NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF BUSINESS CYCLES
AND THE BENEFITS OF STABILIZATION: A SURVEY
Gadi Barlevy
Working Paper 10926
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10926
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Gadi Barlevy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Business Cycles and the Benefits of Stabilization: A Survey
Gadi Barlevy
NBER Working Paper No. 10926
November 2004
JEL No. E32, E63, D6
ABSTRACT
This article reviews the literature on the cost of U.S. post-War business cycle fluctuations. I argue
that recent work has established this cost is considerably larger than initial work found. However,
despite the large cost of macroeconomic volatility, it is not obvious that policymakers should have
pursued a more aggressive stabilization policy than they did. Still, the fact that volatility is so costly
suggests stable growth is a desirable goal that ought to be maintained to the extent possible, just as
policymakers are currently required to do under the Balanced Growth and Full Employment Act of
1978. This survey was prepared for the Economic Perspectives, a publication of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.
Gadi Barlevy
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle
Chicago, IL 60604
and NBER
gbarlevy@frbchi.org

The Cost of Business Cycles and the Benefits of Stabilization:
a Survey∗
Gadi Barlevy
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
e-mail: gbarlevy@frbchi.org

Introduction and Summary
During the last half century, policymakers in the U.S. have consistently sought to chart a stable
course for economic growth. The importance accorded to this goal does not merely owe to the
views of select policymakers, but is mandated by law. In 1946, Congress passed the Employment
Act, which encouraged the federal government to adopt policies that would lead to maximum
employment and price stability. Evidently dissatisfied with the fulfillment of these goals, some
thirty years later Congress passed the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act in 1978 (also
known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Act after its two co-authors) that strengthened the original
Employment Act. Among other things, the 1978 law mandated that the Federal Reserve should
specifically aim to maintain economic growth in line with the economy’s potential to expand.
That is, policymakers were instructed to steer the economy in such a way as to insure steady
output growth, fast enough to maintain full employment but not so fast as to ignite inflation.
In stark challenge to the conventional wisdom that inspired such legislation, Robert Lucas
argued in his influential 1987 monograph Models of Business Cycles that deviations from stable
growth over the post-War United States were actually a minor concern that did not merit
∗

Gadi Barlevy is a senior economist and economic advisor at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views
expressed do not reflect the views of either the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System.

the high priority accorded to them under the law. More precisely, Lucas asked how much
individuals should be willing to give up in principle to live in a world not subject to the degree
of macroeconomic volatility the U.S. witnessed during this period. Assuming preferences that
many economists view as a reasonable benchmark, he calculated that individuals would sacrifice
at most one-tenth of one percent of lifetime consumption, prompting him to conclude that there
would be little benefit to “devising ever more subtle policies to remove the residual amount of
business cycle risk.”
Not surprisingly, Lucas’ results have attracted quite some controversy, and various researchers
have revisited his calculation since his monograph was published. This article reviews the
literature prompted by Lucas’ original observation, with an emphasis on two questions. First,
does the subsequent literature confirm that post-War macroeconomic volatility is as minor of
a problem as Lucas’ original calculation suggests? And second, what do these estimates tell us
about the inherent benefits from further pursuing stabilization policy?1
I will argue that subsequent work suggests Lucas’ calculation significantly understates the
true cost of post-War macroeconomic volatility. But at the same time, the mere fact that
post-War business cycles were costly need not imply that attempting to neutralize them would
have been highly desirable; that depends on what shocks were responsible for this volatility and
whether they could have been eﬀectively oﬀset, questions economists have yet to fully resolve.
As such, Lucas’ conclusion that there was little to gain from more aggressive stabilization may
be correct. But even if there is little benefit from further stabilization, it need not follow that
macroeconomic stabilization per se is unimportant; society might have been much worse oﬀ
had policymakers not pursued stabilization to the extent they did during the post-War era, and
avoiding even greater volatility over this period should have ranked as a high priority.

The Original Lucas Calculation
In calculating the cost of business cycles, Lucas (1987) reasoned that people’s concern about
macroeconomic fluctuations is primarily due to how these fluctuations aﬀect the amount of
goods and services they get to consume. He then argued that we can view aggregate consump1
Two other recent surveys are Lucas (2003) and Yellen and Akerlof (2004). Each reaches a somewhat diﬀerent
conclusion than the present survey on at least one of the questions above.

2

tion expenditures each year as the amount of resources that can be used to satisfy such needs.2
Since aggregate consumption fluctuates over the business cycle, Lucas attributed the cost of
business cycles to the fact that individuals are forced to contend with volatile and unpredictable
consumption rather than stable and predictable consumption growth.
To be more precise, Lucas assumed consumption can be decomposed into a part that grows
systematically over time and a part that fluctuates with prevailing economic conditions. Let us
refer to the systematic part as trend consumption, and denote its value in year t by Ct∗ . Actual
consumption in year t, denoted Ct , will deviate from trend by a random percentage εt , i.e.
Ct = (1 + εt ) Ct∗
The random deviation εt is assumed to have a zero mean and to be independent across time.
That is, consumption Ct will be equal to trend consumption Ct∗ on average, although in any
given year it may be higher or lower than trend, independently of what happened to consumption in previous years. Figure 1 shows log per-capita consumption from 1948 to the present,
together with an estimate for trend consumption Ct∗ as Lucas suggested constructing it.3
Lucas further assumed that the way individuals value consumption can be summarized with
a simple utility function that assigns a value to every sequence of consumption expenditures
{Ct , Ct+1 , Ct+2 , ...}. Let U (Ct , Ct+1 , ...) denote the value a typical individual assigns to the

corresponding consumption sequence. To quantify the cost of volatility, Lucas asked by what
fraction we would need to increase lifetime consumption to make an individual with this utility
function just as happy as in a world where consumption never deviated from trend, i.e. where
the individual could consume Ct∗ each year. Formally, Lucas calculated the value of µ for which
¡
¢
∗
, ...
U ((1 + µ) Ct , (1 + µ) Ct+1 , ...) = U Ct∗ , Ct+1

The exact details of Lucas’ calculation are provided in Box 1. Under his assumptions, he found
the cost of business cycles can be approximated by the formula
1
µ = γσ 2ε
2
where γ measures how averse an individual is towards risk and σ 2ε denotes the variance of
deviations from trend consumption. Thus, business cycles are more costly the more volatile is
2

Subsequent work has argued for omitting expenditures on durables, since it is the stock of durable goods
that matters. The implied cost of volatility using non-durable consumption is not dramatically diﬀerent.
That is, {Ct∗ } is the Hodrick-Prescott filter of the original consumption series {Ct }. Since I estimate this
from annual data, I use a weight of 100. Lucas’ original calculation was based on quarterly data.
3

3

their consumption (i.e. the higher is σ 2ε ) and the more averse individuals are to consumption
volatility (i.e. the higher is γ).
Using empirically plausible values for γ and σ 2ε , Lucas arrived at a cost of 0.008%. That is,
individuals would be willing to sacrifice no more than one one-hundredth of one percent of their
consumption to achieve macroeconomic stability. While acknowledging that his calculation
abstracts from many important issues, Lucas argued it was unlikely that the cost of macroeconomic volatility would exceed one-tenth of one percent. A quick glance at Figure 1 reveals why:
since aggregate consumption is not especially volatile, Ct and Ct∗ are not dramatically diﬀerent,
and individuals will be close to indiﬀerent between the two paths.
In the next few sections, I discuss the ways subsequent authors have criticized the above
calculation. These are summarized in Table 1. The table is organized according to which
feature of Lucas’ calculation each article modifies, and provides the range of cost estimates
each paper presents as plausible. Below I survey these critiques as well as the diﬀerences
among the various papers.

Alternative Ways of Implementing Lucas’ Calculation
Even if one accepts the approach that underlies Lucas’ calculation, it is still possible to quibble
with the particular assumptions Lucas used to arrive at his estimate. I begin by reviewing
criticisms that are in this spirit.
One problem concerns the particular function U (·) Lucas used. Although this utility function
is common in applied macroeconomics and has some empirical support, it has a diﬃcult time
accounting for attitudes towards certain types of risks, and as such might understate how much
individuals dislike consumption risk. For example, individuals whose preferences correspond to
those Lucas assumed would be quite willing to invest in risky equity, while the large premium
on stocks over bonds suggests that in practice individuals are more risk averse given they
require a hefty return to invest in equity. One way to fix this is to allow for a higher degree
of risk aversion. For example, whereas Lucas focused on the case where γ = 1, Obstfeld
(1994) and Dolmas (1998) argue that a value of γ as high as 20 may be plausible, which would
increase the costs relative to those Lucas reported by a factor of 20; but since the cost Lucas
calculated was so small, the implied cost of business cycles is still no more than 0.5% of lifetime
consumption. Both authors also consider a more general utility function advocated by Epstein
4

and Zin (1991) that can be more easily reconciled with data on asset prices. This alternative
specification suggests consumption volatility can be far more costly, but only when fluctuations
in consumption are highly persistent, which for reasons I discuss below may not correspond to
what we usually think of as business cycle volatility. Tallarini (2000) uses the same generalized
utility from Epstein and Zin (1991), but argues that far greater values of risk aversion are
needed to accord with the premium on risky equity. As a result, he estimates the cost of
business cycles to be much larger, between 2% and 12% of lifetime consumption.4 Pemberton
(1996) and Dolmas (1998) consider a diﬀerent utility specification known as first-order risk
aversion. The implied cost of business cycles for this specification is only slightly larger than
the one Obstfeld and Dolmas report, and for reasonable parameter values does not exceed 1%
of lifetime consumption. Otrok (2001) proposes still another specification for utility, but finds
that plausible parameter values yield even more negligible costs.
Thus, most of the papers that propose alternative utility formulations continue to find small
costs of business cycles, although a few argue the costs are significantly larger. So which of
these specifications best captures individual preferences? Fortunately, Alvarez and Jermann
(2000) develop an approach that does not require imposing a utility function, but infers one
indirectly from a variety of asset prices, including the return on equity.5 They argue that asset
prices reveal that individuals strongly dislike fluctuations in trend consumption growth, not
cyclical fluctuations in consumption. To appreciate this point, consider Figure 1. The growth
rate of trend consumption Ct∗ varies over time: per capita consumption grew at roughly 3% per
year in the 1960s, compared to about 2% per year in the remaining post-War period. Alvarez
and Jermann infer that the reason individuals require a high premium to hold stocks is because
the return on stocks tended to be low in those periods when trend consumption growth was
low. But the fact that households are so concerned with slow trend growth does not mean they
are equally alarmed about temporary deviations from trend. Indeed, Alvarez and Jermann
calculate that individuals would be willing to sacrifice at most 0.3% of lifetime consumption to
eliminate only business cycle volatility in consumption, although they would sacrifice a lot more
to avoid fluctuations in trend consumption growth. The preferences that are most consistent
with data on asset prices therefore suggest the cost of business cycles is fairly small.
4

Campbell and Cochrane (1995) similarly argue the equity premium implies a large cost of business cycles.

5

DiTella, MacColloch, and Oswald (2003) and Wolfers (2003) propose using survey data on how happy people
feel as another way of estimating the cost of cycles without imposing a particular utility function. For example,
Wolfers regresses well-being data on the mean and variance of unemployment to arrive at a tradeoﬀ between the
two. One could do the same with the mean and variance of consumption; however, while consumption grows over
time, average reported well-being does not. This incongruity suggests either individuals do not strongly prefer
more consumption to less, or, more likely, that well-being measures are not directly comparable over time.

5

Another objection to Lucas’ calculation concerns his assumptions regarding deviations from
trend consumption. Lucas assumed that the fact that consumption is below trend this year
says nothing about whether it will be above or below trend next year. In practice, though, if
consumption is below trend this year it is also likely to be below trend next year. Depending on
how persistent shocks are and which utility function one assumes, this can aﬀect the implied cost
of consumption volatility. Even if shocks are likely to persist for several years, as would appear
to be the relevant case from Figure 1, the cost of business cycles is typically less than 1% for
most utility specifications. But when Obstfeld (1994) assumes shocks are permanent, so a fall
in consumption today is expected to persist indefinitely, he finds that the cost of cycles can be
as much as 1.8%. Dolmas (1998) shows that the cost of business cycles can be even larger — over
20% of lifetime consumption — when shocks are permanent and individuals have preferences that
exhibit first-order risk aversion. Yet these permanent shocks are essentially changes in trend
consumption growth, which presumably reflect changes in the economy’s potential, rather than
temporary deviations from trend that policymakers can try to oﬀset. The fact that the cost
of permanent fluctuations in consumption can be so large thus mirrors the findings of Alvarez
and Jermann that what individuals particularly dislike are fluctuations in trend consumption.
Although society would be much better oﬀ if these permanent shocks were avoided, this is not
a cost that could be avoided by conventional stabilization policy.

Using Individual-Level Data: Preliminary Results
A potentially more compelling criticism of Lucas’ estimate concerns its reliance on aggregate
data. To see why using aggregate data might be problematic, suppose there was a small fraction of the population whose consumption was highly volatile, while consumption for everyone
else was constant. Average consumption across the entire population would not appear very
volatile; but for the unlucky few whose consumption is volatile, fluctuations will be quite costly.
More generally, suppose that the small declines in aggregate consumption during recessions are
driven by large declines in the consumption of a small but randomly chosen number of individuals, reflecting the fact that it is hard to predict exactly where the eﬀects of downturns will
be most severe. Since any individual runs the risk of a dramatic fall in his consumption, eliminating cyclical fluctuations might make all individuals much better oﬀ. In essence, focusing
on aggregate consumption understates the volatility of consumption σ 2ε individuals face, and as
such understates the cost of business cycles.
Unfortunately, there is no time series on consumption at the level of households with which to

6

carry out Lucas’ calculation.6 Instead, estimates of the cost of business cycles based on household data rely on more readily available observations on earnings. More precisely, researchers
use individual earnings data to estimate a stochastic income process for a typical household,
and then use theory to predict the consumption of a household facing this income process. They
then calculate the cost of business cycles from predicted as opposed to actual consumption.
An important assumption in this line of work is that credit markets are “incomplete,” i.e.
credit markets provide only limited protection against income risk. Households facing volatile
incomes would naturally try to borrow when their incomes are low to maintain a constant level of
consumption. Such borrowing will not allow them to escape consumption volatility altogether,
since in recessions there will be more low income households who wish to borrow and fewer
high income households willing to lend, raising interest rates and making it too costly to keep
consumption constant. Still, with unlimited access to credit, one can show that individuals
will be able to limit the volatility of their consumption to that of aggregate consumption, in
which case Lucas’ original calculation would be applicable. But his calculation would not be
applicable is if households were limited in their borrowing, as is often the case in practice.
Formally, let yt denote the annual labor income for a given individual in year t. We begin by
constructing a stochastic income process whose realizations mimic the incomes we observe for
diﬀerent households. For example, suppose income fluctuations were primarily due to periodic
episodes of unemployment. We can then capture income fluctuations with a simple process
whereby the income of an individual household can take on two values, one that corresponds
to the average earnings of employed workers and one that corresponds to the average earnings
of unemployed workers (e.g. unemployment benefits). We can then estimate the transition
probabilities between employment and unemployment from individual observations. A more
sophisticated approach would also take into account the possibility that workers earn more on
their jobs in boom times than they do in recessions.
Let at denote the net value of the individual’s asset holdings in year t, and let rt denote
the interest rate paid on assets held between year t and year t + 1. Likewise, let ct denote the
individual’s consumption expenditures in year t. Individuals are assumed to choose consumption
expenditures to maximize utility U (ct , ct+1 , ...) given the process for yt and subject to the
6

However, it is possible to disaggregate consumption at the level of individual states, as in Robe and Pallage
(2002). They find that retail sales at the state level are more volatile than at the national level, suggesting the
eﬀects of macroeconomic shocks are concentrated among a subset of states. Accordingly, the cost of volatility
they find is somewhat larger than Lucas computed from total U.S. data.

7

constraint that at+1 = (1 + rt ) at + yt − ct . This constraint states that the value of the assets an

individual has at the beginning of year t + 1 is just the sum of the value of the assets he held in
year t, the interest he earned on these assets, and the wage income he earned, minus whatever
he spent on purchases in year t. To capture the limited ability of households to borrow, we can
add the restriction that at ≥ 0 for all t, i.e. individuals are not allowed to carry any debt. A

weaker restriction would allow for some amount of debt, so the lower bound on assets would
be a negative number rather than zero. Solving this maximization problem yields a predicted
sequence for consumption {ct , ct+1 , ...}.

Next, we use economic theory to forecast how the income process would change once aggregate
ª
©
∗ , ... ,
fluctuations are stabilized. Denote the process for income in a stable world by yt∗ , yt+1

so an asterisk denotes the value of a variable once aggregate fluctuations are eliminated. Once
again, we can solve for the consumption decisions c∗t , c∗t+1 , ... of an individual facing the con-

straints a∗t+1 = (1 + rt∗ ) a∗t + yt∗ − c∗t and a∗t ≥ 0. Given the two consumption paths, we can

once again ask how much we need to increase consumption in the world with volatility to make

an individual as happy as when aggregate volatility is eliminated, i.e. what value of µ would
¡
¢
ensure U ((1 + µ) ct , (1 + µ) ct+1 , ...) = U c∗t , c∗t+1 , ... .
The various papers that pursue this hypothesis disagree on how to model the income process
yt∗ .

Atkeson and Phelan (1994) argue that as long as income while employed and income while

unemployed do not vary with the business cycle, the income process yt∗ should be identical to
yt . To see why, suppose the probability an individual will be unemployed is 3% in a boom and
9% in a recession, and that each year is equally likely to be a recession or a boom. From an
individual’s perspective, then, the probability of being unemployed in some year in the future
is

1
2

× 3% +

1
2

× 9% = 6%. Now, consider a stabilization policy where the government hires

workers in recessions but not in booms to keep the probability of being unemployed constant
at 6%. Each worker now faces the same earnings risk once as before, namely a 6% probability
of being unemployed in any given year. But this does not mean individuals are not aﬀected
by stabilization. Without government intervention, demand for borrowing will be higher in
recessions when more people are unemployed, and consequently the equilibrium interest rate
rt will be higher as well. By contrast, in the stable environment, the interest rate rt∗ will be
constant over time. Stabilization thus eliminates variations in the rate at which an individual
can borrow or lend. For this reason, the consumption choices c∗t in the stable economy may
diﬀer from ct . But when Atkeson and Phelan ask how much individuals would need to be as
happy as when they get to consume c∗t , the answer is only 0.02% of lifetime consumption.

8

By contrast, Imrohoroglu (1989) argues that stabilization does aﬀect earnings risk, although
at the same time she ignores the interest rate risk that Atkeson and Phelan emphasize. Her
argument relies on the observation that unemployment spells are typically short in booms but
long in recessions, whereas in a stable environment unemployment durations would presumably
be of average length. The virtue of stabilization is that it allows individuals to avoid long
spells unemployment which are hard to save for.7 While stabilization also eliminates short
unemployment spells, borrowing-constrained households do not suﬀer as much from eliminating
short spells as they benefit from eliminating long ones. When Imrohoroglu computes the cost of
business cycles assuming individuals cannot borrow and earn zero real interest on their savings,
she finds a cost of business cycles of 0.3%. When she also allows individuals to borrow at a real
rate of 8% (while saving at a rate of zero), the cost falls to a mere 0.05%. While her analysis
ignores fluctuations in the interest rate over the cycle, recall that Atkeson and Phelan find these
to be negligible. Thus, preliminary work on the cost of business cycles with incomplete markets
appeared to reaﬃrm Lucas’ original conclusion.

More Recent Work Using Individual-Level Data
More recent work, however, has questioned this conclusion. The reason for the small cost of
business cycles above is that interest rates are not particularly volatile over the cycle, nor are
unemployment spells in the U.S. very long, even in recessions. Since households could easily
save enough to sustain them through short periods of unemployment, these papers conclude
that business cycles should not be especially costly. Yet there are two problems with this
conclusion. First, fluctuations can contribute to earnings risk beyond just unemployment risk.
For example, since wages are procyclical, workers who are laid oﬀ in recessions will re-enter the
work force at lower wages that may remain low for far longer than the duration of a typical
unemployment spell. Second, even though individuals could save for bad times, evidence on
the distribution of wealth suggests a significant number of them do not. More recent work has
taken these observations into account, and suggests more significant costs of business cycles.
Consider first the work of Krusell and Smith (2002).8 They allow the interest rate rt to vary
7
Atkeson and Phelan do not deny that unemployment duration varies over the cycle; rather, they argue
stabilization makes long spells less likely to occur at the same time others experience long spells, rather than
less likely to occur at all. Which view is more reasonable depends on the underlying model and the nature of
stabilization.
8

The 2002 paper is a revised version of their 1999 paper; my discussion is based on the 2002 version.

9

over the cycle, so individuals face interest rate risk as described by Atkeson and Phelan (1994).
At the same time, they follow Imrohoroglu (1989) in assuming that stabilization will allow
individuals to avoid long spells of unemployment. But they also introduce two new features:
(1) they assume stabilization has a more significant eﬀect on earnings risk than in Imrohoroglu’s
formulation, in line with empirical evidence; and (2) they modify the model to accord with the
observation that a considerable fraction of all households hold very little wealth.
Turning first to the eﬀects of stabilization on earnings risk, Krusell and Smith incorporate
Imrohoroglu’s observation that stabilization allows individuals to avoid long spells of unemployment. But they introduce two additional features. First, they assume that the wages
households earn while employed vary over the cycle but would remain constant under stabilization, so yt∗ would be less volatile than yt even for households that avoid unemployment. Second,
they assume stabilization lowers the risk of becoming unemployed. This can be motivated by
the observation that some jobs that are profitable in booms turn unprofitable in recessions.
Workers employed on those jobs would earn high wages in booms, but will be immediately laid
oﬀ in the next recession. If these jobs remain profitable after stabilization, workers on these
jobs would no longer have to fear unemployment whenever a downturn occurs. At the same
time, these workers would earn lower wages on these jobs under stabilization, since they will
no longer earn the high wages they would have earned in booms.
In addition to changing the way stabilization aﬀects earnings risk, Krusell and Smith modify
Imrohoroglu’s model to accord with evidence on the distribution of wealth across households,
specifically with the observation that wealth is highly concentrated. To do this, they allow for
heterogeneity in discount rates across individuals. Households who are more patient than the
average household save more and as such account for a disproportionate share of total wealth.
Similarly, households who are more impatient than the average household hold very little wealth.
While this leaves them vulnerable to periods of low consumption while unemployed, they are
too impatient to cut back on their current consumption and save for when their income is low.
By choosing the distribution of discount rates appropriately, Krusell and Smith are able to
reconcile their model with the empirical distribution of wealth.
For households that are unemployed and have exhausted their borrowing capacity, Krusell and
Smith estimate that eliminating fluctuations would be worth almost 4% of lifetime consumption.
However, the cost of fluctuations for other individuals in the economy is much smaller, and is
even negative for households with moderate savings (these households are not concerned about
earnings volatility given their savings, and they like the fact that in the cyclical environment
10

wages are high precisely when they are more likely to be employed). Wealthy households do have
a strong preference for stabilization, although this has nothing to do with volatility directly;
rather, eliminating fluctuations would lead other households to cut back their precautionary
savings, causing the supply of loanable funds to shrink and interest rates to rise, which obviously
benefits those who own many assets. On the whole, Krusell and Smith find that the majority
of households would be made worse oﬀ under stabilization, and averaging over all individuals
implies business cycles are socially beneficial on net, although mildly so. As such, their findings
hardly point to stabilization as a pressing social concern. But their results do illustrate that
business cycles are costly for households with few assets.
Subsequent work has argued that Krusell and Smith themselves understate the degree of
earnings risk individuals face. For example, although Krusell and Smith allow wages to fluctuate
over the cycle, the degree to which they let wages vary with economic conditions depends on
the predictions of a model rather than on direct evidence on earnings. When Storesletten,
Telmer, and Yaron (2001) look at reported household earnings, they find that the standard
deviation of earnings across households more than doubles in recessions, far more than implied
by Krusell and Smith’s model. Moreover, Storesletten et al find that earnings shocks are highly
persistent, so that when a household’s income falls this year, for whatever reason, its earnings
are likely to be low for far longer than in Krusell and Smith. Using the same utility function
Lucas considered, they estimate that eliminating fluctuations would be worth 0.6% of lifetime
consumption, while households with little savings (who in their model are young households
that have yet to accumulate any wealth) would be willing to sacrifice 1.5% of their consumption.
For somewhat higher degrees of risk aversion, but still within the range Lucas considered, they
estimate the cost for the population as a whole at 2.5% of lifetime consumption, while those
without any savings would be willing to sacrifice 7.4%.
Although Storesletten et al assume earnings shocks are highly persistent, households can
still protect themselves fairly well against these shocks by saving. This is because earnings
are persistent, but not permanent.9 Krebs (2003) considers a similar model where shocks are
permanent, so a fall in income today will lead expected income in all future years to fall by
the same amount. In this case individuals will not be able to borrow to oﬀset negative shocks
to their income, even when credit markets operate perfectly; after all, who would lend to an
individual to cover earnings losses that are never expected to be recovered? Krebs estimates
that, overall, individuals with the same preferences as Lucas assumed would be willing to
9

There appears to be some confusion about this in the literature. Several papers claim that Storesletten et
al assume earnings shocks are permanent, when in fact they do not.

11

sacrifice 7.5% of lifetime consumption to eliminate fluctuations in this case. But it is hard to
tell from the data whether earnings shocks are permanent or just highly persistent, and the
cost of cycles is considerably smaller in the latter case.10
Beaudry and Pages (2001) do not assume earnings shocks are permanent, but they do assume
shocks are suﬃciently persistent that individuals have no incentive to save at the going interest
rate. Moreover, rather than estimating earnings volatility from evidence on earnings dispersion
as Storesletten et al and Krebs, they use data on the cyclicality of starting wages. Their
logic is that, just as in earlier work, layoﬀs contribute to much of the earnings risk individuals
face. However, unlike previous work, this is not because of the earnings workers forgo while
unemployed, but because laid-oﬀ workers typically re-enter the work force at a lower wage than
they previously earned. While it is never a good thing to be laid oﬀ and start from scratch, it is
particularly bad if you have to do so in a recession. They calibrate their model to data on the
volatility of starting salaries over the cycle, and using Lucas’ original utility function, estimate
that individuals would be willing to sacrifice 1.4% of consumption to eliminate fluctuations in
starting salaries over the cycle. When they allow for more risk aversion as in Storesletten et al,
they estimate a cost of 4.4%. However, this cost is only borne by workers; employers in their
model are assumed not to care about volatility, and the implied cost of business cycles for the
population as a whole is smaller.11
In sum, once we take into account evidence on the low savings rates of many households,
as well as the fact that cyclical fluctuations can lead to persistent earnings declines, post-War
business cycles start to matter; specifically, there is a core of households who are disinclined to
save and as such would be willing to sacrifice between as much as 4 and 7% percent of lifetime
consumption to avoid such volatility. Remaining households are likely to suﬀer less from cyclical
fluctuations, and may even benefit from them. The overall cost of cycles is thus more modest,
but can still run as much as 2.5%.
10
Turnovsky and Bianconi (2005) also consider a model where shocks are permanent. But they assume stabilization reduces the average level of volatility rather than its variation over time. Moreover, they allow households
to vary their labor supply in response to shocks. Their estimate for the cost of cycles is about 2%.
11

Several papers claim Beaudry and Pages obtain large costs because they assume stabilization eliminates all
earnings risk. While it is true that workers in their model face no risk in the stable economy, the maximum risk
workers are assumed to face in the volatile economy is calibrated to the extra amount workers lose when they are
laid oﬀ in recessions as opposed to booms, not the much larger amount they lose on average upon layoﬀ. Thus,
their welfare estimates only reflect the gains from eliminating the cyclical part of idiosyncratic risk.

12

The Eﬀects of Volatility on the Level of Consumption
A separate problem with Lucas’ calculation is his assumption on how stabilization aﬀects the
level of consumption. Lucas asserted stabilization would eliminate deviations from trend, implying consumption will revert to its average level. But as various economists have since noted,
the level of consumption might change in response to stabilization, so that stabilization might
increase average consumption relative to the volatile economy.
The papers described in the previous section using household income data are immune to this
criticism, since they derive consumption c∗t as the solution to a household problem rather than
setting it to the average of observed consumption. However, they still abstract from some of
the ways that stabilization can aﬀect the level of consumption, and as such can still understate
the true cost of business cycles. As in most of the literature that explores this hypothesis, my
discussion will focus on aggregate data.
One critique along these lines comes from DeLong and Summers (1988). They argue that
rather than steadying economic activity at its average level, stabilization would prevent economic activity from falling below its maximum potential, in line with the mandates of the Full
Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978. Thus, stabilization policy would “fill in troughs
without shaving oﬀ the peaks.” While their discussion is couched in terms of output, one can
easily adapt their argument for consumption. Let Ct∗ denote the level of consumption that
would prevail in year t in the counterfactually stable economy. Previously, Ct∗ also reflected the
average of consumption; but now the two series are no longer assumed to be the same. Let εt
denote the percent deviation of actual consumption in year t from Ct∗ , i.e. Ct = (1 + εt ) Ct∗ . If
consumption in the stable economy represents the maximum level consumption can attain, εt
must be less than or equal to zero. The average value of εt is therefore negative, as opposed to
zero. Consequently, the consumption path in the stable economy Ct∗ exceeds the average level
of consumption in the volatile economy.
Just as Lucas used the assumption that εt is zero on average to recover Ct∗ from data on
Ct = (1 + εt ) Ct∗ , DeLong and Summers propose a way to recover Ct∗ from Ct when εt ≤ 0.

Their approach is described in Box 2. Alternatively, we can use data on business cycle peaks

to isolate years when εt = 0, and then interpolate between these points to recover Ct∗ . In
particular, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has attempted to identify peaks
and troughs in economic activity ever since 1850, which we can use to identify years in which εt
was presumably equal to 0. This approach is also detailed in Box 2. Both series are illustrated
13

in Figure 2, together with the original data on aggregate consumption from Figure 1. The
average deviation εt is 1.9% using DeLong and Summers’ approach and 1.6% using the series
interpolated from NBER peaks. The cost of business cycles turns out to be roughly equal to
this average, so these magnitudes also represent the amount individuals would sacrifice to attain
Ct∗ . In closely related work, Cohen (2000) finds a slightly smaller cost of business cycles of 1%,
still much larger than the cost Lucas calculated.
The diﬀerence between Lucas’ estimate and the one that emerges from DeLong and Summers’
analysis stems from their diﬀerent views of stabilization. Which of these is more compelling?
Each imposes what it views as reasonable assumptions on the deviation εt between actual
consumption and its level after stabilization to estimate Ct∗ . But a more compelling approach
would be to derive Ct∗ using economic theory, rather than impose fairly ad-hoc restrictions on εt
to recover it, and to see whether it is higher than average consumption in the cyclical economy.
One explanation for why stabilization should increase consumption is that shocks aﬀect the
economy asymmetrically: positive shocks boost economic activity less than negative shocks
dampen it.12 Mankiw (1988) and Yellen and Akerlof (2004) sketch out such an argument and
cite evidence that unemployment responds asymmetrically to changes in inflation, suggesting
that if the Federal Reserve were able to stabilize inflation at its average level, unemployment
would fall and more output could be produced and consumed. Mankiw estimates that stabilization should increase output on average by about 0.5% per year, while Yellen and Akerlof’s
estimates suggest output would increase by between 0.5 and 0.8%. On a similar theme, Gali,
Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2003) develop a formal model in which market frictions imply that
welfare (and under certain assumptions, consumption) responds asymmetrically to employment
fluctuations. They find that a policy that stabilizes employment would increase welfare by an
amount equivalent to increasing lifetime consumption by between 0.30 and 0.75%.
Ramey and Ramey (1991) suggest an alternative explanation for why stabilization ought
to increase the average level of consumption. Their argument is based on the notion that
firms need to precommit to a specific technology before they commence production. In an
uncertain environment, firms may end up with a technology that is inappropriate for the scale
of production they would have to undertake. Thus, volatile environments are more likely to
involve ineﬃcient production, resulting in lower average output. Ramey and Ramey estimate
that fluctuations lower output by 1.7% on average, although they also note that if households
12

Technically, this asymmetry is corresponds to the notion that consumption is a concave function of whatever
variable is being stabilized.

14

are risk-averse they would sacrifice slightly more than this to avoid fluctuations. This is on par
with the magnitudes suggested by DeLong and Summers.13
A third reason for why stabilization might change the level of consumption concerns its eﬀect
on capital accumulation. If individuals accumulate more capital in the stable environment,
there will be more inputs available for production in the long-run and thus average output will
eventually be higher than in the volatile environment. However, as I discuss in more detail
in the next section, the theoretical eﬀects of stabilization on the capital stock are ambiguous;
investment can either rise or fall in response to stabilization. For now, I simply note that the
welfare eﬀects associated with such changes are negligible and would not contribute much to
the cost of business cycles. But the other explanations for why stabilization ought to increase
average consumption suggest a cost of business cycles of just under 2%.

The Eﬀects of Volatility on Consumption Growth
The previous section focused on scenarios in which eliminating fluctuations increases the level of
consumption. Graphically, this implies stabilization induces a parallel shift up in consumption
from the path Lucas assumed and which is displayed in Figure 1. But eliminating fluctuations
may also aﬀect the growth rate of consumption. I now discuss work that explores this possibility.
The most commonly cited reason for why stabilization should aﬀect consumption growth
concerns its eﬀect on investment. The intuition for this is as follows: since firms are likely to be
more cautious about investing in uncertain environments, eliminating fluctuations should lead
firms to accumulate capital more rapidly. This allows firms to produce more output, enabling
households to enjoy more consumption and presumably make them better oﬀ. However, as I
now explain, this line of reasoning turns out to be misleading.
First, eliminating volatility can just as plausibly discourage investment as encourage it. For
example, recall that in the face of volatility, households choose to maintain precautionary
savings to sustain them through periods of low earnings. Stabilization would mitigate the need
for such savings. As savings become more scarce, interest rates would rise and may discourage
13
Portier and Puch (2004) make a similar point, although in their framework firms commit to a price rather
than to a technology. While they demonstrate that this commitment magnifies the cost of business cycles, they
view their model as too stylized to yield informative estimates for the true cost of business cycles.

15

firms from investing.14 But even if stabilization encourages investment, the resulting increase in
consumption growth comes at a cost. This is because investment uses up resources that would
otherwise have been used to produce consumption goods, so households get to enjoy less initial
consumption. Whether households are better oﬀ under faster growth is therefore ambiguous.
To put it another way, the eﬀects of stabilization on investment do not reflect a simple change
in the rate at which consumption grows; rather, they involve changes in the tradeoﬀ between
present and future consumption. In a well-functioning economy where households act in their
own best interest, changes in this tradeoﬀ ought to reflect the preferences of households and
as such make them better oﬀ. Hence, assuming trend consumption remains unchanged once
the economy is stabilized ignores an implicit benefit from stabilization. But this benefit is
likely to be modest given households already chose their consumption optimally in the volatile
environment. In fact, when Matheron and Maury (2000) and Epaulard and Pommeret (2003)
calculate the welfare cost of business cycles due to their eﬀects on investment, they find eﬀects
of no more than 0.5%.
The reason that an increase in investment has such a small eﬀect on welfare is that most of
the benefits from the faster growth it gives rise to are oﬀset by lower initial consumption. But
Barlevy (2004a) argues that eliminating fluctuations can increase consumption growth even
when initial consumption is unchanged. This is because changes in investment aﬀect growth
asymmetrically; an increase in investment increases growth less than a similar decrease in
investment decreases growth, reflecting among other things the inability of firms to undertake
too many investment projects at once. In this case, simply eliminating fluctuations in investment
without ever changing the level of investment should increase growth. Estimates reported in
the paper suggest that if stabilization would steady investment at its average level, the growth
rate of per-capita consumption would increase from 2% per year to about 2.35% per year, which
is well within the range of historical variation in trend consumption growth.
Figure 3 illustrates how trend consumption Ct∗ from Figure 1 would change if consumption
grew by an additional 0.35 percentage points per year. Although the eﬀect on growth is modest,
its cumulative eﬀects are large, and households would presumably significantly prefer this new
consumption path. Indeed, Barlevy (2004a) estimates the cost of cycles due to their eﬀect on
14

Even ignoring precautionary savings, uncertainty may encourage firms to invest rather than discourage
them. With more volatility, profits will be higher if uncertainty is resolved favorably but no lower if uncertainty
is resolved unfavorably as long as firms can cut their losses by shutting down or adjusting their labor hiring.
While this point has long been recognized in the investment literature, it has not figured much in work on the
cost of business cycles, where the notion that firms can cut their losses is typically ignored.

16

growth at 7.5 − 8.0% of lifetime consumption, much larger than the cost of business cycles
described so far.

Note that Figure 3 assumes stabilization has no eﬀect on average investment. But recall that
stabilization might also lead to a change in the level of investment, so consumption may be
steeper or flatter than captured by the figure. However, as noted earlier, in a well-functioning
economy, changes in the tradeoﬀ between present and future consumption will only be to the
benefit of households. In that case, households should be at least as well oﬀ without cycles as
with the consumption path depicted in Figure 3, even if stabilization causes investment to fall
by enough to lead to a lower overall growth rate. What matters is not whether consumption
actually grows more rapidly in the absence of fluctuations, but that stabilization makes it
possible to grow more rapidly from the same amount of resources.
In the opposite direction, various papers have argued that business cycles facilitate rather
than depress growth. One hypothesis relies on the idea of intertemporal substitution; firms
can take advantage of the fact that productivity is lower in recessions to undertake growthenhancing activities without having to sacrifice as much output. While there is some truth to
this, Barlevy (2004b) argues that one of the main inputs into productivity growth, research
and development, is concentrated precisely when its opportunity cost is most expensive, i.e.
in booms. Thus, at least with regard to one of the primary inputs of productivity growth,
business cycles force society to trade oﬀ present and future consumption less favorably, not
more favorably, imposing a social cost equal to 0.3% of lifetime consumption. This reinforces
the view that business cycles retard the economy’s growth potential, in this case by increasing
the cost of achieving growth.
In a separate paper, Shleifer (1986) argues that volatility may be essential for growth. His
reasoning is that firms invest in developing new technologies because to earn excess profits.
If stabilization eliminates periods of high profits, it may discourage investment and growth.
Shleifer develops an illustrative example in which the absence of fluctuations leaves the economy
stagnant. Since the economy operates ineﬃciently in his example, the argument that changes
in investment make households better does not apply, and the falloﬀ in investment makes
households worse oﬀ. However, recall from the previous section that stabilization is also likely
to increase the level of economic activity, and with it average profits. This partly mitigates the
concern that stabilization would suppress the incentives to innovate.
Finally, Jovanovic (2004) argues that volatility is an unavoidable byproduct of growth, so
17

stabilization may curtail growth. His argument is that growth involves experimentation: firms
try out new ideas, some of which fail spectacularly. If the only way to stabilize the economy is to
preclude such experimentation, stabilization may lead to stagnation. However, it is not obvious
that stabilization would necessitate suspending experimentation, as opposed to moderating the
negative consequences of failure. Indeed, in Jovanovic’s model, reducing the volatility that
results from experimentation would both facilitate growth and make society better oﬀ.

Taking Stock: How Costly is Post-War Volatility?
Research that has followed up on Lucas’ original insight regarding the cost of post-War U.S.
business cycles has raised important shortcomings with his approach. On the one hand, Lucas
correctly pointed out that aggregate consumption does not fluctuate very much over the business
cycle, so an individual household whose consumption mirrored aggregate consumption would
not be much better oﬀ if these fluctuations were smoothed out. This conclusion proves to be
robust. But in a world with imperfect credit markets, the consumption of individual households
may be far more volatile than aggregate consumption, and as such they would benefit more from
eliminating macroeconomic volatility. Even when we take into account wealthier households
who are not much aﬀected by business cycles, the average cost to society can be as large as
2.5% of aggregate consumption per year.
Beyond the direct cost of consumption volatility, there is evidence that business cycles impose
an even larger indirect cost through their eﬀect on the level and growth rate of economic activity.
That is, living in a volatile world not only forces households to contend with unpredictable
consumption, but also to consume less than they would otherwise. These costs are not mutually
exclusive of the cost of higher uncertainty, so the true cost of business cycles relative to a world
with no fluctuations should be the sum total of these costs. The final tab comes to over 10%
of lifetime consumption, an unquestionably large cost.
The costs are based entirely on the way business cycles impact consumption. But as various
commentators have noted, business cycles might be costly in other ways as well. For example,
they may force households to work a diﬀerent number of hours each, something they may be
just as reluctant to do as varying their consumption over time. Likewise, business cycles may
make households anxious and stressed about the prospect of earnings losses, even those whose
incomes are spared. There is probably some truth to these arguments. However, one can easily
fall into the trap of adopting a utopian view of what stabilization can achieve. By restricting

18

attention to the fairly conventional and, more importantly, measurable ways by which business
cycles impact on consumption, the work surveyed above makes an eﬀective case that post-War
business cycles were quite costly after all.

Policy Implications: Is Stabilization an Important Priority?
The large cost of business cycles during the post-War period naturally raises two questions
regarding policy. First, should policymakers have acted more aggressively to stabilize the
economy during this period than they actually did? And second, is stabilization an important
priority that should guide policymakers, as current law dictates? I now argue that despite
the apparently large costs of business cycles over the post-War period, it is far from obvious
that society would have been much better oﬀ if policymakers had pursued a more aggressive
stabilization, since at least some of the shocks that were responsible for cyclical fluctuations
over this period were not something that could be easily oﬀset. At the same time, the fact
that even modest amounts of volatility can impose such a large social cost reaﬃrms that stable
growth should be an important goal that policymakers aspire to. In other words, it may not
be possible to defend against all sources of volatility, including potentially those responsible for
much of the volatility during the post-War period, but preventing the economy from being even
more volatile should certainly rank as a high priority.
In his original monograph, Lucas reasoned that since the cost of business cycles is so small,
there is little to be gained from further stabilization. In revising his estimates, some of the
papers cited above have argued that the inverse is also true, i.e. the fact that the implied cost
of business cycles is so large implies that the benefits to more aggressive stabilization must also
be substantial. But just because business cycles are costly does not automatically imply that
stabilization is desirable; instead, that depends on what causes business cycle fluctuations, what
tools are available to policymakers, and whether these tools can eﬀectively oﬀset the underlying
shocks. Even if Lucas’ original calculation understates the cost of business cycles, his conclusion
that further stabilization is unwarranted may very well hold true.
In his recent review article, Lucas (2003) argues that evidence on the nature of cyclical
fluctuations over the post-War period suggests there was very little scope for policymakers
to pursue stabilization more aggressively. He reviews the evidence on the sources of output
volatility during the post-War period. Various decompositions reveal that at most one third
of the variation in output can be attributed to monetary shocks, which the Federal Reserve

19

presumably has the best chance of oﬀsetting. The remaining 70% of output volatility is due to
changes in real economic variables. For example, one shock to real economic variables that was
relevant during this period is the sharp changes in oil prices. A dramatic run-up in the price
of oil raises production costs and aﬀects the economy’s potential for producing goods in the
short-run, i.e. as long as existing production technologies are still in place. In this case, there
is probably little that policymakers can do to successfully stabilize the economy. At best, they
can try to oﬀset the shock by lowering other aspects of production costs, but such intervention
can easily do more harm than good by distorting the incentives of firms to abandon more
costly energy-intensive technologies. In fact, one can formally show that, at least under certain
assumptions, policymakers should not try to oﬀset exogenous fluctuations in real economic
variables. In this case, policymakers would have at best been able to reduce macroeconomic
volatility by one third, and the benefits to pursuing more aggressive stabilization would be far
more modest than the implied cost of aggregate fluctuations.
However, one has to be careful in interpreting evidence on the source of fluctuations. For
example, consider fluctuations in aggregate productivity over the business cycle. These would
be counted as fluctuations in real as opposed to monetary factors. As pointed out above, if
these changes are driven by technological considerations, e.g. changes in the economic environment that aﬀect the viability of existing technologies such as a change in the relative price
of a key input such as oil, there may be little for policymakers to do anything. But fluctuations in aggregate productivity might instead reflect fluctuations in variables that policymakers
could aﬀect. For example, Benhabib and Farmer (1994) develop a model in which if firms are
optimistic about economic conditions, they will choose to operate at a larger scale, which in
turn contributes to raising aggregate productivity and reaﬃrms their decision to operate at a
larger scale. But if firms are pessimistic about economic conditions, they will choose to operate
at a smaller scale, resulting in lower aggregate productivity. In this case, policymakers might
be able to credibly announce policies that dissuade firms from being pessimistic; for example,
they might pledge to pursue an accommodative policy if productivity were low. If firms find
it optimal to expand their scale under easy monetary policy, such a policy would preclude the
economy from settling at a low level of productivity. Policymakers could then stabilize fluctuations by aﬀecting expectations, a point Benhabib and Farmer themselves allude to. The extent
to which the large cost of post-War business cycles could have been avoided through prudent
policy thus depends on what forces were responsible for this volatility in the first place.
Without further research as to the underlying source of business cycle fluctuations, then,
we cannot reject Lucas’ conclusion that there was little to be gained from pursuing a more
20

aggressive stabilization over this period. Nevertheless, the fact that even small amounts of
volatility are of such great consequence suggests that, in answer to the second question this
section began with, stabilization should rank as a high priority for policymakers. Lucas himself
was careful in his original monograph to argue that while there is little to gain from eliminating
residual risk above and beyond whatever stabilization policies were already being pursued at the
time, this does not invalidate the potentially grave importance of existing stabilization policies.
For example, he readily acknowledged in his monograph that “fluctuations at the pre-Second
World War level, especially combined as they were with an absence of adequate programs for
social insurance, were associated with large costs in welfare.” This is confirmed in recent work
by Chatterjee and Corbae (2001), who show that the same calculation by Imorohoroglu (1989)
that yields such small costs of business cycles for the post-War period suggests individuals
should have been willing to sacrifice more than 6% of lifetime consumption to avoid prolonged
episodes such as the Great Depression, since very long unemployment spells are very costly.
Incorporating the other features described in this survey would magnify this cost even more. To
the extent that the alternative to the stabilization policies that were pursued in the post-War
period was the risk of another Great Depression, there can be no dispute that prudent policies
that keep the economy relatively stable are an important priority, especially in light of evidence
suggesting that it was bad policies that either exacerbated or prolonged the Depression.15
That said, one does not need to appeal to the extreme of the Great Depression to appreciate
the benefits inherent to stabilization policy. As the work surveyed in this article reveals, even
a modest amount of macroeconomic volatility can impose significant social costs. The fact
that there are some shocks policymakers are unable to do much about, and that such shocks
may have accounted for a significant share of the macroeconomic volatility during the post-War
period, should not take away from the observation that household are likely to be significantly
better oﬀ in stable environments than in volatile ones. Even if policymakers were not in a
position to stabilize much more aggressively than they did during the post-War period, they
could still have played an important role in safeguarding the economy from any additional
shocks that would have made output even more volatile.

15

Chatterjee and Corbae’s estimates assume policy did not change between the post-War and pre-War period.
However, since their results assume downturns of the magnitude of the Great Depression are rare given the fact
that they failed to occur in the post-War period, their 6% would represent a lower bound on the true cost of
eliminating these crises.

21

Conclusion
Economists have split as to whether post-War business cycles were costly. On the one hand,
there are those who accepted Lucas’ original conclusion, a view reinforced by early work that
appeared to confirm his results even after accounting for greater degrees of risk aversion and the
fact that credit markets provide only incomplete protection against earnings risk. At the other
extreme are those who from the outset dismissed Lucas’ conclusion as implausible and were
convinced that stabilization is an important policy goal, even if they didn’t always oﬀer much
to directly counter his argument. This article argues that more recent work which explores
particular features absent from Lucas’ calculation reveals that post-War business cycles were in
fact costly, but that this does not necessarily imply that more aggressive stabilization during this
period was warranted. Determining whether policymakers should have acted more aggressively
requires a better understanding of what forces are ultimately responsible for business cycle
fluctuations, a diﬃcult question that economists are slowly but surely making progress on. But
even if ultimately there wasn’t much more that policymakers could have done to further insulate
the economy from cyclical shocks during this period, maintaining a stable growth path does
appear to be a highly desirable goal. To the extent that policymakers prevented the economy
from being even more volatile during this period, then, they deserve much credit.

22

Box 1: Lucas’ Calculation

Lucas’ calculation begins by assuming Ct∗ = λt C0∗ where λ > 1 measures the average growth
rate for consumption during the post-War period. Actual consumption Ct is then set equal
to (1 + εt ) Ct∗ , where 1 + εt are independent and identically distributed lognormal random
variables with mean 1 and variance σ 2 . The standard deviation of σ can be computed from
the standard deviation of ln (Ct /Ct∗ ) ≈ εt . Rather than estimate a linear trend, Lucas used

the Hodrick-Prescott filter of aggregate consumption as his measure for Ct∗ , from which he
estimated σ = 1.3%.
For his utility function, Lucas used the constant relative risk aversion utility function
"∞
#
X C 1−γ − 1
t t
β
U ({Ct }) = E0
1−γ
t=0

Here β denotes the rate at which utility is discounted over time and γ is equal to the coeﬃcient
of relative risk-aversion, i.e. the higher is γ the more reluctant the individual is to face a volatile
consumption path. Lucas sets β to 0.95 and γ to 1, parameters which many macroeconomists
would view as reasonable benchmarks. Standard arguments can be used to show that for γ = 1
C 1−γ − 1
reduces to ln Ct .
the function t
1−γ
A little algebra reveals that the solution to the equation
"∞ £
#
¤
£
¤1−γ
∞
t
X (1 + µ) (1 + εt ) (βλ)t C0 1−γ
X
t (βλ) C0
E
=
β
1−γ
1−γ
t=0

t=0

yields the approximate formula µ =
implied cost is thus µ =

1
2

1
2
2 γσ .

For the coeﬃcient of relative risk-aversion. The

2

(1) (0.013) = 0.00008, i.e. less than one-hundredth of one percent.

Box 2: Estimating Potential Consumption Ct∗

Consider a process Ct = (1 + εt ) Ct∗ where εt ≤ 0 and where the probability that εt = 0 is

∗
= λCt∗ . We observe data on Ct , and want to
strictly positive. In addition, suppose that Ct+1

use it to estimate Ct∗ .

23

DeLong and Summers (1988) suggest the following recursive approach for estimating Ct∗ . In
the first year of the sample, define ln Ct∗ = ln Ct . Then, in each subsequent year, define
¾¸
½
·
ln Ct+i − ln Ct∗
∗
∗
ln Ct+1 = ln Ct + max 0, max
i=1 to k
i
where k is an arbitrary integer. DeLong and Summers suggest setting k = 3, 5, and 8. Figure
2 is illustrated using k = 8. By construction, this series will satisfy Ct∗ ≥ Ct , consistent with

the restriction that εt ≤ 0. One can show that this approach will yield a consistent estimate

for Ct∗ for large t as long as we use a suﬃciently large value of k.

An alternative approach relies on using additional observations that supposedly identify periods in which εt = 0. Let t1 , t2 , ...tn denote years in which the NBER business cycle committee
identifies a business cycle peak. These periods are assumed to correspond to years in which
εt = 0. For any t, define τ (t) = max {tn < t} and τ (t) = min {tn > t}, i.e. τ (t) reflects
i=1 to n

i=1 to n

the most recent business cycle peak prior to year t and τ (t) reflects the first business cycle peak
to occur after year t. Then define
ln Ct∗ =

τ (t) − t
t − τ (t)
ln Cτ +
ln Cτ
τ (t) − τ (t)
τ (t) − τ (t)

To the extent that NBER dates identify true peaks (i.e. periods where εt = 0), we would be
assured that Ct∗ ≥ Ct . In practice, this approach yields exceptions for which Ct > Ct∗ . Note that

∗ /C ∗ varies between business cycle
this approach remains valid even if the growth rate λ = Ct+1
t

peaks, whereas the approach suggested by DeLong and Summers may not. Figure 2 uses all
years in which the NBER dating committee identifies a business cycle peak, with the exception
of January 1981, which follows a trough six months earlier in July 1980. This recovery was
likely too short for the economy to have returned to its potential, i.e. it is unlikely that εt = 0
in 1981. A similar problem may arise in some of the early years of the sample, especially given
that in some of those years the implied value of εt is significantly positive.

24

Imrohoroglu (1989)
Atkeson and Phelan (1994)
Krusell and Smith (1999, 2002)
average across all households:
for households with no wealth:
Storesletten et al (2001)
average across all households:
for households with no wealth:
Krebs (2001)
Beaudry and Pages (2001)

Article

Otrok (2001)
Alvarez and Jermann (2000)

Epstein-Zin preferences
Epstein-Zin preferences
Epstein-Zin preferences
Epstein-Zin preferences
(but a much higher risk-aversion)
First order risk-aversion
First order risk-aversion
First order risk-aversion
Time non-separable preferences
Estimated non-parameterically
from asset price data

Preference specification

independent over time
serially correlated with autocorrelation of 0.98
permanent
moderately persistent but not permanent
moderately persistent but not permanent

independent over time
permanent
serially correlated with autocorrelation of 0.98
serially correlated with autocorrelation of 0.99

Nature of consumption fluctuations

Earnings and interest rates both less volatile

Earnings and interest rates both less volatile

-0.66%
3.68%
0.6 - 2.5%
1.5 - 7.4%
7.5%
1.4 - 4.4%

Earnings less volatile
Earnings less volatile

Workers less likely to be unemployed for long periods
Interest rates become less volatile

Assumed Effect of Stabilization

0.30%
0.02%

Cost

Reduction in earnings volatility is
calibrated differently from above
Earnings shocks assumed permanent
Cost is for households with no wealth

Also match wealth distribution
(so some households do not save)

Other Remarks

Panel B: Calibrated risk to match household data rather than aggregate data

0.01 - 1.1%
0.05 - 2.4%
0.4 - 22.9%
0.004%
< 0.3%

Pemberton (1996)
Dolmas (1998)

Dolmas (1998)
Tallarini (2000)

0.02 - 0.5%
0.01 - 1.8%
0.04 - 0.7%
2.1 - 12.6%

Cost

Obstfeld (1994)

Article

Panel A: Modify preferences and/or persistence of shocks

Table 1: Alternative Calculations for the Cost of Business Cycles

Matheron and Maury (2000)
Epaulard and Pommeret (2003)
Barlevy (2004a)
Barlevy (2004b)

Article

Ramey and Ramey (1991)
DeLong and Summers (1988)
Cohen (2000)
Gali et al (2003)

Article

Increases output by avoiding mismatch between technology and economic conditions
Avoid temporary declines in output (implied cost is based on calculations in Box 2)
Avoid temporary declines in consumption
Lower distortions in the economy (higher consumption from a given amount of labor)

Assumed Effect of Stabilization

0.1 - 0.5%
0 - 0.3%
7.5 - 8.0%
0.3%

Cost

Increases/decreases investment and long-run growth (cost only reflects this effect)
Increases/decreases investment and long-run growth (cost only reflects this effect)
Allows the economy to achieve more growth from a given average level of investment
Avoids inefficient timing of growth (and thus lowers the cost of achieving growth)

Assumed Effect of Stabilization

Panel D: Stabilization affects long-run growth rather than leave it unchanged

1.7%
1.6 - 1.9%
1.0%
0.3 - 0.8%

Cost

Panel C: Stabilization increases level of consumption rather than leave it unchanged

Figure 1
Log Consumption Per Capita, 1948-2003
Stabilization corresponds to smoothing consumption
10.2

10.0

9.8

9.6

9.4

9.2
ln(C)
9.0
ln(C*)
8.8
1948

1953

1958

1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

Sources: consumption data is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis; population data is from the Census Bureau

Figure 2

Log Consumption Per Capita, 1948-2003
Stabilization corresponds to filling in troughs
10.2

10.0

9.8

9.6

9.4

9.2

ln(C)
ln(C*) - DeLong and Summers estimate

9.0
ln(C*) - Interpolating NBER peaks
8.8
1948

1953

1958

1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

Sources: consumption data is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis; population data is from the Census Bureau

1998

2003

Figure 3
Log Consumption Per Capita, 1948-2003
Stabilization affects trend growth
10.2

10.0

9.8

9.6

9.4

9.2
ln(C)
9.0
ln(C*)
8.8
1948

1953

1958

1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

Sources: consumption data is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis; population data is from the Census Bureau

1998

2003

References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann, 2000. “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Cost of
Business Cycles” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
[2] Atkeson, Andrew and Christopher Phelan. 1994. “Reconsidering the Costs of Business
Cycles with Incomplete Markets.” in S. Fischer and J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 187-207.
[3] Barlevy, Gadi. 2004a. “The Cost of Business Cycles under Endogenous Growth” American
Economic Review, September.
[4] Barlevy, Gadi, 2004b. “On the Timing of Innovation in Stochastic Schumpeterian Growth
Models” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper, August.
[5] Beaudry, Paul and Carmen Pages, 2001. “The Cost of Business Cycles and the Stabilization
Value of Unemployment Insurance.” European Economic Review, August, 45(8), pp. 154572.
[6] Benhabib, Jess and Farmer, Roger. “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns.” Journal of
Economic Theory, June 1994, 63(1), pp. 19-41.
[7] Campbell, John and John Cochrane, 1995. “By Force of Habit: a Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” NBER (Cambridge, MA) Working
Paper No. 4995, January.
[8] Chatterjee, Satyajit and Dean Corbae, 2001. “On the Welfare Gains of Reducing the
Likelihood of Economic Crises” University of Texas Working Paper, September.
[9] Cohen, Darrel, 2000. “A Quantitative Defense of Stabilization Policy” FEDS Working
Paper #00-34, June.
[10] DeLong, Bradford and Larry Summers, 1988. “How Does Macroeconomic Policy Aﬀect
Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 433-80.
[11] DiTella, Rafael, Robert McCulloch, and Andrew Oswald, 2003. “The Macroeconomics of
Happiness” Review of Economics and Statistics, November, 85(4), pp. 809-27.
[12] Dolmas, Jim, 1998. “Risk Preferences and the Welfare Cost of Business Cycles.” Review
of Economic Dynamics, July, 1(3), pp. 646-76.

[13] Epaulard, Anne and Aude Pommeret, 2003. “Recursive Utility, Growth, and the Welfare
Cost of Volatility.” Review of Economic Dynamics, July, 6(2), pp. 672-84.
[14] Epstein, Larry and Zin, Stanley, 1991. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political
Economy, April, 99(2), pp. 263-86.
[15] Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David Lopez Salido, 2003. “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
Costs of Business Fluctuations” NYU Working paper, October.
[16] Imrohoroglu, Ayse, 1989. “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy, December, 97(6), pp. 1364-83.
[17] Jovanovic, Boyan, 2004. “Asymmetric Cycles” NYU Working Paper, August.
[18] Krebs, Tom, 2003. “Growth and Welfare Eﬀects of Business Cycles in Economies with
Idiosyncratic Human Capital Risk,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October, 6(4), pp.
846-868.
[19] Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith, 1999. “On the Welfare Eﬀects of Eliminating Business
Cycles.” Review of Economic Dynamics, January, 2(1), pp. 245-272.
[20] Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith, 2002. “Revisiting the Welfare Eﬀects of Eliminating
Business Cycles.” Rochester University Working Paper, November.
[21] Lucas, Robert, 1987. Models of Business Cycles. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
[22] Lucas, Robert, 2003. “Macroeconomic Priorities.” American Economic Review. March,
93(1), pp. 1-14.
[23] Mankiw, Greg, 1988. “Comments on How Does Macroeconomic Policy Aﬀect Output?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 481-85.
[24] Matheron, Julien and Tristan-Pierre Maury, 2000. “The Welfare Cost of Fluctuations in
AK Growth Models.” Mimeo, University of Paris.
[25] Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994. “Evaluating Risky Consumption Paths: The Role of Intertemporal Substitutability.” European Economic Review, August, 38(7), pp. 1471-86.
[26] Otrok, Christopher, 2001. “On Measuring the Welfare Cost of Business Cycles.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, February, 47(1), pp. 61-92.

[27] Pemberton, James, 1996. “Growth Trends, Cyclical Fluctuations, and Welfare with NonExpected Utility Preferences.” Economics Letters, March, 50(3), pp. 387-92.
[28] Portier, Franck and Luis Puch, 2004. “The Welfare Cost of Business Cycles in an Economy
with Nonclearing Markets” Toulouse Working Paper, February.
[29] Ramey, Garey and Valerie Ramey, 1991. “Technology Commitment and the Cost of Economic Fluctuations.” NBER (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 3755, June.
[30] Robe, Michel and Stephane Pallage, 2002. “The States vs. the states: On the Welfare Cost
of Business Cycles in the U.S.” American University Working Paper.
[31] Shleifer, Andrei, 1986. “Implementation Cycles” Journal of Political Economy, 94(6), December, pp. 1163-90.
[32] Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2001. “The Welfare Cost of Business
Cycles Revisited: Finite Lives and Cyclical Variation in Idiosyncratic Risk.” European
Economic Review, June, 45(7), pp. 1311-39.
[33] Tallarini, Thomas. “Risk Sensitive Real Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
June 2000, 45(3), pp. 507-32.
[34] Turnovsky, Stephen and Marcelo Bianconi, 2005. “The Welfare Gains from Stabilization in
a Stochastically Growing Economy with Idiosyncratic Shocks and Flexible Labor Supply”
Macroeconomic Dynamics.
[35] Wolfers, Justin, 2003. “Is Business Cycle Volatility Costly? Evidence from Surveys of
Subjective Well-Being” International Finance, Spring, 6(1), pp. 1-26.
[36] Yellen, Janet and George Akerlof, 2004. “Stabilization Policy: a Reconsideration” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco speech, July.

