                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONETARY POLICY AND REGIONAL INTEREST RATES
                         IN THE UNITED STATES, 1880-2002

                                            John Landon-Lane
                                              Hugh Rockoff

                                          Working Paper 10924
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10924


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by John Landon-Lane and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Regional Interest Rates in the United States, 1880-2002
John Landon-Lane and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 10924
November 2004
JEL No. N1

                                           ABSTRACT

The long running debate among economic historians over how long it took regional financial markets

in the United States to become fully integrated should be of considerable interest to students of

monetary unions. This paper reviews the debate, discusses the implications of various hypotheses

for the optimality of the US monetary union, and presents some new findings on the origin and

diffusion of monetary shocks. It appears that financial markets were integrated in the late nineteenth

and early twentieth centuries in the sense that monetary shocks were routinely transmitted from one

part of the United States to another. In particular, shocks to interest rates in the eastern financial

centers were routinely transmitted to the periphery. However, it also appears that during this period

significant shocks to bank lending rates in the periphery often arose on the periphery itself. This

suggests that a nineteenth century monetary authority that relied on operations confined to eastern

financial centers would have had a difficult time managing the U.S. monetary union. After World

War II the problem of eruptions on the periphery declined.

John Landon-Lane
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
lane@econ.rutgers.edu

Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu
Monetary Policy and Regional Interest Rates in the United States, 1880-20021




                     1. Financial Integration in a Monetary Union

          There has been a long-running debate among economic historians over how

quickly financial markets in the United States achieved integration after the formation of

a currency union in 1788. Some students of American capital markets believe that full

integration was not achieved until more than a century later. Today, the inclusion of

additional countries in the EMU, the dollarization of countries in Latin America, and the

creation of wholly new monetary unions are real possibilities. Therefore, this debate over

the speed at which the U.S. capital market integrated is worth reviewing for the light that

it sheds on the potential development of the capital market as an efficient transmission

system for monetary policy within a monetary union.

          This debate can be traced to Lance Davis's (1965) classic paper, although one

could also cite the older paper by R.M. Breckenridge (1898), which is still well worth

reading. More recent contributions, just to mention a few of our favorites, include

Richard Sylla (1967, 1969), John James (November 1976, December 1976), Gene Smiley

(1975), Richard Keehn (1980), and (of course!) Howard Bodenhorn and Hugh Rockoff

(1992).

          The focus of this literature has been on why there were persistent regional

differences in interest rates, and on how long these differences took to disappear. One

reason for focusing on long-run differences is the concern of economic historians with

economic growth. Persistent differences in rates of return were the incentive to move


                                               1
capital from one region to another, and the movement of capital from the Northeast to the

West, Midwest, and South, was a major source of economic growth.

       A second reason for focusing on long-run differences in rates is a concern with

the efficiency of markets. One might be tempted to assume that financial markets,

especially short-term markets, would integrate soon after a monetary union was formed.

Labor markets, real capital markets, or final goods markets might show less uniformity of

response because of legal or cultural barriers to trade. However, one would think that one

could depend on the integration of financial markets to create an effective transmission

mechanism for monetary policy. For one thing people who work in financial markets are

knowledgeable specialists in arbitrage: we would expect them to respond quickly to small

profit opportunities. Moreover, the physical cost of transporting money from one place to

another is trivial compared with the costs of moving labor or real capital. We might

expect workers to respond slowly to a difference in real wages, and we might expect it to

take time to build new factories and move machinery; but we would expect financiers to

respond quickly to a difference in interest rates. In other words, the suggestion that

persistent regional differences might be an example of market failure undoubtedly

motivated much of the research in this area.

       This literature, whatever the original motives, provides useful information for

students of monetary unions. If changes in interest rates in eastern financial markets were

transmitted in a slow and halting way to the periphery, or simply were not transmitted at

all, then there was little potential for an effective monetary union, at least one managed

through short-term rates.2 Thus the school of thought that holds that it took the United




                                               2
States the whole of the nineteenth century to achieve an integrated financial market

would make the United States a pessimistic model for monetary unions.

       Efficient transmission of shocks from one part of the monetary union to another is

merely a necessary condition for an optimal currency area. The key question, as pointed

out long ago by Robert Mundell, is whether business cycles (here assumed to be reflected

in interest-rate cycles) in different regions were synchronous. Did shocks to interest rates

occur nationwide or were some regions subject to important independent shocks? If

interest rate shocks are system wide, a monetary union can be managed in a simple way.

The monetary authority can offset system wide shocks by taking actions in the central

money market. On the other hand, if independent shocks occur frequetly in outlying parts

of the monetary union, the problem facing the monetary authority becomes far more

complicated. Suppose an undesirable rate increase occurs in the periphery while rates

remain at target levels in the core. What is a monetary authority to do? If rates in the core

are lowered in order to combat high rates on the periphery, rates in the core will be too

low. The first case, of course, corresponds to the case in which the monetary union is an

optimal currency area in Mundell’s sense; the second case, one in which it was not.

       We will begin by exploring the existing literature for the information it contains

about the pace of financial integration.



                     2. The Debate over Financial Market Integration

       The analogy that most students of U.S. financial markets have had in mind is with

a market for some uniform commodity, for example wheat. In the absence of

transportation costs, transactions costs, tariffs, and so on, we would expect the price of a


                                              3
particular grade of wheat to be the same everywhere. A shock to the system, moreover,

would be transmitted quickly to all parts of the market. A bad harvest in the Ukraine

would produce a general increase in the price of wheat throughout the world. In the same

way, we might expect interest rates to be the same in the absence of transactions costs,

usury laws, and so on. If there were barriers to trade, then we would see higher or lower

prices persisting in some markets. Technological progress or institutional change that

reduced barriers to trade would produce a more uniform price.

       Breckenridge (1898) may have been the first to look at U.S. short-term capital

markets with this analogy in mind. He looked at rates on commercial paper in different

cities of the United States in the 1890s, and found differences in rates that he considered

astonishing. While the average rate in Boston for 1893-97 was 3.832 percent, the average

rate in Omaha Nebraska was 7.980 percent, Breckenridge (1898, 120). Breckenridge

rejected the possibility that differences in the risk of repayment could explain the

differences in rates. The commercial paper on which Breckenridge focused most of his

attention consisted of short-term, first-class double name paper.3 He regarded this sort of

paper as carrying a very low risk of default in every part of the country.4 If risk couldn't

explain the regional differences what did? Based on comparisons with Canada, and other

developed countries, Breckenridge concluded that the fragmented structure of the

American banking system set up artificial barriers to the movement of capital. A few

large banks with headquarters in Toronto and Montreal and branches throughout the

country dominated the Canadian system. The U.S. system, on the other hand, consisted of

separate banking systems in each state. Branching within states, moreover, was often

prohibited.


                                              4
       The modern literature, as we noted above, begins with Davis (1965). One of

Davis's innovations was to make use of the reports of the Comptroller of the Currency on

the National Banks. This source provides the income and expenditure data and balance

sheets for all of the National Banks of the United States. From it Davis was able to

compute proxies for interest rates by state and city that covered the whole of the United

States on an annual basis from the time the National Banking system was established in

1863. Like Breckenridge, Davis found substantial interregional differences in rates.

Davis's data, moreover, permitted him to observe the long-term trend, which he believed

showed the gradual convergence of regional rates. Why did these differences persist for

so long? Davis (1965, 358) believed that there was a "disinclination of capital to

migrate," that was gradually overcome. In part, this barrier was overcome by the

diffusion of an important institution: the commercial paper market.5 This market

consisted of unregulated brokers, located mainly in financial centers, who would buy

paper created by local businessmen and then sell it on a national market. Davis believed

that rates came down and rate gaps closed as this network of brokers spread and provided

competition for local banks.

       This hypothesis has been subjected to considerable criticism.6 One of the first to

criticize Davis's interpretation was George Stigler (1967). Stigler argued that it is not

possible to make inferences of the sort Davis made about whether differentials between

regions are "too" high in the absence of information about transactions costs. Suppose we

observe that the price wheat is different in different markets, Stigler asks. Would we

conclude that "there was a disinclination of wheat to migrate" or would we ask whether




                                              5
there were transaction costs that made it uneconomic to buy wheat in the cheap market

and sell it in the dear market?

       Richard Sylla (1969) in another classic paper argued that Davis was right about

persistent differences in interest rates, but wrong about the causes of the differences, and

wrong about the reasons for their disappearance. Sylla argued that high rates in rural

areas of the United States reflected local bank monopolies. The National Banking Act

(1863 and 1864) in combination with a punitive tax on notes issued by state banks gave

National Banks the sole right to issue bank notes. The Act also set a high minimum

standard for the capital of national banks. Together these factors meant that many small

towns, especially in the South and West became one-bank towns. These towns couldn't

support a state bank because state banks couldn't issue notes, and they couldn't support

more than one national bank because of the high minimum capital requirement. The

result was a national bank that could exploit its monopoly position by raising interest

rates on loans.

       This problem, as stressed by Ransom and Sutch (1977), was especially severe in

the South after the Civil War. In the South poverty meant that the minimum capital

requirement in the National Banking Act was an important barrier to entry, and illiteracy

and innumeracy meant that the limitation on state banks of issue was also important.

Over time, according to Sylla, the growth of deposit banking, partly as a result of the

growth of numeracy and literacy, made it easier for state banks to compete, thus eroding

the monopoly positions of the National Banks. The Gold Standard Act of 1900 reduced

the minimum capital requirements of the National Banks. A surge of entry occurred in its




                                              6
wake, which served both to further undermine the monopoly positions of local banks, and

to illustrate it's underlying cause.

        John James (1976a, 1976b, 1978) reworked Davis’s interest rates and argued

based on cross-state regressions that Sylla was right that local bank monopolies explained

most of the differentials. Risk, in the form of loan loss rates, an issue raised by one of us

(Rockoff 1977), could only explain a relatively small part. James differed from Sylla,

however, on why local bank monopolies had been eroded. In James's view, the key

development was the passage of "free banking laws" in various states that allowed small

state chartered banks to enter local markets and compete with existing banks.

        The Sylla-James bank market structure interpretation was challenged by a number

of writers. (1) Richard Keehn performed a cross-bank study for Wisconsin and found no

evidence of local bank monopolies that would explain the local pattern of interest rates.

Rates in Milwaukee (where there was lot's of competition) were sometimes higher than

rates in rural areas. Wisconsin, however, as Keehn pointed out, may not have been typical

because it had a long history of relatively free entry and competition. As far as we are

aware, no one has tried to replicate Keehn's careful study for other states. This seems to

us, however, to be the best way of getting at the one-bank-town argument. (2) The Sylla-

James hypothesis was also challenged by Marie Elizabeth Sushka and W. Brian Barrett

(1984) who argued that financial market integration had occurred earlier than suggested

by the Sylla-James hypothesis, and that increasing financial sophistication on the part of

borrowers (reminiscent in some ways of Davis's position) explain the decline in rate

differentials. And (3), the Sylla-James hypothesis was attacked by John Binder and David

T. Brown (1991) who found little evidence to support either free banking laws or the


                                              7
Gold Standard Act of 1900 as key developments. Instead they stressed the absence of

branch banking and changes in agricultural returns.

       A number of writers have pushed in other directions. Kerry Odell (1989) explored

the degree of integration on the Pacific Coast. Bodenhorn (1992) and Bodenhorn and

Rockoff (1992) explored integration before the Civil War. Gene Smiley (1975) also

modified Davis's interest rate estimates, and raised an interesting point about the

measurement of interest rate differentials: should we look at absolute differentials or a

measure of dispersion such as the coefficient of variation. Since interest rates were

generally falling at the end of the nineteenth century (in the United States and the rest of

the world) absolute differentials were falling. But dispersion measured, say, by the

coefficient of variation was falling less rapidly. Smiley puts full integration, measured by

low dispersion of rates, later than Davis.

       The implication of the regional differences identified by Davis and documented

by subsequent writers for the efficiency of the short-term capital market as a transmission

system for monetary policy depends on the reasons for the persistence of interest rate

differentials. If Davis was right, then we would expect that monetary impulses that

affected rates in eastern financial markets would have minimal effects on other regions.

According to Davis it required a specific institutional link -- the commercial paper market

-- to connect regional financial markets. It would seem to follow that when that link was

lacking the transmission of monetary shocks would fail. On the other hand, if Sylla and

James were right that local bank monopolies were raising the price of credit in rural

areas, then there would be no presumption that the transmission mechanism would be

impaired. A gas station has a local monopoly and as a result is able to set its selling price


                                              8
higher than the price in competitive markets. We would still expect this station to raise

and lower its price in response to changes in the wholesale price of gasoline.

       Even in Sylla-James case, one can think of reasons why interest rates in different

regions might respond differently to monetary shocks. Conservative bankers in rural

areas, protected by local monopolies, might be less inclined to keep abreast of and

respond to every short-term fluctuation in the market. But on the whole, one would think

that local bank monopolies, although they would imply a less than optimal allocation of

banking resources, would not inhibit the transmission of monetary policy impulses.

       The possibility that regional differences reflected risks would also be consistent

with the efficient transmission of monetary impulses. After all one sees persistent

differences in rates of return on assets of varying levels of risk that trade in the same

market. But they respond in harmony to monetary shocks. Lea Carty (1996) found a

distinct regional premium on railroad bonds: Bonds issued by Southern railroads paid a

higher rate. But Carty also noted that rates in the South and other regions fluctuated

together in response to common macro-economic shocks.

       To sum up, the literature on regional interest rates in the United States suggests

that the ability of the short-term capital markets to serve as a conduit for monetary policy

may have evolved rather slowly in the United States. Some stories are more encouraging

to the advocates of monetary unions than others – for example the work by Sylla and

James suggesting that local bank monopolies account for persistent rate differences or the

work by Bodenhorn and Rockoff suggesting that a good deal of integration had been

achieved before the Civil War – but all suggest that it took time and effort to achieve

integration.


                                              9
       This literature, however, has been largely silent on the second issue of crucial

importance to students of monetary unions: where did shocks arise? Did interest rates

vary throughout the country mostly because large shocks hit eastern financial centers? Or

were peripheral regions subject to independent shocks? Our empirical work has been

focused on this issue.


                                3. Data and Definitions

       The debate over regional interest rates in the United States, as we noted above,

has generated significant amounts of data on bank lending rates by region. Banking

across state lines was prohibited in the United States. Each state therefore had its own

banking system. Many states, moreover, prohibited branch banking. The result was a

myriad of local banks filing reports on their assets and earnings with government

regulators. From this massive amount of data local lending rates of commercial banks can

be established. If a few large banks with many branches had characterized the United

States, as was the case in Canada and other developed countries, local rates might be

much harder to establish. They would be recorded in the internal records of the banks,

and would not be reported to regulators. As we will see below data for the most recent

years may be contaminated by this problem. Luckily (for scholars if not for the country as

a whole), the fragmented structure of the American banking system has created a

substantial amount of data on regional interest rates.

       For regional interest rates we used Bodenhorn's (1995) estimates for the period

1880 to 1960 and estimates based on data on the FDIC website for 1966 to the present. In

the first decade after the Civil War, by the way, the Western United States remained on

gold while the East remained on the Greenback. The United States returned to the gold

                                             10
standard in 1879, so Bodenhorn's data starts when the U.S. monetary union is

reconstituted after the Civil War. Bodenhorn (1995), following Smiley (1975) and James

(December 1976, November 1976), purged Davis's data of various revenues and losses in

order to arrive at something closer to contractual loan rates. Essentially, Davis attributed

all bank earnings to loans, and divided that figure by total loans to get a proxy for the rate

of interest. Smiley and James removed earnings on bonds and other non-loan earnings

from the numerator and various non-loan assets from the denominator to produce a

number closer to the contractual rate on loans. Bodenhorn (1995) extended these

estimates to 1960. We also tried using Davis's original estimates because they are

available before 1880 and for a finer division of regions. Some of our preliminary results

are reported below. But these results suggested that the impurities may be important

when it comes to using the rates in the VARs reported in the penultimate section of the

paper.

         Our data for the period after 1966 was derived from income and balance sheet

data posted on the FDIC website.7 This data would appear to be exactly what is needed.

The variable we used was the ratio of "Total Interest Income on Loans and Leases" to

"Net Loans and Leases." The main problem here is that total interest income and loans

are reported by bank and attributed to the home office of the bank. Interregional mergers

in recent years have undoubtedly undermined the usefulness of the series as measures of

regional interest rates. To bridge the gap between Bodenhorn's series and the FDIC loans

and discounts series we interpolated using data from the Annual Report of the Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation.




                                             11
        Here a different variable, the ratio of "Interest and Discounts on Loans" to

"Loans, Discounts, and Overdrafts" was available. This variable produced somewhat

lower rates in the Northeast (especially in New York State), and so this variable was used

as an interpolator. We simply computed percentage deviations from trend values in the

FDIC loans, discounts, and overdrafts series and added them to deviations from the trend

between the end of the Bodenhorn series and the beginning of the FDIC loans and

discounts series. The standard deviations of the resulting series are relatively low during

the period 1961 to 1965. But this is also true of other rates such as the corporate bond

rate. So we did not try to adjust the interpolator for a potential difference in its underlying

volatility.

        Figure 1, plots the bank lending rates in the Northeast and the West and the rate

on high grade corporate bonds, a proxy for a rate that could be controlled through open

market operations, for the period 1880 to 2002. An inspection of the chart tells the basic

story. In the postwar era bank lending rates in the West and in the Northeast and the yield

on high grade corporate are moving together. In the late nineteenth century this is far

from obvious.

        How should we define "monetary policy?" First of all, it should be noted that the

term "monetary policy" is anachronistic when applied to the nineteenth century. Before

the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 the stock of money in the

United States was determined primarily by (1) the amount of gold in the country, (2) the

reserve ratios of banks, and (3) the currency deposit ratio of the public. Domestic mining

and the balance of payments in turn determined the amount of gold. The Federal

government did influence these variables in various ways, but generally it would be a


                                              12
mistake to think of the Federal government as an active monetary authority. After the

Federal Reserve was established in 1913 it makes sense to speak of monetary policy.

What we are in fact doing for part of the period is examining the effects of monetary

shocks on regional rates whether those shocks were caused by monetary policy or by the

private sector.

       We experimented with several measures of monetary policy: (1) interest rates,

including both short term rates and the corporate bond rate, which as figure 1 shows

seems to be closely related to the bank lending rates, (2) the rate of change (or the change

in the rate of change) of high-powered money, and (3) the rate of change (or the change

in the rate of change) of the stock of money, generally M2. For the most part, however

we report results using short-term interest rates in financial centers as the measure of

monetary policy. This choice follows the current fashion of viewing interest rates as the

measure of monetary policy. And focussing on interest rates is a good way of focusing on

the efficiency of the transmission mechanism: when one end of the line was shaken, by

whatever means, what happened at the other end? The monetary aggregates, moreover,

seldom showed any clear effects on rates in the simple initial tests we used, partly

perhaps because of the complicated structure of the effects of the aggregates on interest

rates. Interest rates, of course, are only an intermediate indicator of the affects of

monetary policy. Ultimately, we are interested in the affects on employment and prices.

But we have not explored the connection between interest rate movements and regional

employment or other measures of economic activity.




                                              13
                                   4. Financial Crises

       If monetary impulses were transmitted quickly through financial markets, and if

interest rates were good indicators of monetary policy, then we would expect to find

periods of extreme distress in financial markets recorded in interest rates from all regions.

Financial crises are, to put it somewhat differently, natural experiments in which to test

the integration of financial markets. Tables 2 and 3 use this idea by exploring several

interest rates during the key periods of financial distress in the nineteenth and early

twentieth centuries. Although there were a number of financial crises, the crises of 1873,

1893, 1907 and 1929 would surely be among those at the top of any list. Each was

characterized by a stock market crash, a banking crisis, and a sharp downturn in

economic activity. Depending on the variables one looks at, one might bring in a few

other crises. Looking at the stock of money or deposits in suspended banks, for example,

would point to the crisis of 1877-78. And looking at the change in the price level would

point to the recessions that followed the Civil War and World War I. But few financial

historians would disagree with the conclusion that the four crises examined here were

among the most severe. Indeed, we would guess that most American financial historians

would rate them as the four most important crises between the Civil War and World War

II.

       In Tables 1 and 2 we show the cumulative change in particular interest rates from

the level reached in the preceding trough of the business cycle (according to the NBER

chronology.)8 For example, the first entry in the first column of data in Table 1 shows

that the commercial paper rate in 1871 was 27 basis points below the level in 1870 (the

trough of the business cycle). The third entry shows that at the cyclical peak in 1873 – the


                                             14
cyclical peaks such as 1873 are in bold – the commercial paper rate was 306 basis points

above the level of the previous trough. As you can see, as least as far as Davis's data is

concerned, the financial boom and bust cycle, shown so clearly in data columns one and

two, was only imperfectly reflected in the regional rates. As might be expected, New

York City rates conform fairly closely to the commercial paper and call money rates, but

others show a much looser connection. Region III, mainly Southern states, follows its

own path as it recovers from the Civil War. One might have expected a closer

relationship in 1893, and 1907, but in Davis's data, which reports realized yields, the

picture is also mixed in those years.

       Bodenhorn’s figures are the basis for the pictures of the crises of 1893, 1907, and

1929 shown in Table 2. In all three crises we see the same pattern in money market rates.

Commercial paper rates and call money rates rose dramatically during the boom

(speculative bubble?) and then fell dramatically afterwards. In 1893 and 1929, although

not in 1907, money market rates ended up below the level they had settled into during the

previous trough. In 1893 regional rates followed a roughly similar path, although they did

not fall so far below the level reached in the previous trough, as did money market rates.

During the boom, rates in the Plains and in the West actually rose more than in the money

markets. This was, by the way, the period of Populist agitation against the "moneyed

interests." It is also, the only case in our data where increases in bank lending rates

exceeded the increases in money market rates. This is the only case, to put the matter

differently, that literally matches the old adage "When Wall Street Sneezes, Main Street

Catches a Cold."9




                                              15
       Perhaps the most surprising feature of Table 2 is the behavior of rates during the

Great Contraction from 1929 to 1933. Most historians of the integration of U.S. financial

markets have argued that the process was completed in the nineteenth century or at the

latest early in the twentieth century. But here we see evidence of regions going their own

way in the 1930s. Most of the regional rates did rise along with the money market rates

in 1928 and 1929. But the impact seems to have been somewhat muted. And while

money market rates then plunged well below the 1927 trough during the years 1930-33,

the regional rates remained above the 1927 level.

       This episode is so striking that it deserves a diagram. Figure 2 plots two money

market rates, the commercial paper rate and the call money rate, and the four regional

bank-lending rates from 1926 to 1934. It is hard to escape the feeling that the regional

rates were divorced during this contraction from the violent fluctuations in the financial

centers. It is possible that as the economy declined banks saw the risk attached to their

average loan rising, so that risk adjusted rates may have been falling. But whatever the

reason, it is clear that the typical bank borrower did not benefit from the rapid decline in

rates in the financial centers. There were no major financial disturbances in the early

postwar years, so it is not possible to find an example from that period to compare with

the disturbances shown in Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 2.

       A close look at the financial crises, to sum up, suggests that monetary shocks

were communicated to all parts of the United States by financial markets, but that the

level and timing of the responses was erratic. Focusing on the financial crises, of course,

means ignoring information from less disturbed periods. In the following two sections we




                                             16
use more general statistics to characterize these response patterns. We begin with some

simple correlations.




                                 5. Simple Correlations

Perhaps the simplest way of approaching the question of short-run financial market

integration is to ask whether regional interest rates tended to move in the same direction

in the short run as interest rates in the financial centers (or other indicators of monetary

policy) and whether the frequency with which regional rates moved in the same direction

as rates in financial centers increased over time. Presumably, if financial markets were

highly integrated interest rates in different regions would move in the same direction at

the same time.

       This idea is applied in Table 3. Here we examined three periods: 1880-1905 (26

years), 1906-1945 (40 years), and 1946-1960 (15 years). The years from 1880-1905 were

a period of relative economic and financial stability. The United States was on the gold

standard throughout and generally enjoyed peace and growing prosperity, although as we

have seen there were periodic financial crises, particularly in the 1890s. During 1880-

1905 many scholars have argued, as we saw above, that US short-term capital markets

although not fully integrated were heading toward that ideal. Scholars disagree, however,

on when full integration was achieved. The years from 1906 to 1946 were a time of

trouble when even highly integrated markets would behave in an anomalous fashion. This

period includes two major financial crises, 1907 and 1929-33, and the two world wars.

During the Second World War, moreover, market rates were distorted for a considerable

time by the Federal Reserve's policy of pegging interest rates. And a number of


                                              17
institutional changes occurred that tended to further unify national capital markets

including the establishment of the Federal Reserve System, and the concentration of the

Federal Reserve’s authority in the Federal Reserve Board in Washington D.C. (Rockoff

2000). The period after 1946 was, generally, one of economic stability with many of the

prerequisites for financial market integration in place.

       For each sub-period we calculated the percentage of years in which the rate in a

particular region moved in the same direction as the rate in the money markets. Panel A

of Table 3 shows the percentage of years in which regional rates moved in the same

direction as the commercial paper rate, Panel B shows the percentage of years in which

regional rates moved in the same direction as the call money rate, Panel C shows the

percentage years in which regional rates moved in the opposite direction (to capture a

short-term liquidity effect) from the change in the rate of change (acceleration) of money,

and Panel D shows these measures for various assets traded in the financial centers to

provide a basis of comparison.

       If the markets were perfectly integrated in the short run, and if bank loans in

various regions and short-term money market instruments were all of similar risk, we

would expect that when rates rose in the money market they would rise in regional

markets -- the figures in Table 3 would all be 100s. If the markets were completely

separate we would expect that when rates rose in the money markets, they might rise in

regional markets or they might, just as likely, fall -- the figures in Table 3 would all be

50s.

       It is clear that by this measure the correspondence between movements of interest

rates in the interior regions and in the money markets was rather loose during the initial


                                              18
period. In the Northeast the percentage of same-direction movements was 72

(significantly different from chance at the 10 percent level), but the percentage of same-

direction movements was lower in the other regions. In the South it was only 52 percent

and in the West 44 percent, obviously no better than chance. Same-direction movements

also seem to be a matter of chance during the disturbed years from 1906-1945. One could

predict whether interest rates would move in the same direction or the opposite direction

from the commercial paper rate by flipping a coin. Only when we get to the postwar era

do we see a pattern that resembles what we would expect from a unified market. The

pattern for the call money rate shown in Panel B is similar: we must wait until we get to

the postwar period to see rates move up and down together.10

       The positive correlations for the post war period, however, may be partly

spurious. There was a sharp and widespread upward trend in interest rates after World

War II. This trend may have been the result of rates returning to normalcy from the low

levels of the 1930s. And the upward trend also may have been the result of a rising

inflation premium. Naturally, if there were a broad upward trend in rates, year-to-year

changes would turn out to be highly correlated. But while a return to interest-rate

normalcy or an inflation premium in some sense may reflect common monetary factors,

they do not represent the short-run monetary impulses that we are trying to uncover.

       Panel C. looks at a measure of monetary policy based on the stock of money

(M2). Since the stock of money tended to rise from year to year for substantial periods of

time, we looked at the change in the growth rate of the stock of money. In the short-run

we would expect a decrease in liquidity to raise interest rates. So panel C shows the

percentage of years in which this measure of liquidity moves in the opposite direction


                                            19
from a regional interest rate. While there is generally a tendency for regional rates to

move in the opposite direction to the change in the rate of change of money, the

relationship is fragile. The problem may be that there are also positive connections

between money and interest rates complicating the picture. Changes in the growth rate of

money for example might signal expansion or inflation which generally produce higher

rates.11

           Panel D of Table 3 provides some evidence that our measure of integration, rates

moving in the same direction, as crude as it is, can pick up signs of integration. Our two

money market rates, the call rate and the commercial paper rate generally moved in the

same direction during the initial period 1880-1905. During the second period, 1906-1945,

however, there is retrogression, perhaps because the call money rate was being affected

by disturbances and institutional changes in security markets.

We find similar patterns if we look at securities that we know were trading in the same

markets. For High-grade Municipal bonds and High-grade Corporates the percentages of

same-direction movements, as shown in Panel D, are 84 percent in the first period, 73

percent in the second period, and 93 percent in the third period, all statistically

significant. Interest rates on bonds of different quality ratings are available only for part

of the period. Between 1920 and 1945 yields on Aaa (low risk) corporate bonds and Baa

(medium risk) corporate bonds moved in the same direction 85 percent of the time, and

from 1946 to 1960, 93 percent of the time. These comparisons show that our simple

measure of co-movement is capable of picking up short-term integration when it is

present. The high correlation of movements in the Aaa and Baa bonds did not mean, to

reiterate, that there was no difference in yields. For the period 1920 to 1960 the Aaa rate


                                              20
averaged 3.76 percent while the Baa rate averaged 5.76 percent, a difference of 1.40

percent. The difference gradually declined in the postwar period. But the decline was not

a sign of increasing market integration, but rather increased economic stability, and hence

a decrease in the risk attached to the Baa bonds

       As the problem with spurious correlation in the period 1946 to 1960 indicated, the

simple correlations explored above, although suggestive, may provide a misleading

picture of the correlation (or lack thereof) between monetary policy changes in financial

markets and outlying regions. Vector Auto Regressions provide a way of characterizing

the relationship that can avoid this and similar problems.



                               6. Vector Autoregressions

       Vector autoregressions (VARs) are a useful way of characterizing the data for the

purpose of examining how amenable the system was to management by a single

monetary authority. With VARs we can divide the changes in rates in each region into an

amount that could be predicted on the basis of past values of all the rates in the system,

and an error that depends on the shocks hitting the system. If most forecast errors were

the result of shocks that arose in the financial core and diffused to the periphery then the

task of the monetary authority would be straightforward. If an undesirable shock to

national rates occurred then the authority could simply intervene in the core market and

offset the shock. On the other hand, if most forecast errors on the periphery were the

result of shocks that arose on the periphery itself, then the ability of a monetary authority

operating through rate changes in core financial markets would be problematic.




                                             21
        Our strategy was to set up a vector auto regression that included each of the

regional rates explored above and a national rate, the latter being a potential or actual

instrument of monetary policy. We then asked two questions of the resulting VARs.

Were the markets integrated in all periods in the sense that shocks to the national rates

were diffused to all regions? And were the national markets dominant in all periods in the

sense that the movement of rates in the periphery mostly reflected movements in the

core?

        Our data, as noted above, extends from 1880 to 2002. We first divided this period

into three segments: 1880-1913, 1914-1943, and 1955-2002. This division, we believe,

would appear natural to most financial historians. The first segment extends from the start

of our data in 1880 (the first year after the post-Civil-War reunification of the monetary

union) to 1913 when the Federal Reserve was established. The second segment includes

the disturbed middle decades of the twentieth century: the two world wars and the Great

Depression. The last segment begins in 1955, when our data on the Federal Funds rate

begins and represents the modern period in Federal Reserve history. One could, of

course, break the initial period into different and additional segments. It would be

interesting, for example, to break the initial segment near 1900 into two smaller segments

because some financial historians have argued that full integration was achieved at about

that time. Unfortunately, however, this additional break would leave us with relatively

small samples given the model we wish to estimate.

        In what follows we identify orthogonalized structural shocks in the VAR/VEC by

assuming that the contemporaneous relationship matrix of the VAR is lower triangular.

Given this identification we ordered the variables in the following way: (1) the national


                                             22
rate – the commercial paper rate or the Federal Funds rate, (2) the Northeast rate, (3) the

Plains rate, (4) the Southern rate, and (5) the Western rate. This ordering was dictated

partly by the main question: what could a monetary authority do? The monetary policy

variable therefore comes first, and then the Northeast region. The Northeast contained the

eastern financial centers: New York (by far the most important), Boston, and

Philadelphia. The order to be chosen for the peripheral regions is less clear-cut. The order

we usually worked with was, after the Northeast, the Plains states, the South, and the

West. To some extent reflects a nineteenth century view of things. Today we would be

more likely to put the West second and, perhaps, the Plains states last.

       All the variables were tested for the presence of a unit root and it was found that

all were I(1) in the sense that the hypothesis of a unit root could not be rejected.12 Since

all the variables were I(1) we needed to estimate the VAR in differences. This brings into

play the issue of cointegration. If there is cointegration present the appropriate model to

estimate is the Vector Error Correction model which is just the DVAR (VAR in

differences) with error correction terms added to each equation. We used the method of

Johansen (1988, 1992) to test for co-integration, but we used the sample size corrected

critical values suggested by Cheung and Lai (1993).

       Our results were mixed. (1) In 1880-1913 we found evidence at the 5% level of

one cointegrating relationship between all the variables in the system. (2) In 1914-1943

we did not find evidence of any cointegrating relationships. If one looks at a graph of the

data for this period, for example Figure 2, it is obvious why this is the case. The

commercial paper rate behaves quite differently from the regional rates. (3) In 1955-2002

we find evidence at the 5% level of one cointegrating vector for both sets of variable


                                             23
whether we combine the regional rates with the commercial paper rate or the Federal

Funds rate. This result is strong if we allow for a break in drift in the variables in 1981.

       Given these results we did the following: (1) For period 1880-1913 we estimated

a VEC model with one lag, (2) for the period 1914-1943 we estimated a straight DVAR

with one lag, and (3) for the period 1955-2002 we estimated two VEC models, one with

the commercial paper rate as the “national’’ rate and a second with the Federal funds rate

as the “national” rate. Our VARs are reported in Tables 5-7.

        In each case we computed orthogonalized interest rate impulse response

functions using a Cholesky decomposition. Given our ordering of the variables, the

Cholesky decomposition means that we can interpret the shocks in the following way.

The national shock is the shock that hits the commercial paper rate (or the Federal Funds

rate). The Northeast shock is the component of the northeast residual that is orthogonal to

the national shock. The Plains shock is the component of the plains shock orthogonal to

both the national shock and the Northeast shock. The South shock is the component of

the South shock that is orthogonal to the National, Northeast, and Plains shocks. The

West shock is the shock that hits the West that is orthogonal to all the other shocks.

       These impulse response functions were then used to construct variance

decompositions. The variance decompositions show the contribution each structural

shock makes to the non-forecasteable components of each variable (i.e. the random

component of each variable once we account for the trend, level, and the relationship to

past levels of the series). We can display these decompositions on a simple graph. The

vertical axis measures the proportion (as a percent) of the variance of the forecast errors

explained by the variance of the independent shocks to a particular interest series, and the


                                              24
horizontal axis shows time in years. Variance decompositions are more useful for our

purposes because they reflect both the size and frequency of the shocks as well as their

impact as described by the VAR equations. The usual impulse-response charts does not

show the size or the frequency of the shocks, but merely what the effect of a standardized

shock would be. Since there are 5 variables in our system (the national rate and the four

regional rates) there are 25 variance decompositions for each period.

        We will focus first on the Northeast (the core) and the West (the periphery).

Figure 3 shows the effect of a shock to the National rate on bank lending rates in the

Northeast. As might be expected, in the most recent period shocks to the national rate,

whether measured by the commercial paper rate or the Federal Funds rate, appears to

explain most (about 70 percent) of the variance of the forecast errors in the Northeastern

bank lending rate. Perhaps it is more surprising, however, that this also appears to have

been true in the earliest period that we examine, 1880-1913. Only during the years of war

and depression do we find a lower figure. If we move to the periphery (Figure 4) we find

a very different story. As before, shocks to the National rate account for most of the

variance of the forecast errors in the Western rate in the post World War II era. But if we

go back to the period 1880-1913, or 1914-1943 we find that shocks to the National rate

explain very little.

        The other side of the coin is the role of shocks within the region itself. Figure 5

shows the impact on the Northeast of shocks arising within the Northeast itself. In both

the postwar and pre-1914 eras, shocks that we assign to the Northeast account for only

about 20 percent of the variance of the forecast errors. Only during the war and interwar

years do the independent regional shocks appear important. But when we turn to the West


                                              25
(Figure 6) we find something very different. Here we find that regional shocks were

important – accounting for about 50 percent of the forecast errors in the West – during

both 1880-1913 and 1914-1943. Only when we get to the modern era do we find that

shocks arising independently in the West played a minor role.

       If we look at the other peripheral regions, the Plains and the South, we see

essentially the same pattern. Figure 7 shows the variance decomposition of the effects of

shocks to the National rate on the Plains. Again, shocks to the National rate explain most

(90 percent) of the forecast errors in the bank lending rate on the Plains during the

postwar era, but a substantially smaller percentage during the two earlier periods. And

Figure 8 shows the variance decomposition of the effects of shocks to the National rate

on the South. And again, we find shocks to the National rate explaining 90 percent of the

variance of the forecast errors in the Southern rate during the postwar era, but perhaps

only 20 percent during 1914 to 1943, and only 10 percent during 1880-1913.13

       The simplest interpretation of these dramatic results, and the one that we favor, is

simply that the regions have become more homogeneous over time. When Orange

County California actually grew oranges the economy and hence bank lending rates

behaved very differently from rates in other regions. Only a monetary policy tailored for

California would have been able to offset local shocks. Now that the economy of Orange

County is much like the economy in the rest of the country the relevant interest rate

shocks are those hitting the national economy, and an interest rate policy tailored to

California is no longer necessary. One could, it is true, come up with some alternative

interpretations. It could be true that the adoption of the Federal Funds rate as the

preferred instrument for conducting monetary policy has increased the significance for


                                             26
the economy as a whole of shocks to this rate. But this explanation does not explain so

well why the commercial paper rate was dominant in the East in the late nineteenth

century.



                                          7. Conclusion

       The U.S. monetary union was established at the end of the eighteenth century

when the U.S. Constitution was adopted. But financial market integration did not occur

overnight. Indeed, there is a long-running debate among financial historians over how

quickly financial markets were integrated. The pessimists such as Davis maintain that it

took nearly a century. The optimists, such as Bodenhorn and Rockoff, maintain that a

high degree of integration was achieved in the antebellum period.

       But even if the optimists are right there was a second problem that made

centralized monetary control problematic. In the nineteenth century, perhaps until World

War II, the peripheral regions of the United States did not simply import interest rate

shocks from other regions. They generated their own. In the first segment we examined,

1880-1913, for example, most of the variance in the forecast errors we observe in the

West were generated by innovations occurring in the West. This lack of synchronicity set

a difficult problem for a potential monetary authority.

       It was true, to put it somewhat differently, that “When Wall Street Sneezed, Main

Street Caught a Cold” If that is all there was to it, the money doctor’s task would be

simple. Giving Wall Street a dose medicine whenever it sneezed would take care of Main

Street as well. The problem was that Main Street often caught colds when Wall Street

didn’t. Giving everyone the same medicine at the same time wouldn’t work.


                                            27
       Was this problem peculiar to the American monetary union or is it to be expected

in all such unions? Clearly, the unique institutional history of American banking has

much to do with the resulting weakness of the banking system as a monetary transmission

mechanism. Each state had its own independent banking system. As Breckenridge

(1898), Davis (1965), and others have noted this system created artificial barriers to the

movement of short-term funds. The Civil War, moreover, reversed much of the

integration that had occurred in the first half of the nineteenth century by destroying the

banking system of the South. And the National Banking Act adopted during the war put

important constraints on the ability of the South to rebuild its banking system. As

Bodenhorn and Rockoff (1992) and Bodenhorn (1992) have shown, there were important

signs that capital markets were approaching full integration before the Civil War. This

process will not of course be followed in detail in other monetary unions. Nevertheless,

the possibility that political forces will prevent the unification of financial markets as

existing monetary unions are extended or new ones created cannot be ruled out.

       Today the Federal Reserve relies on operations conducted in central financial

markets. This should not blind us to the possibility of other institutional arrangements.

The system of Federal Reserve District banks was designed to deal with the unique

problems of individual districts. It made sense to have an institutional structure that could

respond to idiosyncratic shocks in rural areas. Bank reserve ratio changes, a largely

forgotten tool of monetary policy, also could have been used as a tool for addressing

problems in particular markets.

       The United States is often held up as an example of a successful monetary union.

But the history of how it got to be a successful monetary union is not as well known as it


                                              28
should be. The literature on regional differences in interest rates reviewed and extended

here suggests that the journey from monetary union to optimal currency area was long

and hard.




                                            29
References

Binder, John J. and David T. Brown." Bank Rates of Return and Entry Restrictions,
1869-1914.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 51, No. 1. (Mar., 1991), pp. 47-66.

Bodenhorn, Howard. "Capital Mobility and Financial Integration in Antebellum
America." The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 52 (3) (September 1992): 585-610.

Bodenhorn, Howard. "A More Perfect Union: Regional Interest Rates in the United
States, 1880-1960" In Anglo-American Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the
Twentieth Century, eds. Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla. Burr Ridge, Ill: Irwin
Professional Pub., 1995, pp. 415-454.

Bodenhorn, Howard, and Hugh Rockoff. "Regional Interest Rates in Antebellum
America." In Strategic factors in nineteenth century American Economic History: A
Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel, eds. Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, A National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Report, 1992, pp. 159-87.

Breckenridge, R. M. "Discount Rates in the United States." Political Science
Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 1. (Mar., 1898), pp. 119-142.

Carty, Lea V. "Regional Interest Rate Premia in the American Railroad Bond Market
from 1876 to 1890." Explorations in Economic History 33 (October 1996): 440-58.

Cheung, Y-W, and K.S. Lai “Finite Sample Sizes of Johansen’s Likelihood Ratio Tests
for Cointegration,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 55, (1993): 313-328

Clark, William, and Charlie Turner. “International Trade and the Evolution of the
American Capital Market, 1888- 1911.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 45, No.
2, The Tasks of Economic History. (Jun., 1985), pp. 405-410.

Davis, Lance E. "The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National
Market." The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 25, No. 3. (Sep., 1965), pp. 355-399.

Driscoll, John C. "Does Bank Lending Affect Output? Evidence from the U.S. States."
Federal Reserve Board, Working Paper, Finance and Economics Discussion Series,
July 2003.

Eichengreen, Barry. "Mortgage Interest Rates in the Populist Era." The
American Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 5. (Dec., 1984), pp. 995-1015.

__________. "Agricultural Mortgages in the Populist Era: Reply to Snowden."
The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 47, No. 3. (Sep., 1987), pp. 757-760.



                                           30
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. Monetary Statistics of the United
States: Estimates, Sources, Methods. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1970.

_________. Monetary Trends in The United States and the United Kingdom, their
Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, 1867-1975. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1982.

Grubb, Farley. "Creating the U.S. Currency Union, 1761-1811: A Quest for Monetary
Stability or a Grab for the Sovereignty?" Department of Economics, University of
Delaware, Working Paper No. 00-02, 2000.

James, John A.. "Banking Market Structure, Risk, and the Pattern of Local Interest
Rates in the United States, 1893-1911." The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
58, No. 4. (Nov., 1976a), pp. 453-462.

__________. "The Development of the National Money Market, 1893-1911" The
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 36, No. 4. (Dec., 1976b), pp. 878-897.

__________. Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1978.

Johansen, S. “Statistical Analysis of Cointegration Vectors,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 12, (1988): 231-254

__________. “Determination of Cointegration Rank in the Presence of a Linear Trend,”
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 54, (1992): 383-397

Keehn, Richard H. “Market Power and Bank Lending: Some Evidence from
Wisconsin, 1870-1900.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 40, No. 1, The Tasks
of Economic History. (Mar., 1980), pp. 45-52.

Odell, Kerry A. “The Integration of Regional and Interregional Capital Markets:
Evidence from the Pacific Coast, 1883-1913.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol.
49, No. 2, The Tasks of Economic History. (Jun., 1989), pp. 297-310.

Olmstead, Alan L.. “Davis vs. Bigelow Revisited: Antebellum American Interest
Rates.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 34, No. 2. (Jun., 1974), pp. 483-491.

Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch. One Kind of Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1977.

Rockoff, Hugh. "Regional Interest Rates and Bank Failures, 1870-1914," Explorations in
Economic History, 14 (Winter, 1977), pp. 90-95.



                                           31
__________. "How Long Did It Take the United States to Become an Optimal Currency
Area?" NBER working paper, h0124, April 2000.

Smiley, Gene. "Interest Rate Movement in the United States, 1888-1913." The Journal
of Economic History, Vol. 35, No. 3. (Sep., 1975), pp. 591-620.

Smiley, Gene. "Regional Variation in Bank Loan Rates in the Interwar Years" The
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 41, No. 4. (Dec., 1981), pp. 889-901.

Snowden, Kenneth A.. "Mortgage Rates and American Capital Market
Development in the Late Nineteenth Century." The Journal of Economic
History, Vol. 47, No. 3. (Sep., 1987), pp. 671-691.

Stigler, George J. “Imperfections in the Capital Market.” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 75, No. 3. (Jun., 1967), pp. 287-292.

Sushka, Marie Elizabeth, and W. Brian Barrett. “Banking Structure and the National
Capital Market, 1869-1914. The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 44, No. 2, The
Tasks of Economic History. (Jun., 1984), pp. 463-477.

Sylla, Richard. “Finance and Capital in the United States, 1850-1900.” The Journal of
Economic History, Vol. 27, No. 4, The Tasks of Economic History. (Dec., 1967), pp.
621-624.

__________. Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in
the United States, 1863-1913. The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 29, No. 4. (Dec.,
1969), pp. 657-686.

__________. "Financial Intermediaries in Economic History: Quantitative Research on
the Seminal Hypotheses of Lance Davis and Alexander Gershenkron" in Robert E.
Gallman, ed., Recent Developments in the Study of Economic History: Essays in
Memory of Herman E. Krooss. Greenwich Conn.: 1977, 55-80.




                                            32
Table 1. Money Market Rates And Regional Interest Rates In Three Periods Of
Financial Distress, 1873, 1893, and 1907.


           Change from the level in the preceding cyclical trough (basis points)

Panic      Money Market Rates      Bank Lending Rates by Region

           Commercial    Call      NYC     I          II        III     IV       V        VI
           Paper         money



1871           -27         -27      -16        -59         27    -313    21      NA        NA

1872           138         240      11         -67         -5    -403    28      NA        27

1873           306         874      31         -43         6     -422    87      NA       119

1874           -127       -218      -13        -106        -6    -441    28      NA       -112

1875           -181       -254      -63        -178    -38       -536    48      NA        -40



1892           -128        -57      -92        -103    -18       -46     -33     -198      59

1893           140         110      -54        -47         0      22     -71     -143      -15

1894           -235      -237      -157        -121    -52       -145   -247     -261     -128



1905            20         221     -165        -64     -21        73     -33     183       21

1906           148         462      -22         8          26    -54         1       11    -25

1907           214         481      29         54          60    -43     -2          96   184

1908            17         18       -56        11      -64       -45     -39     -25           2


Sources: Commercial Paper and Call Money: Friedman and Schwartz (1982, 122)
Regional Rates: Davis (1965). These are Davis's "weighted returns of Reserve City
Banks." The regions are defined in Table 4.




                                          33
Table 2. Money Market Rates And Regional Interest Rates In Three Periods Of Financial
Distress, 1893, 1907, and 1929.

           Change from the level in the preceding cyclical trough (basis points)

 Crisis       Money Market Rates                       Bank Lending Rates
           Commercial Call money         Northeast     South      Plains           West
           Paper

1892           -128            -57              -78       -65          -55           -60
1893            140           110               35        82           197           158
1894           -235           -237              -82       -30           -9           -40

1905            20            221            -69          -12          -20           -62
1906           148            462            -32          -24          -40          -158
1907           214            481            161          116          151           65
1908            17             18             39           29           21          -130

1928             82           195          -24            2          -55             159
1929            176          361            82           34           39             24
1930            -47          -109           44           61           78             135
1931           -139          -229           21           34           37             119
1932           -130          -201           61           36           64             129
1933           -235          -290           46            7           51             137
Sources: Commercial Paper and Call Money: Friedman and Schwartz (1982, 122)
Regional Rates: Bodenhorn (1995, 450-51.) The regions are defined in Table 4.




                                           34
Table 3. The Frequency of Co-movements in Money Market and Regional Rates, 1880-
1960.

         Region                                 Period

                          1880-1905            1906-1945              1946-1960

                            A. Commercial Paper Rate

Northeast           72%*                 63%                    87%**

South               52                   55                     93**

Plains              60                   60                     93*

West                44                   43                     73*

Money               56                   63                     60


                               B. Call Money Rate

Northeast           64                   50                     87**

South               52                   40                     93**

Plains              44                   40                     93**

West                52                   38                     73*

Money               40                   43                     60

                    C. Changes in the Rate of Change of Money

Northeast           68                   75*                    67

South               72*                  63                     67

Plains              88**                 75*                    67

West                64                   55                     60

Call Money          40                   43                     60

                                       35
                            D. Rates within the Financial Centers

Commercial Paper       76**                    65                     87**
and Call Money
Municipal Bonds        84**                    73*                    93**
and High-Grade
Corporate Bonds
Aaa Corporate          NA                      85**a                  93**
Bonds and Baa
Corporate Bonds
Commercial Paper       60                      63                     60
and Monetary
Acceleration

Call Money and         36                      43                     60
Monetary
Acceleration

Notes: The Table shows the percentage of years in each period in which interest rates in a
given region moved in the same direction as the commercial paper rate (panel A) or the
call money rate (panel B), or in the opposite direction to the change in the rate of change
of the stock of money, “acceleration” of money (panel C), or that rates in financial
markets moved in the same direction (Panel D). One * means that the observation is
significantly greater than 50 percent (chance) at the 10 percent level; two *s, that it is
significantly greater at the 5 percent level.
a
    1920-1945




                                             36
Table 4. The Regions Defined by Davis and Bodenhorn.

Northeast       Region    South            Region       Plains      Region    West        Region
(Bodenhorn)     (Davis)   (Bodenhorn)      (Davis)      (Bodenhorn) (Davis)   (Bodenhorn) (Davis)
Maine                I    Virginia           III        Minnesota      IV     Arizona        VI
New Hampshire        I    West Virginia      III        Iowa           IV     Idaho          VI
Vermont              I    North Carolina     III        Missouri       IV     Utah           VI
Massachusetts        I    South Carolina     III        Oklahoma        V     Nevada         VI
Rhode Island         I    Georgia            III        Texas          III    California     VI
Connecticut          I    Florida            III        Kansas          V     Oregon         VI
New York            II    Alabama            III        Nebraska        V     Washington     VI
New Jersey          II    Mississippi        III        North Dakota    V
Delaware            II    Louisiana          III        New Mexico      V
Pennsylvania        II    Tennessee          III        Montana         V
Maryland            II    Kentucky           III        Wyoming         V
Ohio               IV     Arkansas           III        Colorado        V
Indiana            IV
Illinois           IV
Michigan           IV
Wisconsin          IV
Note: Region II includes the District of Columbia. Region NYC is New York City
Sources: Davis (1965), Bodenhorn (1995).




                                                   37
Table 5: Estimation Results for VEC:1880-1913

  Cointegrating Eq:   CointEq1

       rtcomm         1.000000
         −1


        rt NE         1.317486
           −1
                      (1.04420)

       rt Plains      -4.546399
          −1
                      (0.77771)

       rtSouth        8.641425
         −1
                      (1.52986)

        rtWest        -1.614998
          −1
                      (0.53596)

      Constant        -26.05903
        VEC            ∆rtcomm       ∆rt NE      ∆rt Plains    ∆rtSouth     ∆rtWest
     CointEq1         -0.035273    -0.056758    0.085985      -0.053066    0.063256
                       (0.09413)    (0.05326)   (0.08367)      (0.04887)   (0.12773)

      ∆rtcomm         0.098841     0.424982     0.301113      0.111647     0.163839
         −1
                      (0.21874)    (0.12376)    (0.19443)     (0.11357)    (0.29681)

       ∆rt NE         -0.504462    -0.519332    -0.257823     0.209513     -0.277549
           −1
                      (0.43147)    (0.24411)    (0.38351)     (0.22401)    (0.58546)

      ∆rt Plains      -0.811847    -0.447980    -0.569012     -0.361865    -0.156484
          −1
                      (0.40996)    (0.23194)    (0.36439)     (0.21284)    (0.55628)

      ∆rtSouth        0.441062     0.368508     -0.293224     -0.285047    -0.133221
         −1
                      (0.60648)    (0.34312)    (0.53907)     (0.31487)    (0.82294)

       ∆rtWest        -0.076332    -0.123857    0.107312      -0.002879    -0.347544
          −1
                      (0.19838)    (0.11224)    (0.17633)     (0.10300)    (0.26919)

      Constant        -0.025112    -0.023869    -0.041686     -0.088148    -0.163564
                       (0.18027)    (0.10199)    (0.16023)     (0.09359)    (0.24461)
R-squared              0.479663     0.471995     0.352430      0.450357     0.263675
Adj. R-squared         0.354782     0.345274     0.197013      0.318442     0.086957


                                          38
Table 6: Estimation Results for VAR: 1914-1943

        VAR           ∆rtcomm      ∆rt NE         ∆rt Plains    ∆rtSouth    ∆rtWest

      ∆rtcomm
         −1          0.050360     0.333030       0.522799      0.210862    0.278810
                     (0.17724)    (0.12355)      (0.12562)     (0.11295)   (0.13995)

       ∆rt NE
           −1        0.182246     -0.238599      0.027166      0.439248    -0.010536
                     (0.51221)    (0.35707)      (0.36304)     (0.32642)   (0.40446)

      ∆rt Plains
          −1         -1.004283    -0.255433      -0.630108     -0.283657   0.353484
                     (0.36880)    (0.25710)      (0.26140)     (0.23503)   (0.29122)

      ∆rtSouth
         −1          0.218811     0.254455       0.542377      -0.184302   0.019099
                     (0.50244)    (0.35026)      (0.35612)     (0.32019)   (0.39674)

      ∆rtWest
         −1          0.288042     0.179917       0.043915      0.043938    -0.703479
                     (0.24619)    (0.17162)      (0.17450)     (0.15689)   (0.19440)

     Constant        -0.235349    -0.145262      -0.160758     -0.146429   -0.114000
                     (0.15628)    (0.10895)      (0.11077)     (0.09960)   (0.12341)
     R-squared       0.341695     0.277109       0.536982      0.247354    0.505585
   Adj. R-squared    0.204548     0.126506       0.440520      0.090552    0.402582




                                        39
Table 7a: Estimation Results for VEC:1955-2002 (using the commercial paper rate)

  Cointegrating Eq:   CointEq1

       rtcomm
         −1           1.000000


        rt NE
           −1         7.541244
                      (1.14369)

       rt Plains
          −1          23.06107
                      (4.02675)

       rtSouth
         −1           -28.47610
                      (4.40977)

        rtWest
          −1          -3.785045
                      (1.30640)

      Constant        10.73664
        VEC            ∆rtcomm      ∆rt NE      ∆rt Plains    ∆rtSouth     ∆rtWest
     CointEq1         0.020828    -0.132273    -0.067825     -0.020118   -0.076725
                      (0.10335)   (0.06479)    (0.04639)     (0.04226)   (0.06009)

      ∆rtcomm
         −1           0.727232     0.399205     0.436929     0.399077    0.389193
                      (0.20474)    (0.12836)    (0.09190)    (0.08372)   (0.11904)

       ∆rt NE
           −1         0.153596     0.407044     0.391188     0.171615    0.344568
                      (0.68746)    (0.43099)    (0.30856)    (0.28111)   (0.39969)

      ∆rt Plains
          −1          1.415023     1.367305     0.987615     0.647794    0.908078
                      (1.62010)    (1.01570)    (0.72717)    (0.66247)   (0.94193)

      ∆rtSouth
         −1           -2.983008   -1.426121    -1.243240     -0.866988   -0.874312
                      (1.60914)    (1.00883)    (0.72225)    (0.65799)   (0.93556)

       ∆rtWest
          −1          -0.453151   -0.487856    -0.431340     -0.258032   -0.618130
                      (0.74998)    (0.47019)    (0.33662)    (0.30667)   (0.43604)

      Constant        0.707789    -0.344920    -0.058878     0.142585    -0.114023
                      (0.57633)   (0.36132)    (0.25868)     (0.23566)   (0.33508)

       D1981          -1.337117    0.842034     0.234775     -0.229040   0.319101
                      (1.12782)    (0.70707)    (0.50622)    (0.46117)   (0.65572)
     R-squared        0.415578     0.325975     0.520143     0.559034    0.358437
   Adj. R-squared     0.313304     0.208021     0.436169     0.481864    0.246164


                                         40
Table 7b: Estimation Results for VEC:1955-2002 (using the Federal Funds rate)

  Cointegrating Eq:   CointEq1

      rt FedFunds
         −1           1.000000


         rt NE
            −1        10.23021
                      (1.69495)

       rt Plains
          −1          31.98862
                      (5.91049)

       rtSouth
         −1           -38.48361
                      (6.46709)

        rtWest
          −1          -5.689151
                      (1.93968)

      Constant        14.14103
        VEC           ∆rt FedFunds    ∆rt NE      ∆rt Plains    ∆rtSouth    ∆rtWest
     CointEq1         -0.043009      -0.106500   -0.063118     -0.026376   -0.069791
                      (0.09443)      (0.04929)   (0.03532)     (0.03288)   (0.04556)

     ∆rt FedFunds
         −1           0.661498       0.327215    0.373366      0.332031    0.316519
                      (0.22216)      (0.11595)   (0.08308)     (0.07735)   (0.10719)

       ∆rt NE
           −1         0.519498       0.476912    0.446614      0.222952    0.448527
                      (0.87070)      (0.45444)   (0.32561)     (0.30316)   (0.42010)

      ∆rt Plains
          −1          2.399895       1.410201    1.051350      0.718209    0.986936
                      (2.01826)      (1.05338)   (0.75477)     (0.70271)   (0.97378)

      ∆rtSouth
         −1           -3.629202      -1.314612   -1.159096     -0.784378   -0.785322
                      (1.98773)      (1.03745)   (0.74335)     (0.69208)   (0.95905)

       ∆rtWest
          −1          -1.082418      -0.662664   -0.578558     -0.388030   -0.818393
                      (0.96416)      (0.50322)   (0.36057)     (0.33570)   (0.46519)

      Constant        0.349886       -0.444830   -0.170794     0.059687    -0.200296
                      (0.76491)      (0.39923)   (0.28605)     (0.26632)   (0.36906)

        D1981         -0.632014      0.988506    0.422644      -0.080521   0.482587
                      (1.44551)      (0.75445)   (0.54058)     (0.50329)   (0.69743)
     R-squared        0.354613       0.315409    0.509928      0.531116    0.350190
   Adj. R-squared     0.235726       0.189300    0.419652      0.444743    0.230488




                                           41
                         Figure 1. Interest Rates 1880-2002


16.00

14.00

12.00

10.00

8.00

6.00

4.00

2.00

0.00
 1880   1900      1920             1940             1960            1980        2000




               West               Northeast                   Corporate Bonds




                                    42
.




                                   Figure 2. Interest Rates, 1926-1934

    9.00



    8.00



    7.00



    6.00



    5.00



    4.00



    3.00



    2.00



    1.00



    0.00
           1926   1927      1928            1929           1930          1931        1932          1933   1934

                         Commercial Paper     Call Money     Northeast    Plains   South    West



                                                    43
.


                 Figure 3. Variance Decomposition of Effect on Northeast Rate of a Shock to the National Rate


                 100
                                                                               1880-1913
                  90                                                           1914-1943
                                                                               1955-2002(Commercial)
                  80
                                                                               1955-2002(Fed Funds)

                  70

                  60
    percentage




                  50

                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                  0
                       0    2       4       6        8      10       12      14      16      18        20




.




                                                             44
.

    Figure 4: Variance Decomposition of the Effect on the West Rate of a Shock to the National Rate


                     100
                                                                    1880-1913
                      90                                            1914-1943
                                                                    1955-2002(Commercial)
                      80
                                                                    1955-2002(Fed Funds)

                      70

                      60
        percentage




                      50

                      40

                      30

                      20

                      10

                      0
                           0   2   4   6     8      10     12     14      16      18        20




.




                                                  45
.

    Figure 5: Variance Decomposition of Effect on Northeast Rate of a Shock to Northeast Rate


                     100
                                                                1880-1913
                     90                                         1914-1943
                                                                1955-2002(Commercial)
                     80
                                                                1955-2002(Fed Funds)

                     70

                     60
        percentage




                     50

                     40

                     30

                     20

                     10

                      0
                           0   2   4   6   8     10    12     14      16      18        20




.




                                               46
.




    Figure 6: Variance Decomposition of Effect on West Rate of a Shock to West Rate


                  100
                                                          1880-1913
                  90                                      1914-1943
                                                          1955-2002(Commercial)
                  80
                                                          1955-2002(Fed Funds)

                  70

                  60
     percentage




                  50

                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                   0
                        0   2   4   6   8    10   12     14     16      18        20




.
                                            47
.


    Figure 7: Variance Decomposition of Effect on Plains Rate of a Shock to National Rate


                    100

                    90

                    80

                    70

                    60
       percentage




                    50

                    40

                    30
                                                          1880-1913
                    20
                                                          1914-1943
                                                          1955-2002(Commercial)
                    10
                                                          1955-2002(Fed Funds)
                     0
                          0   2   4   6   8    10    12     14        16    18    20




.
                                              48
.


    Figure 8: Variance Decomposition of Effect on South Rate of a Shock to National Rate


                    100

                    90
                                                           1880-1913
                    80                                     1914-1943
                                                           1955-2002(Commercial)
                    70                                     1955-2002(Fed Funds)

                    60
       percentage




                    50

                    40

                    30

                    20

                    10

                     0
                          0   2   4   6   8    10    12     14      16      18     20




                                              49
Endnotes


1. We thank Michael Bordo, Joseph Hughes, Eugene White and the other participants in a
seminar at Rutgers University; Marc Flandreau, Rolf Luders, and other participants at a seminar
at the Institut d’Études Politiques de Paris; and John James for helpful comments on an earlier
draft. John.C.Driscoll of the Federal Reserve Board was kind enough to share his data on
regional interest rates with us. Deepa Bhat provided thoughtful research assistance.

2. We focus on short-term interest rates because it has become fashionable in recent years to
think of these rates as the main instruments and indicators of monetary policy. We have done
some experimentation with other measures of monetary policy, including long-term rates,
money, and high-powered money. We do not believe that the use of alternative measures would
substantially change our conclusions, but we have not carried out all of our work with alternative
measures.

3. Breckenridge also looked at regional differences in mortgage rates. Barry Eichengreen (1984,
1987) and Kenneth Snowden (1987) explored these differences more recently. Here, however,
we have focused on the short-term rate differentials because these are more directly relevant to
discussions of the effectiveness of monetary policy, at least as policy is currently discussed.

4. Double-name paper was less risky than single name paper for the obvious reason that there
were two people to sue if the debt was not repaid rather than one, and for the less obvious reason
that it probably represented a "real bill." The purchaser of a real good (a carload of wheat)
created a note, which was then endorsed by the seller, before being discounted by a lender. The
original creator of the note then could probably repay it by reselling the wheat.

5. The phrase was taken over from Breckinridge (1898, 129).

6. Sylla (1977) provides a good summary of the literature from the first decade after Davis's
seminal paper.

7. John C. Driscoll of the Federal Reserve Board kindly shared the regional data that he used in
his paper (2003) on bank lending rates. We derived our own series in order to be sure that they
were as close as possible to being extensions of the earlier data. As it turned out, our final
estimates were extremely close to Driscoll's.

8. The chronology can be found at www.nber.org.

9. We are stretching a point. Usually this adage seems to refer to a connection between stock
market crashes and real economic activity.

10. The results are similar if we look at changes over a 5-year interval.

11. We also experimented with measures such as the simple rate of growth of money and the
deviation from a five-year trend. But the results were similar. Experiments with high-powered

                                                 50
money also failed to uncover a measure of liquidity that was strongly correlated (in the simple
sense used in this section) with regional interest rates.

12. On economic grounds it seems unlikely that there would be a unit root in the interest rate
series, especially in earlier years. Real rates would be anchored by the productivity of capital and
time preference, and the inflation premium would be held in check by the gold standard. Perhaps
in the postwar era when the inflation premium becomes an issue a unit root in nominal rates
would be more likely.

13. All the variance decompositions and the underlying data are available from the authors on
request.




                                                51
