                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION CAPS AND LOBBY FORMATION:
                             THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                             Allan Drazen
                                             Nuno Limão
                                           Thomas Stratmann

                                         Working Paper 10928
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10928


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




We thank Stephanie Aaronson, Phil Keefer, Andrew Lyon, Peter Murrell, Yona Rubinstein, Robert Schwab,
and participants at seminars at the University of Maryland and Tel Aviv University, the 2004 Public Choice
Conference, the 2004 Pier Conference on Political Economics, and the 2004 INSIE Conference for useful
comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Allan Drazen, Nuno Limão, and Thomas Stratmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Political Contribution Caps and Lobby Formation: Theory and Evidence
Allan Drazen, Nuno Limão, and Thomas Stratmann
NBER Working Paper No. 10927
November 2004
JEL No. D7, H0, P16

                                           ABSTRACT

The perceived importance of “special interest group” money in election campaigns motivates

widespread use of caps on allowable contributions. We present a bargaining model in which putting

a cap that is not too stringent on the size of the contribution a lobby can make improves its

bargaining position relative to the politician, thus increasing the payoff from lobbying. Such a cap

will therefore increase the equilibrium number of lobbies when lobby formation is endogenous. Caps

may then also increase total contributions from all lobbies, increase politically motivated government

spending, and lower social welfare. We present empirical evidence from U.S. states consistent with

the predictions of the model. We find a positive effect on the number of PACs formed from enacting

laws constraining PAC contributions. Moreover, the estimated effect is nonlinear, as predicted by

the theoretical model. Very stringent caps reduce the number of PACs, but as the cap increases above

a threshold level, the effect becomes positive. Contribution caps in the majority of US states are

above this threshold.

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University fo Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Nuno Lamão
Department of Economics
University fo Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Thomas Stratman
Center for the Study of Public Choice
George Mason University
MSN 1D3 - Carow Hall
4400 University Drive
Fairfax, VA 22030
1     Introduction

One of the leading criticisms of the political system in the United States and many other countries
is the influence of money on politics, and, more specifically, the influence of special interest groups
(SIGs) on policies and elections via their ability to contribute money to politicians. Concern with
the eﬀect of money is not new1 , but the magnitude of contributions, particularly what is known as
“soft money”, now makes this concern especially central to assessments of how democracy works.
    A crucial aspect of political finance reform is thus regulating and limiting contributions that can
be made to politicians. Many countries have contribution limits.2 The most obvious regulation is a
cap on the size of contributions made by individual lobbies.3 Contribution caps are often expected
to lower the influence that SIGs have, possibly lowering the total amount of SIG money in politics
and thus generating policy outcomes that are more desirable from a social welfare perspective.
    This reasoning ignores the possible eﬀect of contribution caps on the bargaining position of existing
SIGs relative to the government, as well as the eﬀect of caps on the incentives for new SIGs to
organize. In this paper, we present a simple optimizing model where SIGs and politicians bargain
over an economic policy that the politician can implement in exchange for contributions. In this
framework, binding contribution caps can improve a lobby’s bargaining position and increase the
return to lobbying.4 Intuitively the cap allows a lobby to credibly oﬀer a smaller contribution for any
given level of the policy for which it is bargaining.5
    The strengthening of lobbies’ bargaining position implies that binding caps can lead to an increase
in the number of lobbies formed. We derive conditions under which this endogenous increase in the
   1
     Craig (1978, p. 506) notes that Gustav Stresemann, the leading political figure in Weimar Germany in the late
1920s, felt that legislation limiting political contributions might be necessary in that period to curb the influence of
vested interests.
   2
     For example, France, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Spain, Taiwan, Turkey, United States. See
www.aceproject.org.
   3
     Such limits are often controversial, as, for example, limiting freedom of speech. The U.S. in 2003 implemented
important federal campaign finance reform, which was immediately challenged, and subsequently upheld by the U.S.
Supreme Court in December 2003.
   4
     Ansolabehere, et al. (2003) argue that caps on PAC contributions at the federal level in the U.S. are generally
not binding (though there are PACs for which caps are binding). At the state level, caps are far more often binding,
perhaps because they are at a lower level. We were able to collect data for a number of recent state gubernatorial races.
In the Florida gubernatorial race of 1998, 90% of the contributions for Jeb Bush that we could identify as coming from
PACs were at the cap of $500, while 80% of PAC contributions for the challenger Mackay were at the cap. In Montana
in 1996, 97% of contributions for the winner Racicot that we could identify as coming from PACs were at the cap of
$400; in Kansas in 1998, over 50% of PAC contributions to the winner Graves were at the cap of $2000. (In each case,
the challenger was considered weak and received little PAC money.) In other states, we also found a significant fraction
of contributions at the cap, though this is for individual and PAC contributions taken together. Our empirical results
below are for states, and they suggest that caps do in fact have the eﬀect we hypothesize.
   5
     Note that this eﬀect is derived independently of whether a cap is set on other lobbies. It may therefore help
to explain why some US companies such as Time Warner, General Motors and Monsanto have voluntarily adopted
restrictions on political contributions even before any federal law was enacted.



                                                           1
number of lobbies implies an increase in both the total amount of contributions being made and
the level of distortionary policies or total government spending that favor SIGs. More importantly,
we show that with endogenous lobby formation, contribution caps on individual lobbies may reduce
social welfare. We then test the main predictions of the model using data for US states and find,
among other things, that the adoption of contribution caps has a positive eﬀect on lobby formation.
       Caps can also aﬀect lobby formation when there is interaction between lobbies. One particularly
relevant form of interaction in the context of campaign finance reform is that large increases in
contributions from alternative sources increases the “price” that a politician can charge a lobby in
exchange for policy favors. We capture this eﬀect by modelling diminishing marginal benefits from
aggregate contributions to politicians. This generates an additional channel through which lobbies
gain from contribution caps: an increase in the marginal benefit of their contribution allows them to
obtain the same policy level at a lower contribution.
       Our focus on bargaining between the SIG and the politician over the trade of policy favors for
campaign contributions is motivated by empirical studies showing that contributions from Political
Action Committees have a significant influence on the voting behavior of Congressmen (see, for
example, Stratmann [2002]). Although contributions are also motivated by the desire to have the
preferred candidate elected, there is considerable evidence that contributions influence how legislators
allocate time, how they act in committees, and how they vote on the floor (Hall and Wayman [1990],
Stratmann [1998]).6
       Our theoretical result on a cap inducing formation of new lobbies does not reflect an existing
lobby splitting up into more than one lobby to circumvent the cap. This may or may not be optimal
for lobbies, but we simply assume that the cost of forming a second group is too high relative to
the additional benefit from lobbying that arises from circumventing the cap. We are not asserting
that this assumption is likely (or unlikely) to hold. We are making it in the theoretical model in
order to focus on a less obvious eﬀect of the cap on the number of lobbies that has the potential to
generate truly new lobbies and therefore decrease social welfare. In the empirical work we address
the possibility that the increase in the number of lobbies is due to a split-up eﬀect and show that is
not the eﬀect we capture. Our results are also not due to any asymmetries between the benefits from
caps to already formed versus newly formed lobbies, nor to lobby competition.
       Our results have implications for optimal campaign finance reform. While a reform entailing only
   6
     There is a debate as to whether contributions buy policy favors. Ansolabehere, et al. (2003) point to a number
of studies that have found little or no impact of PAC contributions on roll call votes in the U.S. They do suggest that
a subset of donors, mainly corporate and industry PACs, behave as if they expected favors in return and may in fact
receive a reasonable rate of return on their contributions.


                                                          2
contribution caps may increase the total amount of money that lobbies contribute to candidates,
taxing contributions may counteract the eﬀect of caps in increasing lobbies’ power. In contrast, a
program of matching contributions may only exacerbate the problem. Hence, any campaign finance
reform must consider the eﬀects of reforms on the incentive to form lobbies. More generally, en-
dogenous lobby formation in response to political reform can be quite important in determining the
outcome of the reform and can potentially lead to an eﬀect that is the opposite of what is suggested
by a static analysis of such a reform.
   To test the key prediction that a restriction on existing lobbies can actually increase the number
of lobbies, we take advantage of the fact that U.S. states that imposed contribution limits did so at
diﬀerent points in time. We construct a measure of the number of state political action committees
(PACs) to use as our dependent variable and, using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence approach, estimate that
on average the implementation of caps on contributions from PACs increases their number by about
7-8% relative to other states. Since the probability of adoption of campaign finance laws may depend
on the number of lobbies, we re-estimate our regressions using an instrumental variable estimator to
address this potential endogeneity problem. We confirm the positive eﬀect of caps on the number
of PACs and find that the result is in fact strengthened considerably. However, we fail to reject
exogeneity and thus place greater confidence in the more conservative estimates.
   We also find that the eﬀect of caps on PACs is not linear. A cap that is too stringent lowers the
number of PACs, but a cap above a certain threshold increases it, both eﬀects are exactly as predicted
by the model. The critical threshold is fairly low, with the caps for many of the U.S. states lying
significantly above it. Our estimates also indicate that prohibitions on contribution from corporations
and unions that do not take place through PACs increase the number of PACs. This is consistent
with the prediction from the extended version of the model with lobby interaction. Throughout the
estimation we control for state and time fixed eﬀects as well as for other basic state determinants
of PAC formation, including population, income, and government revenue. We also account for two
important parameters in the model — lobby bargaining power in a state; and the share of informed
voters. The findings here are also consistent with the model: an increase in lobby bargaining power
is positively correlated with the number of PACs created, as is a decrease in the share of informed
voters. This latter information eﬀect on the number of lobbies is another novel finding of the paper.
   There is an increasing amount of theoretical work on the welfare implications of campaign finance
reform. Prat (2002) and Coate (2003, 2004) consider models in which contributions finance adver-
tising and perhaps policy favors as well. Contribution limits may either raise or lower social welfare


                                                  3
depending on a number of model characteristics, including the nature of advertising (directly versus
indirectly informative). In contrast to our paper, the existing theory assumes that the number of
interest groups does not change once campaign finance reform is implemented, so that the phenom-
enon central to our welfare results plays no role. (We discuss this approach further in the concluding
section of the paper.) Che and Gale (1998) also take the number of lobbies as fixed and provide
a theoretical argument why contribution caps on individual lobby contributions will lead to higher
aggregate contributions. Their result depends on a lobby competition eﬀect.7 We argue that reforms,
and in particular contribution caps, can fundamentally change the bargaining relationship between
lobbies and politicians even without lobby competition. This leads to formation of new lobbies,
which can overturn some of the conventional wisdom on the eﬀects of caps. In Riezman and Wilson
(1997) the number of lobbies may change in response to contribution limits, which may lower social
welfare when there are asymmetries between two politicians seeking election or their supporters. A
key diﬀerence is that in their model contributions and government policies are not determined by
bargaining between lobbies and the government. Hence, our key eﬀect that caps may strengthen the
bargaining position of existing (symmetric) lobbies and thus induce lobby formation does not arise.
      Empirical work on lobby formation, on the other hand, has largely ignored the eﬀect of campaign
finance reform. The focus has been on examining the industry characteristics that determine whether
an industry has PACs and how much each contributes. Such variables include industry size, con-
centration and whether it faces government regulations on its economic activities. (Pittman [1988],
Zardkoohi [1988], Grier, Munger, Roberts [1994]). Hart (2001) uses firm level data and finds that the
probability of a large high-tech firm forming a PAC is higher if it has larger sales, is subject to gov-
ernment regulations on its economic activities and varies with the regional location of the corporate
headquarters.
      The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the basic setup. In section
3 we derive the eﬀect of caps on the number of lobbies, taxes and social welfare, and in section 4
we derive the eﬀect of caps when the model is extended to allow for lobby interaction. We analyze
complementary reforms that avoid the lobby formation eﬀect of caps in section 5. In section 6 we
provide empirical evidence of the positive eﬀect of campaign finance reforms in US states on PAC
formation. The final section contains a discussion and summary of the implications of the main
results.
  7
    They model an all pay auction with two buyers (interpreted as lobbies) bid for the same “object” sold by the
government (e.g. a contract). A cap makes the lobby with higher valuation (weakly) less likely to win and increases
the surplus from the sale, i.e. aggregate contributions.



                                                        4
2     Model

The underlying framework is similar to Grossman and Helpman (1994) with some key diﬀerences
that we will point out. We consider a small open economy in which individuals are identical except,
possibly, for diﬀerent endowments of non-labor factors. We represent utility as:

                                                              H
                                                              X
                                                U ≡ xn +            u(xi )                                         (1)
                                                              i=1


where the subutility functions, u, are twice continuously diﬀerentiable and strictly concave. The
term xn , represents the consumption of the numeraire good, n, which is produced using only labor
with a marginal product of unity. This, along with the assumption of a fixed world price of n at
unity and a suﬃciently large labor force, implies the wage is unity. We assume symmetry across the
non-numeraire goods and thus denote their common exogenous world price by p. For given prices
an individual who owns the specific factor i has income Ei and chooses consumption to maximize
                                            P
utility subject to a budget constraint, xn + i pxi ≤ Ei . Given the assumptions on the subutility, the
budget constraint is satisfied with equality and individuals demand d(p) = u0 (p)−1 of each of the non-
numeraire goods, identical for all goods in the absence of consumption taxes or tariﬀs. An individual’s
                                                                                 P
indirect utility is simply the sum of income, Ei , and consumer surplus, s(p) = i [u(d(p)) − pd(p)].
    Production of the non-numeraire goods requires labor and a specific factor to be combined ac-
cording to a constant returns technology. Since the wage is unity the return to the specific factor
depends only on the supplier price of the good, psi . The reward to the specific factor is given by the
quasi-rent π(psi ) and equilibrium output is π 0 (psi ), where again for simplicity we assume symmetry
across sectors in this case in the production function. In the absence of production or trade taxes
the producer and world prices are identical.
    To redistribute income to lobbies representing capital owners in sector i the government uses (for
concreteness) a unit production subsidy, ti .8 Transfers to lobbies are financed by lump-sum taxes
charged on the overall population of N individuals. We assume that the government balances its
                                                      P
budget every period, so that each period it must raise i∈L ti π 0 (p + ti ),9 where L is the endogenously
determined set of sectors that are organized as lobbies at a given point. For simplicity we assume
   8
     What policy is used for redistribution is an important and interesting question in itself, but not one we address.
Drazen and Limão (2004) show how a production subsidy can arise as the government’s optimal redistribution policy
in a framework similar to that used here.
   9
     In a small open economy the consumer prices are determined by the world price so they are independent of the
production subsidy. Production subsidies aﬀect quantities produced and lower individuals’ income but this will only
result in lower consumption of the numeraire good.



                                                          5
that each of the members within any given lobby own a similar amount of capital and labor. For
organized sectors gross welfare is:

                                                       X
                  Wi = li + π(p + ti ) + αi N [s(p) − (                 ti π 0 (p + ti ))/N ] if i ∈ L   (2)
                                                                  i∈L


where αi is the share of the population that are factor owners of capital in sector i, which we assume is
                                                                                         P
a negligible part of the overall population. They therefore take the size of the budget, i∈L ti π 0 (p+ti ),
as given and do not lobby for it to be reduced. This assumption allows us to focus on the interaction
between the government and the lobbies in the absence of any lobby competition eﬀects. Thus the
lobby maximizes its gross welfare net of its provision of contributions, which is given by:


                                                 Vi ≡ Wi − Ci                                            (3)


Social welfare is then represented by:

                                   X                      X
                          W ≡l+            π(p + ti ) −             ti π 0 (p + ti ) + N s(p)            (4)
                                       i                      i∈L


   Contributions are used by politicians to make campaign expenditures in order to attract votes in
an electoral framework. Following Baron (1994) and Grossman and Helpman (1996), we assume that
there are two types of voters: “informed” and “uninformed”. The first are unaﬀected by campaign
advertisements or other expenditures financed by contributions, while the second can be attracted
by higher campaign expenditures. All contributions are used for campaign expenditures on impres-
sionable voters. They assume that the fraction of impressionable votes one party gets relative to the
other is simply a function of the absolute diﬀerence in their campaign expenditures, that is, in the
contributions they succeed in raising. As show in appendix A, under some additional assumptions
about functional forms, a politician whose objective is to maximize total votes can be represented as
having the objective of maximizing a weighted sum of social welfare and contributions:

                                                              X
                                             G ≡ aW +                   Ci                               (5)
                                                                i∈L

As in Grossman and Helpman (1996) we therefore take maximization of (5) as representing the
behavior of a politician who solicits contributions from SIGs to maximize his electoral prospects.
   Of course, alternative modeling of how contributions are used to influence election outcomes won’t




                                                          6
lead to the simple form of (5).10 However, as long as neither side has all the bargaining power, the
basic positive results we derive below—that contribution caps that are not too stringent will make
lobbies better oﬀ and thus give new lobbies the incentive to form—are more general than the specific
rationale in the previous paragraph for politicians to desire trading transfers for contributions. On
the other hand, the welfare implications of caps, for example, may depend crucially on exactly what
functions campaign expenditures serve.
         The twin assumptions of additive separability of contributions in G and concentrated factor own-
ership (αi → 0) imply that there is no economic interaction among lobbies. In many instances
interest groups lobby for policies such as production subsidies in their own sector so modelling away
motives for lobby competition is not only theoretically useful but also a plausible representation. We
introduce a form of lobby interaction below, but for now we restrict our attention to the bargain-
ing between a politician/government and each individual lobby separately. The lobby will oﬀer a
contribution in exchange for a production subsidy and the interaction with the politician takes the
form of Nash bargaining, as in Drazen and Limão (2004). This type of interaction diﬀers from the
menu-auction approach in Grossman and Helpman (1994) where lobbies simply make the government
a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer. Allowing for Nash bargaining leads to key diﬀerences in the results, as will
be clear below.


3         Contribution Caps and Lobby Formation

To derive the eﬀect of contribution caps on the formation of lobbies, we solve the model backwards.
First we show the eﬀect of caps on the net welfare for a given lobby. We then model an initial stage
of lobby formation and show how contribution caps can induce new lobbies to form by increasing the
net welfare of a lobby. Given the symmetry assumptions we made, once a lobby is formed it behaves
identically to all others so that, in the second stage, we can focus on a “representative” lobby.


3.1         Unconstrained Political Equilibrium

In the absence of contribution caps the political equilibrium in the second stage after lobbies have
formed is a pair (C, t) that is eﬃcient, and divides the maximized joint surplus to the politician and
lobby according to the bargaining power of the lobby, λ. Since contributions enter linearly in both
the politician’s and the lobby’s objective they are used to divide the surplus, whereas the production
    10
         In Coate (2004), for example, contributions finance informative messages that a candidate is qualified.




                                                               7
subsidy is set to achieve a politically eﬃcient outcome. The solution is illustrated in Figure 1, where
the vertical line at t = t∗ represents the contract curve defined by the following condition:

                                                  Gt   Vt
                                                     =                                                (6)
                                                  GC   VC

where subscripts represent partial derivatives. This condition reduces to

                                              t∗ π 00 (p + t∗ )   1
                                                  0       ∗
                                                                =                                     (7)
                                               π (p + t )         a

The equilibrium contribution level, C ∗ , is then set to divide the surplus such that the utility levels
obtained by maximizing the Nash product subject to the Pareto frontier are satisfied:


                                   M axG≥g0 ,V ≥v0 U = (G − g 0 )1−λ (V − v0 )λ                       (8)

                                   s.t. V = v m − (G − g 0 )                                          (9)


where vm is the maximum utility for the lobby when the politician is maintained at his reservation
utility, g 0 , the level of utility when both t and C are zero (or are combined in a way that provides
equal utility). Given the linear Pareto frontier we have the following solution for the utility levels G∗
and V ∗ of the unconstrained political equilibrium:


                                       G∗ − g 0 = (1 − λ)(g m − g 0 )                               (10)

                                       V ∗ − v0 = λ(v m − v 0 )                                     (11)


where we note that g m −g 0 = vm −v 0 because both politician and lobby value contributions identically
and, given t∗ , contributions are the only variable that determines the utility level. Point N in
Figure 2 represents the Nash bargaining equilibrium in the absence of caps, implying an equilibrium
contribution level C ∗ .


3.2    Contribution Caps

We can now consider the eﬀect of an exogenously imposed cap to show that they can increase the
net welfare of existing lobbies.

Proposition 1 :(Eﬀect of caps on lobby payoﬀs)
i. There exists a set of binding contribution caps, Ci ⊂ (0, C ∗ ), that strictly increase lobby i’s net


                                                       8
welfare iﬀ its bargaining power λi ∈ (0, 1).
ii. If lobby i has all (none) of the bargaining power, λi = 1 (0), then any binding contribution cap
strictly (weakly) decreases its net welfare.
iii. There exist suﬃciently low binding caps that strictly decrease the net welfare for a lobby i with
λi ∈ (0, 1] (weakly if λi = 0)
iv. Any lobby i with λi ∈ [0, 1] is indiﬀerent between any cap on other lobbies Cj ∈ [0, ∞) for j 6= i.

   Proof: See Appendix B

   The first part of the proposition captures a direct bargaining eﬀect: the cap improves the lobby’s
bargaining position by allowing it to credibly oﬀer a smaller contribution for any given subsidy. The
result is illustrated in Figure 1 where N c represents the constrained equilibrium and V c > V ∗ is the
lobby’s utility. The contract curve is identical to the original one as contributions are increased up
to C̄. Any further transfer of utility from the lobby to the government can only come through lower
subsidies so the contract curve becomes the horizontal segment through N c and g mc . We can also see
that the maximum government utility is now lower but if the cap is above C0 the lobby can still attain
v m . Using this information we represent the bargaining solution in Figure 2 by N c . For contributions
below C̄ the new Pareto frontier is identical to the unconstrained one, which is represented by the
dashed line. When the subsidy level is reduced below the politically eﬃcient level of t∗ the joint
bargaining surplus falls so the new Pareto frontier falls below the original one. Moreover, it is simple
to show that the slopes of the two frontiers are identical at the last point where they coincide, C̄
and t∗ , therefore the new frontier is steeper and strictly concave. The increase in the steepness of
the Pareto frontier implies that it is more costly to obtain increases in government utility for a given
reduction in lobby utility, so since the bargaining solution for a given Pareto frontier, is itself eﬃcient
it will feature higher utility for the lobby. It is simple to show (as we do in the appendix) that for
some caps the improvement in bargaining position for the lobby more than oﬀsets the decrease in
overall bargaining surplus from the cap.
   The eﬀect on the lobby’s net welfare is reversed if it has all the bargaining power (λ = 1), as part
(ii) points out. In that case the lobby appropriates all the bargaining surplus and any constraint
such as a cap reduces that surplus and leaves the lobby worse oﬀ. This special case is important
because it forms the basis for the political equilibrium in the work of Grossman and Helpman, and
papers that follow them, whose underlying model structure we share. Conversely, if the lobbies have
no bargaining power (λ = 0), as assumed by Coate (2004), then caps have no eﬀect on their utility.


                                                    9
Therefore the Nash bargaining solution with intermediate bargaining power generates very diﬀerent
results that could not possibly be predicted by considering either of the extremes.
   The third part of the proposition notes that for a suﬃciently low cap all lobbies will be worse
oﬀ, (only weakly so if they have no bargaining power). This is obvious if a cap is set to zero since
then the lobby is prevented from bargaining and obtaining any surplus. Therefore it is also true for
some positive cap. As the cap is raised it eventually reaches a level C at which a lobby is indiﬀerent
relative to the unconstrained case. There exist caps between C and C ∗ that leave the lobby with
higher net welfare than under no caps.
   Given the additive separability of contributions in G and the concentration of factor ownership,
each lobby is indiﬀerent to caps on other lobbies. This along with part (i) of the proposition imply
a basic corollary: all lobbies with intermediate bargaining power benefit from an overall binding cap
on contributions, provided it is not too low. Note that this is true even in the absence of lobby
interaction/competition eﬀects that may lead to too much lobbying from each lobby’s perspective.
Note also that with αi → 0, the net utility of unorganized sectors (which is equal to their gross
utility Wi ) is independent of the existence of contribution caps and of the number of sectors that do
organize.
   With a fixed number of symmetric lobbies, n∗ , and no lobby interaction (so that each lobby would
contribute C ∗ in the absence of a cap), an enforceable binding cap on the contributions of each lobby
lowers the total amount of contributions by (C ∗ − C)n∗ . The equilibrium subsidy rate falls, as is clear
from the solution N c in Figure 1 and therefore the total level of taxes required to fund those subsidies
also falls. Therefore a cap has the expected eﬀects when the number of lobbies is given—there is less
money in politics, fewer distortions and higher social welfare.
   Notice also that politicians who value contributions are never better oﬀ under a cap. This occurs
both because the overall gains from political bargaining fall, represented by the inward shift of the
Pareto frontier in Figure 2, and the politician’s bargaining position worsens, as represented by the
steeper frontier. Therefore no politician supports a cap unless he does not value contributions or has
no bargaining power, in which case he is indiﬀerent.
   We now turn to endogenous lobby formation to show how the improvement in a lobby’s net welfare
due to contribution caps leads to new lobbies forming, and under what conditions this leads to larger
total contributions, higher taxes to fund production subsidies and lower social welfare.




                                                   10
3.3       Lobby Formation

Consider now the first stage of the political process, namely the decision of groups on whether to
form lobbies. Lobbies form if the return to being organized in the second stage, which we have just
analyzed, exceeds the cost of lobby formation. We begin with the cost of forming a lobby. Following
Mitra (1999) we assume that specific factor owners in any of the H sectors may potentially form
a lobby, where the fixed cost (in terms of labor) of forming a lobby in sector i is Fi . This cost is
assumed to diﬀer across sectors because the set of owners for diﬀerent factors that will potentially
organize may diﬀer in their geographical concentration, their organizational ability, or other reasons.
For simplicity, this cost of formation will be the only diﬀerence across potential lobbies. Denoting by
V u the net welfare of an unorganized sector, a sector i will organize as a lobby if


                                                V (·) − V u (·) ≥ Fi                                             (12)


where under our symmetry assumptions, the left-hand side is identical for all i. Note further that, in
the above set-up, αi → 0 implies that both V and V u are independent of n, the number of sectors
that have organized as lobbies.
       Suppose we relabel the sectors that can potentially form, i = 1, ..., H, to reflect their fixed costs
in ascending order, so that sector H now denotes the sector with the highest fixed organization cost.


                                           F1 < · · · < Fn∗ < · · · < FH                                         (13)


so that sectors 1 to n∗ form lobbies when there are no contribution caps and sectors n∗ + 1 to H do
not. The marginal lobby n∗ is determined by the largest Fi such that (12) holds.
       For simplicity, assume now a continuum of sectors that can organize as lobbies so that ordering
the sectors as in (13) implies that Fi is continuous in i as well.11 We may then represent the fixed cost
of formation through a function F (n) where the ordering convention in (13) implies that F 0 (n) > 0.
In this case the equilibrium number of lobbies is determined by an analogue to (12), namely:


                                             V (·) − V u (·) = F (n∗ )                                           (14)


where, to repeat, the left-hand side of (14) is independent of n when αi → 0. Hence, F 0 (n) > 0
  11
     The basic result of a positive relation between n and V does not depend on this assumption and would hold as well
if the Fi only took on a finite number of discrete values.




                                                         11
implies that there is a unique solution to (14). We assume that once a group incurs the fixed cost
it can enforce the collection of contributions from each of its members perfectly. In this case it is
simple to show that the expected Nash equilibrium of the game played by the members within each
group in deciding whether to pay their share of the fixed cost leads to the formation of lobbies up to
the point where (14) is satisfied.12
       The eﬀect of caps on equilibrium lobby formation follows immediately and intuitively. A binding
contribution cap that is not too stringent raises V , provided λ ∈ (0, 1) as shown in proposition 1,
while leaving V u unchanged. Therefore the equilibrium number of lobbies is higher under a cap.
Note that when λ = 0 the equilibrium number of lobbies is identical with or without the cap and
when λ = 1 the equilibrium number is lower.13
       The following proposition summarizes the eﬀects of caps on the number of lobbies and the subse-
quent eﬀects on contributions, subsidies and social welfare, where εnκ represents the elasticity of the
number of lobbies with respect to a marginal tightening of the cap at C ∗ . Similarly for εT κ which
refers to the elasticity of the value of the production subsidy per existing lobby.

Proposition 2 : (Contribution caps, lobby formation and social welfare)
When λ = λi ∈ (0, 1) for all i then the set of binding contribution caps, Ci ⊂ (0, C ∗ ), that strictly
increase the net welfare V of all n∗ operating lobbies with λi will:
i. Lead to the formation of new lobbies with F > F (n∗ )
ii. Increase total contributions iﬀ εnκ > 1
iii. Increase total production subsidies and taxes iﬀ εnκ > −εT κ
iv. Reduce social welfare iﬀ (−(π(p + t∗ ) − π(p) − t∗ π 0 )) εnκ > −(t∗2 π 00 /(1 + t∗ π 00 /π 0 ))εT κ

Conditions ii,iii and iv are satisfied if either F 0 (n∗ ) is suﬃciently low or F (0) is suﬃciently high.

       Proof: See Appendix B

       Part (i) of the proposition simply summarizes the lobby formation eﬀect already described. Part
(ii) reflects the opposing eﬀects of the cap on total contributions. Caps decrease individual contri-
butions from existing lobbies, naturally the elasticity for those lobbies is unity, but it increases the
  12
      When there is more than one factor owner within the sector there is an incentive to free ride and not pay the forma-
tion cost that is also a Nash equilibrium to the lobby formation game played by factor owners within a sector. However,
as Mitra (1999) argues, such an equilibrium does not survive simple refinements that involve pre-play communication
such as Pareto-dominance or coalition proof.
   13
      Note however that if n∗ lobbies were already formed and then an exogenous contribution cap is imposed any existing
lobbies would still be operating since we are modelling the formation costs as fixed and sunk, which would imply no
change when λ = 1.



                                                           12
number of lobbies that form and contribute, with elasticity εnκ . Since once the lobbies form they are
symmetric all that is required is that the elasticity of formation exceed the direct eﬀect, εnκ > 1. Part
(iii) provides a condition similar to (ii) for total production subsidies, which increase if suﬃcient new
lobbies are formed such that the new subsidies now paid more than oﬀset the decrease in the subsidy
paid to the previously existing lobbies. The intuition is clear, if initially there are few organized
lobbies then a tightening of the cap and resulting reduction in the subsidy rate will have a small
eﬀect on total production subsidies for existing lobbies. If that tightening leads to considerable lobby
formation then the new equilibrium level of total production subsidies Σi∈L0 ti π 0i , increases, note that
n does not aﬀect the equilibrium subsidy rate, t. The condition for taxes follows from the balanced
budget constraint.
    Part (iv) provides a necessary and suﬃcient condition for caps to lower social welfare. The left
hand side of the condition captures the social cost of subsidies to newly formed lobbies, the expression
in parenthesis is positive because the increase in profits is insuﬃcient to cover the subsidy cost. The
right side of the condition captures the benefit—a reduction in the distortion arising from a lower
production subsidy on the existing lobbies. If total production subsidies increase then it is suﬃcient
for the social loss per new lobby −(π(p + t∗ ) − π(p) − t∗ π 0 ) to exceed the gain from the marginal
reduction in the distortion caused by the lower subsidy rate for existing lobbies.14,15
    Notice that lobby formation may also imply that politicians gain from caps and therefore may
support them. If total contributions increase and the politician places relatively little value on social
welfare then he will be better oﬀ with the cap.


4     Diminishing Returns to Aggregate Contributions and Lobby Com-
      petition

In the baseline case we modeled away all lobby interaction. One interaction that may be important
is that the marginal benefit of any given contribution by a lobby depends on how much a politician
collects from other lobbies. If he collects a lot, the marginal benefit of any given contribution may
be low, so that each individual lobby will not be able to extract much from the politician in the
form of policy concessions. We represent this by modifying the government objective so that total
  14
     To see this clearly we can also write −εT κ t∗2 π 00 /(1 + t∗ π00 /π 0 ) = −εtκ t∗2 π00 where εtκ represents the elasticity of the
subsidy rate.
  15
     Although the results in Proposition 2 are easiest to see when all lobbies have the same bargaining power λ, they do
not depend on this. As long as no lobby has a λ of either 0 or 1, a contribution cap would make all lobby types better
oﬀ and therefore lead to new lobby formation. The exact conditions, analogous to those in proposition 2, under which
this would increase total contributions, subsidies and lower welfare would diﬀer.


                                                                 13
contributions are evaluated according to an increasing, concave function Ψ:

                                                   X
                                       Ĝ ≡ aW + Ψ(                 Ci )                           (15)
                                                              i∈L


Since all lobbies make identical contributions, we may write the contributions term as Ψ(nC). If we
retain the assumption that each lobby i bargains with the government only over the policy in its
sector ti —which is reasonable if no lobby is too large—then it is simple to derive the additional eﬀect
of the contribution caps on the number of lobbies. In this case no individual lobby i has an incentive
to oﬀer contributions to the government to aﬀect policies in other sectors.
   We assume first that the contribution of any single individual lobby i is too small to change the
marginal benefit of aggregate contributions, that is, Ψ0 ((n − 1)C + Ci ) ≈ Ψ0 ((n − 1)C), for any Ci
that a politician can extract from a lobby and still maintain the lobby at the reservation utility level
v 0 . However, we further assume that there is a suﬃciently large number of lobbies such that when
a binding cap C̄ < C is set it increases the marginal benefit of aggregate contributions, that is,
Ψ0 ((n − 1)C̄ + Ci ) > Ψ0 ((n − 1)C + Ci ). The first assumption implies that the analysis of the direct
eﬀect of a cap on lobby i remains identical to parts i,ii and iii of proposition 1. The key diﬀerence is
therefore that a cap on other lobbies will now benefit lobby i by raising the marginal benefit of its
contributions.
   In order to concentrate on the indirect eﬀect on lobby i we consider the case where all other
lobbies face a binding contribution cap, but lobby i’s contributions are unrestricted. Since sector i
lobbies only for ti and its contributions do not change the marginal benefit of aggregate contributions,
the equilibrium ti is still defined as the solution to equation (6), which is now given by

                                  t̂i π 00 (p + t̂i )   Ψ0 ((n − 1)Ĉ + Ĉi )
                                                      =                                            (16)
                                    π 0 (p + t̂i )               a

   Given our assumption that Ψ0 ((n − 1)C + Ci ) ≈ Ψ0 ((n − 1)C), t̂i is independent of the equilibrium
Ĉi for any politically feasible level of contributions. In order to compare the eﬀect of a cap in this
setup with the original one, we could normalize Ψ so that Ψ0 ((n − 1)Ĉ + Ĉi ) = 1, implying that in
the absence of a cap, t̂i = t∗ . The eﬀect on ti of a cap C̄ < Ĉ on contributions from other lobbies
is then exactly equivalent to a reduction in the politician’s weight on social welfare, a. This follows
immediately from (16) since Ψ0 ((n − 1)C̄ + Ĉi ) > Ψ0 ((n − 1)Ĉ + Ĉi ). The equilibrium production
subsidy for i therefore increases with a cap on other lobbies.
   The indirect eﬀect of a cap on other lobbies on lobby i’s utility is easy to derive. Given t̂i from


                                                      14
(16) the equilibrium transfer is determined as before by maximizing the Nash product in (8). With no
cap on i, the slope of the Pareto frontier is linear, but with slope −1/Ψ0 ((n− 1)C̄) > −1/Ψ0 ((n−1)Ĉ)
(= −1 under the normalization above). With a linear Pareto frontier lobby i’s equilibrium utility
is given by (11). When αi → 0, the reservation value v 0 remains unchanged, while v m increases
because the cap on other lobbies increases the marginal benefit of i’s contributions, so that it needs
to make a lower contribution to maintain the government indiﬀerent relative to its reservation value.
Hence, the cap on other lobbies raises lobby i’s utility when there are diminishing returns to aggregate
contributions.
    The argument above also holds exactly for the marginal unorganized lobby and therefore provides
another channel by which caps increase the number of lobbies. Note that in deriving the indirect eﬀect
we did not impose any limits on the cap. In fact the lower the cap is the stronger the positive eﬀect
on i’s utility. This contrasts with the direct eﬀect derived in proposition 1 where the direct eﬀect of
suﬃciently low caps is to lower lobby utility. Moreover, this indirect eﬀect of caps in increasing the
marginal benefit of individual contributions can apply to caps on any source of contributions that
enter the aggregate contributions functions. This is a result that we will explore in our empirical
work.


5    Alternative Reforms

The conclusions of Proposition 2 imply that contribution caps, presumably meant to reduce the influ-
ence of special interests in the political process, may have just the opposite eﬀect. Caps may increase
the number of organized lobbies, total contributions and subsidies to special interests. Moreover caps
may reduce social welfare. In section 6 below we present empirical evidence that caps do in fact foster
lobby formation, so the negative eﬀects of caps are a real possibility. One response to these findings
is to argue that limitations on contributions should be eliminated. We would argue instead that it
may be necessary to link contribution limitations to other forms of campaign or electoral reform in
order to come closer to achieving their desired purposes. In this section we explore two possibilities
in the context of this model.
    The basic question we address is the following. Since a ban on political contribution is unlikely
to be politically feasible, are there simple reforms that are alternative or complementary to positive
contribution caps that might ensure that individual and total contributions as well as subsidies do
not rise and that social welfare does not fall?



                                                  15
5.1   Taxing Contributions

Consider first a tax on contributions to eliminate the incentives for lobby formation due to a cap.
Denote the tax rate on contributions by µ(Ci ) and assume that the net revenue collected is redistrib-
uted lump-sum to the population. With enforcement or collection costs of β ∈ [0, 1] per unit then
(1 − β)µ(Ci )Ci is available for redistribution from each Ci taxed. The government objective may now
be written as:

                     X                      X                 X
       G ≡ a(l +             π(p + ti ) −          ti π 0 +       (1 − β)µ(Ci )Ci + N s(p))             (17a)
                         i                  i∈L                    i∈L
                                                                             X
                                                                           +         Ci (1 − µ(Ci ))
                                                                                 i∈L
                     X                      X                         X
           ≡ a(l +           π(p + ti ) −          ti π 0 + N s(p)) +      (1 − (1 − a(1 − β))µ(Ci ))Ci (17b)
                         i                  i∈L                                i∈L


From this we immediately see that the marginal benefit of contributions falls only if the government
places suﬃciently low weight on social welfare. For example if β = 0 there are no enforcement costs
and the tax rate is constant, the marginal benefit of contributions is 1 − (1 − a)µ, which is lower than
the marginal benefit in the absence of a tax (i.e., 1) only if a < 1, that is, only if the government
places less weight on social welfare than contributions. With β > 0 the condition is a < 1/(1 − β).
   Assume for now that this is the case, that is, a < 1, which also implies a < 1/(1 − β). Consider
the following schedule for taxing contributions
                                                   ½
                                                              µ          if Ci ≤ C i
                                     µ(Ci , µ) =          1
                                                                         otherwise                      (18)
                                                       1−a(1−β)


That is, up to some contribution level C i there is a constant tax rate µ ≥ 0; beyond that contribution
level the tax rate is suﬃciently high that the marginal benefit of contributions to the politician
is zero, so that the rate after C i is eﬀectively a cap since the politician will not accept individual
contributions above C i to increase production subsidies. Hence, µ = 0 is the case of propositions 1
and 2. We now show that with a tax system with µ > 0, the gains in lobby utility from the cap can be
oﬀset, so that no additional lobbies form. Denote by C µ ≡ C(µ(C), C) the equilibrium contribution
under the tax system (18), nµ the equilibrium number of lobbies under (18), and tµ the equilibrium
production subsidy under (18).

Proposition 3 : (tax on contributions)
When the politician values contributions more than social welfare there exists a reform composed of
                                              1
a tax on contributions µ(Ci ) with µ ∈ [0, 1−a(1−β) ) for any C ∈ [0, C ∗ ] such that


                                                              16
i. V (µ(C), C) ≤ V ∗ and V u (µ(C), C) = V u∗ (where V u is the welfare of unorganized lobbies) so that
no new lobbies form;
ii. C µ ≤ C ∗ and nµ C µ ≤ n∗ C ∗ ;
                 P                       P
iii. tµ ≤ t∗ and i∈L tµi π 0 (p + tµi ) ≤ i∈L t∗i π 0 (p + t∗i );
iv. Social welfare is the same or higher than under no reform.

    Proof: See Appendix B

    In short, taxing contributions can address the potential negative eﬀects of a simple cap on con-
tribution caps.


5.2    Matching Contributions

Another reform that is used in U.S. Presidential campaigns and has been proposed elsewhere is the
use of public funds to match private contributions. Since government matching of some fraction of
contributions can be seen as a negative tax, Proposition 3 also illustrates the potential problems of
matching private contributions with public funds. Matching at some rate can be easily modelled in our
framework by having µ < 0 in (17a). Eﬀectively the matching funds work as a subsidy that increases
the marginal benefit of private contributions provided that a < 1, which implies a(1 − β) < 1. So,
according to Proposition 3, one would expect that using matching contributions as a complementary
reform would actually exacerbate the potentially negative eﬀects of contribution caps. At a given
cap allowing for µ < 0 will increase subsidy rates and lobby welfare thus leading to the creation of
additional lobbies. The larger subsidy rate, number of lobbies and the cost of the matching funds
will lower social welfare at a given cap.16
    Naturally, when a < 1, matching funds leave the politician better oﬀ by giving him a “technol-
ogy” to transform tax revenue into contributions that are more highly valued. Thus this scheme
rewards politicians that adopt caps. However, by tying the incentive to existing contribution levels it
introduces additional distortions. A better way to induce the adoption of caps by politicians could
be to provide public funding that is independent of contributions.
   16
      This discussion also points to another interesting conclusion. If the government values social welfare suﬃciently,
i.e. if a(1 − β) > 1 then matching funds may help to achieve some of the same goals as a tax when a < 1. Note that
when a(1 − β) > 1 an increase in the subsidy rate actually decreases the marginal benefit of contributions. The reason is
simple: the government now values social welfare suﬃciently that it looses from raising tax revenue and “transforming”
it into matching contributions. However, if the matching scheme is a voluntary one, the politician would not choose to
do this. Another diﬀerence relative to the tax scheme is that even if a(1 − β) > 1 the subsidy would be costly to the
public so it is not clear that social welfare would rise.




                                                           17
6     Caps and Lobby Formation: Evidence from Reforms in US States

6.1   Predictions

Using the definitions of V (.) and V u (.) to rewrite (14), we may write the equilibrium number of
lobbies in terms of the exogenous variables in the model


                          F (n) = π(p + ti (C, a)) − Ci (λ, C, a, p) − π(p)

                              n = f (C, λ, a, c, p)                                               (19)


    We believe that the eﬀects of caps on the number of lobbies applies in settings broader than our
specific model. Therefore we do not limit ourselves to a structural estimation focused on industry
related lobbies. Instead we use a broader measure of lobbies—political action committees (PACs)—to
test the main predictions of interest from the model:
    1. The number of PACs depends on the existence of a limit on PAC contributions.
    2. When lobbies have some but not all bargaining power then a cap, C, on all PACs increases n
if that cap is not too low and decreases it otherwise.
    3. In the presence of diminishing marginal benefits to aggregate contributions a cap on contribu-
tions from sources other than PACs, e.g. corporations or unions, increases the number of PACs. Note
that, unlike the eﬀect of caps on PACs, a cap on other sources has a positive eﬀect on the number of
PACs independently of how stringent it is.
    Three secondary predictions arise directly from this model which should also arise in a more
general model. First, when lobbies have higher bargaining power they are more likely to form because
contributions for a given subsidy are lower and thus the gain to organizing higher. Second, increases
in the share of informed voters, a, leads the government to place more weight on their welfare and
in equilibrium this lowers lobby utility. So increases in a lower lobby formation. In our model that
occurs because increases in a imply a lower subsidy rate, as is clear from (7). Third, increases in the
fixed cost of lobby formation lead to lower lobby formation.


6.2   Empirical Approach and Data

The basic estimating equation is:


                              ln nit = β 1(C it ) + Xit γ + µi + vt + uit                         (1E)



                                                   18
where ln n is the log number of PACs in state i in election cycle t and 1(C it ) is an indicator of whether
or not a state regulates contributions by PACs. We include time and state eﬀects, respectively vt and
µi , as well as a number of time-varying state variables in the vector Xit , where we discuss below
how these relate to the theoretical model. Our data range from 1986 to 2000. Since our unit of
observation is an election cycle, we have eight observations per state.
    Data on PAC state campaign finance legislation were obtained from the biannual publication
Campaign Finance Law, from the Federal Election Commission. We classified a state as having no
restrictions when the state allowed unlimited PAC giving to candidates for state oﬃces (1(C it ) = 0)
and having restrictions otherwise (1(C it ) = 1). To interpret β we can take the time diﬀerence of a
state that implements a law and then subtract the diﬀerence of a state that did not. Then, conditional
on the same Xit , we can interpret β simply as the one time eﬀect on the number of lobbies in that
state from implementing a campaign finance law. So our basic approach to identify β is to use the
within variation available through the nineteen US states that have implemented campaign finance
reform laws between 1986 and 2000 relative to the 31 states did not implement any in this period.17
    For the period 1986 to 2000, data on the number of PACs that contributed to state candidates
are not systematically available.18 Therefore we use PACs from the state that contribute to federal
candidates as a proxy for PAC formation at the state level. The source is the Federal Election
Commission, which defines these PACs as those organizations that contribute to federal campaigns.
Each PAC reports their mailing address to the FEC and we define a PAC as being from a particular
state by their mailing address.19
    There is one potential disadvantage and one advantage to using this measure. The disadvantage is
that our maintained assumption may not hold, i.e. the number of new lobbies from a given state may
not be positively correlated with new lobbies from that state that lobby at the federal level. However,
there may be theoretical reasons in either direction. For example, if state and federal policies lobbied
for are substitutes then lobbying at the federal and state level may also be substitutes, but we will see
the evidence is not consistent with this hypothesis. At the same time it is likely that several policies
are not substitutes and that, after incurring the cost of forming and lobbying at the state level, the
SIG will find it relatively cheap to lobby also at the federal level, generating a positive correlation
  17
     The nineteen states are: Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Maryland, Mis-
souri, Nebraska, New Jersey, Nevada, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee and Washington.
  18
     Data on lobbies registered in each of the 50 states have been collected by Gray and Lowery (1997). However, since
we are specifically concerned with the exchange of contributions for favors (rather than more general lobby activities),
we analyze PAC formation rather than lobby formation. PACs can contribute to candidates, while lobbies can not.
  19
     About 13% of all PACs have their headquarters in Washington DC and we exclude them from the analysis.




                                                          19
between the series.20
    A potential advantage of using federal data is that it may address the problem of PACs forming
under a diﬀerent name in response to binding contribution caps in order to evade the cap. In this
case, a positive correlation could be observed between the cap and the number of state PACs, even
though the cap did not induce formation of any really new PACs. Whether or not this occurs depends
on the cost of setting up additional state PACs relative to the benefit of making contributions above
the cap. To understand how the use of federal data is likely to minimize this problem consider the
following case. PAC A is formed before a state law imposing a cap is passed and it lobbies at the
federal and state level. After the state law is passed, the SIG represented by A finds it profitable to
create another PAC, Anew , to channel contributions above the cap at the state level. Since the cap
binds only at the state level this SIG will have no motive to register the new PAC and use it to lobby
at the federal level. Hence the federal data are unlikely to be contaminated by the split-up eﬀect.
    However, even with federal PACs the concern remains that PACs may decide to split into several
PACs when facing a contribution limit for the reason mentioned, thus confounding the empirical
results. To analyze whether this is a quantitatively important concern for our estimation, we also
collected data on the identity of PAC sponsors from the FEC. Although PACs may split because of
caps that is not the case for their sponsors.
    Table 1 reports some descriptive statistics. The number of PACs varies greatly from state to
state. The mean number of PACs is 72 with a minimum of zero PACs in Vermont in 1996 and
over 400 PACs in California. The average number of sponsors in our data set is 66, suggesting that
some organizations are sponsoring more than one PAC. About fifty four percent of our state-year
observations are subject to a limit on PAC contributions. There have been 36 states with limits on
PACs at some point in time. In 2000 this number was 34 since Missouri and Oregon introduced
and subsequently removed their limits. The limits range from $200 (Oregon in 1996) to $73,000 in
Nebraska, with a median of $2,000. None of the states completely prohibits contributions from PACs.
    Three of the variables in the vector X proxy for important variables in the model: lobby bargaining
power in a state, λ, the cost of lobby formation, c, and the share of informed voters, a. To capture λ we
   20
      To examine empirically whether federal PACs are a reasonable measure for the presence of state PACs we collected
data on state PACs that contributed to candidates in the 2000 election in Arizona, California, Idaho, Indiana, New
York, and Missouri. The correlation coeﬃcient between state PACs contributing to state candidates and state PACs
contributing to federal candidates is 0.70 and statistically significant at the one percent level, suggesting that our
measure is strongly correlated with state PACs. To address the concern that this correlation may simply reflect the fact
that larger states have both more state and federal PACs, we estimated a regression of log state PACs on log federal
PACs, state per capita income and population size. The point estimate on log federal PACs was 0.4 and statistically
significant at the 3 percent level.




                                                          20
construct a measure of state specialization. More specifically we construct an Herfindahl-Hirschman
index from the employment in a state collected by the BEA at the three digit level SIC code. If average
employment is similar across sectors then an increase in this index captures increased specialization
in a set of sectors at the 3-digit SIC level. In the extreme if most workers in a state are employed
by a small set of industries then those industries have considerable bargaining power in bargaining
with state politicians.Therefore our model predicts this measure to be positively correlated with the
number of lobbies in a state.
    To proxy for the cost of lobby formation, c, we employ a measure of geographic concentration,
similar to Trefler (1993). Our measure captures if a given sector is relatively more concentrated in
particular states. Greater geographical concentration may reduce the free-rider problem and thus the
cost of organizing so if a state has a large share of an industry that is geographically concentrated
we posit that PACs are more likely to form in this state.21
    Our proxy for a is a voter information variable, since the more informed voters are about the
political process, the stronger the incentive of the politician to place more weight on the welfare
of voters as opposed to contributors. We construct this variable using a recurring question in the
biannual National Election Study (NES): “We’re interested in this interview in finding out whether
people paid much attention to the election campaign this year. Take newspapers for instance—did you
read about the campaign in any newspaper?” The response was coded 0 if the answer was “No, read
no newspapers about the campaign” and 1 when the response was “Yes, read newspaper(s) about
the campaign.” Each individual is identified by the residence state and we aggregated the responses
to the state level.22
    The NES does not always have all states in its survey. Of the 400 possible observations points
for the 50 states between 1986 and 2000, we were able to obtain 285 observations from the NES.
To obtain data for all states we posited a model for the share of informed voters in a state as a
general function of per capita income, urbanization rate and education in the state. We then used
a second order Taylor approximation and obtained predicted values of the share of informed voters
for all states. The predicted value is our voter information measure, which, according to the model,
should have a negative eﬀect on the number of PACs.23
   21
      Using employment concentration as a proxy for a lobbies’ bargaining power and regional concentration as a measure
of fixed cost of formation, makes the most sense for corporate and trade association PACs. Over 66% of PACs in our
sample are classified as corporate or trade PACs by the FEC.
   22
      We used linear interpolation for the two years in which the question was not asked (1994, 1998).
   23
      More specifically we estimated a regression in logs of the share of informed voters on per capita income, urbanization
rate, education and education squared, including also the interactions of all these variables and year dummies. Education
is measured as the percent of individuals with at least a high school degree.



                                                            21
    Tables 1a and 1b provide summary statistics of the variables and Table 6 describes their source
and, when applicable, how we calculate them.


6.3    Estimation

Table 2a reports OLS estimates of equation (1E).24 All the specifications include state and time
eﬀects that are not reported. Column 1 shows that a state’s enactment of limits on campaign finance
laws leads to approximately an 8.4% increase in the number of PACs in that state. In section 6.5 we
estimate that for suﬃciently low caps the eﬀect is actually negative as predicted by the model but
it becomes positive for high enough caps. The results are not driven by any single state and remain
unchanged if we re-estimate dropping one state at a time.
    In column 2 we introduce a measure for whether contributions from corporations and/or unions,
that are not channeled through PACs, are prohibited by the state. When this is included, we find
that limits on PACs increases the number of lobbies in a state by approximately 7.3%, and that the
combined eﬀect of limits on PACs, unions and corporations leads to a 14.1% increase in the number of
PACs. This result is consistent with the prediction of the extended version of our model: the reduction
in contributions from corporations and unions increases the marginal benefit of contributions from
PACs and therefore leads more of them to form. The last two columns are identical to the first two
except that they exclude Nebraska. One of our instruments is not defined for that state so we exclude
it here also in order to subsequently compare these results with the IV estimation.
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2a show the eﬀects of contribution caps and the other covariates on
the number of PAC sponsors. The results of caps on lobby formation are very similar to the results
in the first two columns where the dependent variable was PACs, and the remaining covariates have
a similar eﬀect as in the previous specifications. These results suggest that a PAC split-up eﬀect is
not a quantitatively important concern. Because we are interested in PAC formation and the impact
of contribution caps on the decision to form a PAC, the remaining specifications in this paper will
have PACs, not sponsors, as the dependent variable.
    Our proxy for industry bargaining power also has a positive eﬀect on the number of lobbies, as
predicted by the model. We also use the square of our HHI measure to capture the non-linearity in the
eﬀect of the variable on the expected number of lobbies formed. We expect the HHI variable to have
a non-linear eﬀect on the expected number of lobbies formed. An increase in specialization makes any
given industry more likely to form a lobby. However, as employment becomes concentrated in fewer
   24
      Although the dependent variable is “count data” OLS is appropriate because the number of PACs is fairly “con-
tinuous”.


                                                        22
industries there will be fewer lobbies that will potentially form. Thus, we expect that at low levels of
specialization (all industries active) an increase in the specialization increases lobby formation. We
expect the opposite at high levels, and this is what we find, though the eﬀects are not statistically
significant. The marginal eﬀects show the eﬀect is positive but insignificant at the minimum and at
the mean level of concentration. The geographic concentration measure has the hypothesized sign:
states with higher shares of industries that are more highly regionally concentrated in some part of
the country have a larger number of PACs. This variable does not vary much over time, which may
explain why it is not statistically significant.
   State per capita income is positively and significantly associated with increases in the number of
PACs. Given how broad this measure is, any one specific interpretation is suspect. The relationship
may be driven by the positive eﬀect of income on an individual’s political involvement (e.g. the share
of registered voters increases with income). Moreover, increases in income also increase demand
for certain government provided goods such as environmental protection, etc., thus increasing the
return to lobbying on those issues. State income taxes have no statistically significant eﬀect on
lobby formation. State population has a positive but insignificant eﬀect; perhaps because population
changes only slowly over time and the eﬀect of state size is already absorbed by our state fixed eﬀects.
   The share of informed voters has the predicted negative eﬀect on PAC formation. The point
estimates are negative and statistically significant in all specifications, and they can be interpreted
as elasticity estimates. They suggest that a one percent increase in the share of politically informed
voters leads to an approximately 0.6 percentage point decrease in the number of PACs. To our
knowledge this is the first estimate of the eﬀect of voter information on lobby formation.


6.4   Endogeneity

Voters may favor caps on contributions if they anticipate an increase in lobby activity due to new
lobbies forming. This raises the possibility that the enactment of a campaign finance law in our
analysis is endogenous since there may be unobserved variables that change over time that determine
both lobby formation and consequently the passage of laws capping contributions. To address this
possibility we apply instrumental variables.
   Traditionally Democrats have favored limits on PAC contributions and we will use a set of instru-
ments reflecting political control at the state level. We assume that political control by Democrats
versus Republicans is a determinant of campaign finance legislation but that it is uncorrelated with
lobby formation. One justification to exclude these instruments as regressors from the main equation


                                                   23
is that we already control for state income taxes and transfers, which are likely to be correlated with
political control at the state level. Given that we have more instruments than endogenous variables
we can use the resulting over identifying restrictions to test this and do find that the instruments are
indeed uncorrelated with the error term in the main equation.
    More specifically our instruments reflecting political control are whether the governorship is held
by a Democrat and the change relative to the previous election. We also use the share of seats
held by Democrats in the state assembly and the change relative to the previous election. Since
this relation may be non-linear we also employ the squares of these variables. We also interact the
changes in governorship and Democratic seats, which captures if a law is more likely to be enacted
when Democrats gain control of both institutions. In addition to the political control variables we
also use a measure of how liberal a state’s citizen’s are and whether it has an initiative process as well
as their interaction. We tested our identifying assumptions by performing a test of over identifying
restrictions. We can not reject the null hypothesis, lending support to the assumption that our
instruments are valid.
    The instrumental variable estimates are reported in Table 3.25 (The corresponding first stage
regressions and test statistics for the significance of the instruments are reported in Table 4.) The
results in the first two columns of Table 3 are directly comparable to those in the last two columns
of Table 2a and are qualitatively similar. The coeﬃcient on the finance law remains positive and
significant. Most notably the point estimate actually triples relative to the estimates for the same
sample in Table 2a suggesting that the growth in the number of PACs from enacting the law is
29%. We performed a Hausman test for whether the data suggest that campaign finance laws are in
fact endogenous in the PAC formation regression. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the OLS
estimates are consistent at the 10% and 5% level for the specifications in columns 1 and 2 respectively
and at 10% for the specifications in the last two columns, which we discuss below. Therefore we focus
on the more conservative OLS estimates.


6.5    Quantifying the Eﬀects

We first compare the importance of the average eﬀect of a change in the contribution law relative to
that of other variables. We then augment (1E) to estimate and quantify the marginal eﬀects of the
law at diﬀerent cap values for PAC contributions, since the model predicts these should be negative
for low caps and positive for higher ones.
  25
     The sub sample excludes Nebraska since legislators to the unicameral legislature are non-partisan so some of our
instruments for political control are not defined.


                                                         24
       It is interesting to compare how important PAC limits are relative to lack of voter information
in causing more PACs to form. According to a standard measure that accounts for the standard
deviation in the regressors the PAC eﬀect is about 5 times more important.26 Alternatively, from
the estimates of column 1 in Table 2a we can see that the eﬀect of the limit in increasing PACs is
equivalent to a 12.8% reduction in voter information. Only 1.5% of the state-year observations in our
sample had reductions this large in voter information over any two year period.
       The theoretical model oﬀers other empirical predictions about the eﬀect of caps on the number of
lobbies. One that we already referred to is the eﬀect of prohibitions on other sources of contributions.
Imposing a prohibition on either corporations or unions increases the number of PACs by approxi-
mately 7%; therefore the eﬀect is of the same magnitude as the laws that aﬀect PAC contributions
directly so the comparisons in the previous paragraph relative to voter information is similar for this
variable.
       The model also predicts that suﬃciently low contribution caps lower the gain to lobbying, thus
reducing the number of lobbies that form. To estimate this eﬀect we use additional information
on the value of the cap. The general form of the equation that we now estimate, which allows for
non-linear eﬀects, is
                               ln nit = κ(C it , δ)1(C it ) + Xit γ + µi + vt + uit                        (2E)

       In the first column of Table 2b we use κ(C it , δ) = δ 1 + δ 2 ln C it . Note that in this specification
the interpretation of δ 1 is the eﬀect of implementing a cap of $1. A cap of $1 leads to a 28% decrease
in the number of lobbies, as predicted by the model. The positive coeﬃcient on ln C it (that is, δ 2 )
indicates that conditional on having a cap, an increase in the cap leads to an increase in the number
of lobbies. Hence, the negative eﬀect given by δ 1 is fully oﬀset if the chosen cap is suﬃciently high.
According to the estimates in Table 2b column 1 if the cap is $673 then the campaign finance law
has no eﬀect on lobby formation. A law that implements any higher caps is predicted to increase
the number of lobbies. The finding that a suﬃciently low cap reduces the number of lobbies is not
consistent with the hypothesis that federal policies and lobbies are substituting for state lobbies. If
that was the case then the strongest eﬀect of a state cap on the number of federal lobbies would occur
when that cap is at its lowest.
       In Table 5 we list the states with limits. Out of the 36 states that had limits only in 4 is that
limit below $673: Maine, Missouri, Minnesota and Oregon. The 10th percentile for the limit taken
  26
    This refers to a comparison of the beta eﬀects, which are defined as the product of the coeﬃcient multiplied
by the ratio of the standard deviation of the independent and dependent variable (e.g. for the limit the eﬀect is
0.84*0.5/1.16=0.36 for the voter information variable it is -0.065).


                                                         25
over all the states with limits is $1000 and the median is $2000. We can’t reject the null hypothesis
that the marginal eﬀect of the law δ 1 + δ 2 ln C it is zero for any of the states with limits below the
median. But we can reject it for states with contribution limits above the median. The results for
the restricted sample are similar except that the point estimate for the critical value is lower because
the state excluded in the restricted sample, Nebraska, has an abnormally high cap of $73,000, over
three times the next highest cap and 30 times higher than the median.
    In specification (2) in Table 2b we estimate a more general form of (2E), namely κ(C it , δ) =
δ 1 + δ 2 ln C it + δ 3 (ln C it )2 + δ 4 (ln C it )3 . The coeﬃcients in this expression are not individually
significant. However, they are jointly significant and therefore we calculate both a critical value
and the marginal eﬀects for diﬀerent states. For states with caps above $2000 we reject the null
hypothesis of no eﬀect on the number of lobbies. So, according to this specification, 23 of the 36
states with limits the cap significantly increased the number of lobbies.
    The final point to note from Table 5 is that most states for which the predicted eﬀect is not
statistically significant set their limits in or before 1986. Had their laws allowed for the nominal
values of their limits to be adjusted for inflation their limits would be higher today and therefore it
could be possible for their eﬀect to be significant (naturally this would also have implied a change
in the estimated coeﬃcients). The states that changed their limits during the sample period in our
analysis typically have higher limits and therefore are more likely to have a significant eﬀect.


7    Conclusions

The influence of money on elections and policy outcomes is a major public issue in democratic coun-
tries. A system with unregulated contributions provides a disproportionate amount of political power
to individuals or groups with economic power or low cost of organizing. Limiting the amount that
individuals or groups may contribute therefore appears to be a sensible reform. We have suggested,
however, that caps on contributions, may in fact worsen the problem by providing an incentive for
new lobbies to form. In this paper we provide a simple model to show when this outcome occurs and
provide empirical evidence that caps have led to an increase in the number of lobbies in U.S. states.
    The basic policy implication of the model is not that contribution caps should be abandoned
as a part of campaign finance reform. Rather, if they are used they must either be suﬃciently low
or be complemented by measures that oﬀset the gains to lobbying, thus reducing the incentive for
new lobbies to form. One simple complementary reform is a proportional tax on contributions. If
politicians value contributions more than social welfare, such a tax would reduce the marginal benefit

                                                     26
of contributions to the politician and thus reduce the gains from lobbying. Hence, combining a cap
with a tax can mitigate and even eliminate the potential for new lobby creation due to caps. Our
model and the tax just described also have an important implication for the current policies that oﬀer
public funds to match private contributions to politicians who accept voluntary limits on spending.
These matching funds work exactly as a subsidy to private contributions so they have the opposite
eﬀect of the tax scheme and will, according to our model, lead to lobby creation.
   One potentially beneficial eﬀect of caps is that it “levels” the playing field, that is it may limit
the ability of lobbies that are better funded to have a disproportionate influence on policy. This has
been one of the arguments put forward for caps. Our paper explores a downside to the caps that
has been ignored: that it can increase the number of lobbies. If this increase occurs in policy areas
where previously there wasn’t much lobbying activity then it generates negative welfare eﬀects since
the policy will now respond to lobbying rather than simply social welfare. However, it is also possible
that the new PACs that form in response to the cap lobby in policy areas in which other lobbies
already operate. In the latter case lobby formation may have a positive social welfare eﬀect if the
interests of new lobbies are opposed to the ones of existing ones.
   Our focus in the theory was motivated by the debate on restricting contributions. There are
other ways of helping politicians, such as a PAC running an advertisement favoring the politician,
or using some other non-monetary form to help him. Our conjecture is that if ads, for example, are
a less eﬃcient way of benefiting the politician than a cash transfer, then our results on the eﬀect of
restricting contributions would be similar. The reason is that as the more eﬃcient form of transfer
(cash) is restricted, more of the alternative form is used, but since the latter is relatively less eﬃcient,
it improves the bargaining position of the lobby. This insight is analogous to the results in Drazen
and Limão (2004), who show how the government improves its bargaining position and can thus
benefit by choosing a relatively less eﬃcient policy to redistribute towards lobbies.
   This suggests that an especially interesting extension would be to explicitly model elections and
the use of contributions to fund political advertising, as in Prat (2002) and Coate (2004). As Coate
shows, the welfare implications of restricting contributions depends on how they are used. If they
are used to buy favors, as in our model, banning them may be socially optimal, while if they fi-
nance directly informative advertising about candidate quality, restricting them may actually lower
social welfare. Moreover, when contributions finance policy favors, campaign advertising itself is less
eﬀective in conveying information on candidate quality. Our results raise the obvious question of
how allowing the number of lobbies to change in response to campaign finance reform will aﬀect the


                                                    27
desirability or undesirability of limiting contributions that finance provision of information to voters.
   There are other interesting avenues for future work. One is to analyze the impact of caps in the
presence of lobbies that have asymmetries along dimensions other than organization costs, such as
diﬀerences in bargaining power and lobby size. Although we do not expect the qualitative result of
entry to change, the eﬀect on total contributions and the amount of new distortions will certainly be
diﬀerent and it may generate additional interesting testable predictions. It would also be interesting
to empirically test some of these predictions on industry or firm data to determine the importance of
our channel on the probability of formation of corporate PACs relative to firm specific determinants.
   Finally, a broader implication of our results is that modeling the endogenous response of lobby
formation is crucial in evaluating the outcome of reforms. This is certainly true for political con-
tributions but also applies to other political or economic reforms in areas where politicians and
SIG interact. Such an analysis is particularly important when that interaction is characterized by
bargaining since in those settings conventional wisdom and simple intuition often fail.




                                                   28
References
Ansolabehere, S., J. de Figueiredo, and J. Snyder Jr. (2003), “Why is There so Little Money in U.S.
   Politics?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1), 105-30.
Baron, D. (1994), “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,” American Political
   Science Review 88, 33-47.
Che, Y. and I. Gale (1998), “Caps on Political Lobbying,” American Economic Review 88(3), 643-51.
Campaign Finance Law, Washington, DC: Federal Election Commission.
Coate, S. (2003), “Political Competition with Campaign Contributions and Informative Advertising,”
   working paper, forthcoming in Journal of the European Economic Association.
           (2004), “Pareto Improving Campaign Finance Policy,” American Economic Review. 94, 628-
   55.
Craig, G. (1978), Germany 1866-1945, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drazen, A. and N. Limão (2004), “Government Gains from Self-Restraint: A Bargaining Theory of
   Ineﬃcient Redistribution,” NBER Working Paper 10375.
Gray, V. and D. Lowery (1997), “Reconceptualizing PAC Formation: It’s Not a Collective Action
   Problem, and It May Be an Arms Race,” American Politics Quarterly 25(3), 319-346.
Grier, K.B., M.C. Munger, and B.E. Roberts (1994), “The Determinants of Industrial Political Activity,
   1978—1986,” American Political Science Review 88(4), 911—26.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,” American Economic Review 84, 833-50.
           (1996), “Electoral Competition and Special Interest Politics,” Review of Economic Studies 63,
   265-286.
Hall R.L. and Wayman F.W. (1990). “Buying Time: Moneyed Interests and the Mobilization of Bias in
   Congressional Committees,” American Political Science Review 84(3), 797-820.
Hart, D. (2001), ”Why Do Some Firms Give? Why Do Some Firms Give a Lot? High-Tech PACs,
   1977-1996,” Journal of Politics 63(4), 1230-1249.
Levitt, S. (1994), “Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the Eﬀects of Campaign Spending on Election
   Outcomes in the U.S. House,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 777-798.
Mitra, D. (1999), “Endogenous Lobby Formation and Endogenous Protection: A Long-Run Model of
   Trade Policy Determination,” American Economic Review 89(5), 1116-1134.
Pittman, R. (1988), “Rent-Seeking and Market Structure: Comment,” Public Choice 58(2), 173-85.
Prat, A. (2002), “Campaign Advertising and Voter Welfare,” Review of Economic Studies 69, 999-1018.
Riezman, R. and J.D. Wilson (1997), “Political Reform and Trade Policy,” Journal of International
   Economics 42, 67-90.
Stratmann, T. (1998), “The Market for Congressional Votes: Is Timing of Contributions Everything?,”
   Journal of Law and Economics 45 (1), 85-113.
           (2003), “Can Special Interests Buy Congressional Votes? Evidence from Financial Services
   Legislation,” Journal of Law and Economics 45(2), 345-375.
Trefler, D. (1993), “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An Econometric
   Study of U.S. Import Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 101(1), 138-60.
Zardkoohi, A. (1988), “Market Structure and Campaign Contributions: Does Concentration Matter? A
   Reply,” Public Choice 58(2), 187-91.




                                                    29
                                           APPENDICES

A     Derivation of (5) in an Electoral Framework
     This derivation follows Grossman and Helpman (1996). Suppose there are two parties, say
D and R, who choose vectors of production subsidies tD and tR to apply to the set of lobbies.
Following Baron (1994) and Grossman and Helpman (1996), there are two types of voters, informed
and uniformed. Informed voters  ¡ Pchoose
                                    ¢     on the basis of the parties’ policies. Let the utility of informed
                      P       x
voter x from policy t be w t . In addition party R has exogenous characteristics (or immutable
positions) which                   x
                ¡ Dimply
                    ¢     ¡ R ¢ < xfor informed
                         utility                  voter x. Hence informed voter x votes for party D if
and only if w t −w t ≥ < . <x is not known to parties, but they know it¡is drawn
              x         x
                                                                                          ¡ D ¢ fromx known
                                                                                                       ¡ ¢¢
distribution F (<). Hence, the probability that voter x votes for party D is F w t − w tR .
                                                                                        x

Assume a continuum of informed voters of measure
                                               R ¡ 1,   ¡soDthat
                                                            ¢ by    ¡the law of large numbers, the fraction
                                                                         ¢¢
of informed voters who vote for party D is F w t − w tx           x    R    dx, where the integral is taken
over the set of informed voters.
     Uniformed voters have utility over policies, but can be swayed by campaign advertisements.
The fraction of uninformed voters who vote for party D over party R is assumed to depend on
the¡ diﬀerence                                                                    D      R
      D     R
              ¢ in the campaign expenditures of the two parties, namely S − S , and is denoted
H S − S . Hence if a fraction α of voters are uninformed and a fraction 1 − α are informed, the
fraction of votes gained by party D is
                                    Z
                                        ¡ ¡ ¢            ¡ ¢¢             ¡          ¢
                      ω = (1 − α) F wx tD − wx tR dx + αH S D − S R                                      (20)

with party R receiving a fraction 1 − ω. Suppose that the objective of each party is to maximize its
vote share.
     Grossman and Helpman (1996)³     then´ assume specific functional forms for F (·) and H (·). As-
                                    1   1
                                                                    ¡ ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢¢
sume that < is uniform over − 2f , 2f        for f > 0, so that F wx tD − wx tR           = 12 + f ×
£ x ¡ D¢      ¡   ¢¤        ¡   ¢       ¡   ¢                       ¡         ¢            £        ¤
 w t − wx tR for wx tD − wx tR in this interval and H S D − S R = 12 + h × S D − S R
for h > 0. The vote fraction for party D then becomes
                           1              £ ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢¤      £          ¤
                      ω=     + (1 − α) f × W tD − W tR + αh × S D − S R                                 (21)
                           2
                 R
where W (t) ≡ wx (t) dx is the average utility of informed voters if the vector of production subsidies
is t. Under the additional assumption that the distribution of utility functions among informed and
uninformed voters is the same, once can think of W (·) as representing a social welfare function.
      Suppose there is no lobby competition and lobby gives just enough to party J to induce it to
adopt policy tJi (as will be the case here where lobbies know that voters have no ex ante bias towards
either party). That is, suppose that lobbies have only a policy influence motive and no electoral
motive,Pthat is, no motive to try to influence election outcomes by influencing vote shares. Then
S J = i∈L CiJ for J = D, R for Ci as defined in the text. Each party chooses its platform tJ to
maximize its vote share, taking the other party’s platform as given. Party D, whose objective it is
to maximize ω, may then be seen as maximizing an objective

                                        (1 − α) f ¡ D ¢ X
                                   Do +          W t +           CD                             (22)
                                           αh                 i∈L i
                                   ³         ¡ R¢      ´
where the constant Do =      1
                            2αh   − (1−α)f
                                      αh   W  t   + S R . Party R, whose objective it is to maximize



                                                     30
1 − ω, may then be seen as maximizing an objective

                                         (1 − α) f ¡ R ¢ X
                                   Ro +           W t +           CR                              (23)
                                            αh                 i∈L i
                                 ³           ¡ D¢      ´
where the constant Ro = 2αh 1
                               − (1−α)f
                                     αh   W   t   + S D .

     When lobbies give just enough to the parties to induce them to adopt a policy, one can show
(see Grossman and Helpman [1996]) that each party gets exactly half the votes, no matter what tD
and tR are. If the probability that tD is the outcome ¡of ¢the policy-making process is ϕ (ω) and the
probability that tR is the outcome is 1−ϕ (ω) (where ϕ 12 = 12 ), then each lobby i makes an identical
contribution to each party (CiR = CiD = Ci ) and tR       D
                                                     i = ti for all i. That is, each party adopts the
same platform (tD = tR = t) and Ro = Do . Objectives (22) and (23) are obviously equivalent to (5)
in the text when W (t) is interpreted, as indicated, as the social welfare function.
     Lobby i’s objective in an electoral framework with contributions only to influence policy choices
is                                      ¡ ¢                  ¡ ¢
                         Vi = ϕ (ω) Wi tD + (1 − ϕ (ω)) Wi tR − CiD − CiR                         (24)
With ω = 12 and tD = tR , this is equivalent to (3) plus a constant (since the contribution made to
one party is independent of the contribution to the other party.) With caps on the amount that can
be given to each candidate (rather than on the total amount a lobby can give to all candidates), we
can analyze contributions of lobbies to each candidate separately.


B     Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1
i. Suﬃciency
       Suppose that λ ∈ (0, 1). We need only show the existence of a cap Ci < C ∗ s.t. V (C, t̄) >
V (C , t∗ ). The solution is illustrated in Figure 2. We first show that the constrained Pareto frontier
      ∗

is strictly concave. The constrained Pareto frontier in Figure 2 coincides with the original one for
                                        VC
Ci ≥ C ∗ and thus its slope is simply G   C
                                            = −1 before the cap binds. From (6) we have GGCt = VVCt at N
           Vt    VC
so that G   t
              = G C
                     = −1 when Ci ≥ C ∗ . The rest of the constrained frontier is strictly interior to the
unconstrained one since by imposing a constraint on the problem in (8), we are reducing the total
surplus when the constraint is binding. The slope of the Pareto frontier when the constraint binds
    Vt
is G t
       , reflecting the ratio of changes in welfare as the amount of the production subsidy changes.
               ∗
            Vt (t )      0                ∗
                                     Vt (t<t )
                        π
Moreover, G      ∗ = − atπ 00 = −1 > G (t<t∗ ) , where the first equality is due to the definitions of G and
             t (t )                   t
V , the second follows from (7), and the inequality from noting that at the constrained optimum there
are joint gains from increasing t towards the unconstrained optimum t∗ (see Figure 1).
     Now define point A in Figure 2 as the intersection of the constrained frontier and V = vN . Since
the constrained frontier is strictly concave and v mc = v m for Ci ≥ C0 , i.e. for all caps above the
minimum contribution that maintains the government at g 0 given t = t∗ (see Figure 1), the segment
connecting v m and A is everywhere below the constrained Pareto frontier. Consider then an auxiliary
problem where the Pareto frontier is defined by the straight line through vm and A, which has some
slope m. For any linear Pareto frontier the lobby’s equilibrium utility is V ∗ − v0 = λ(v m − v0 ), which
is easily shown by redefining (9) and confirming we again obtain (11). Since the straight line through
v m and A is a rotation of the original Pareto frontier inwards around v m , and since vm − v 0 and λ
are unchanged in the auxiliary problem, the equilibrium lobby utility is also unchanged. Therefore if
                                                                                UG
we now re-derive the first-order condition, as we do for (8), we obtain − U      V
                                                                                   |A = m. Strict concavity
                                                            Vt
of the constrained frontier implies that at A, m > Gt |A , the slope of the constrained frontier at


                                                    31
A. Therefore, the equilibrium point N C lies to the northwest of A, implying v Nc > v N . Following a
similar argument we can show that when λ ∈ (0, 1) we have V (C, t̄) > V (C ∗ , t∗ ) for any Ci ∈ [C0 , C ∗ ).
      Necessity: see part (ii)
      ii. If λ = 1 then the unconstrained solution is vm ≡ M axC,t V s.t. G = g 0 . The equilibrium
contribution is C ∗ (λ = 1) = C0 . A strictly binding cap entails that the lobby’s utility is now
v mc ≡ M axC,T V s.t. G = g 0 and Ci < C ∗ , the extra constraint implies that v mc < v m . If λ = 0 then
V = v 0 for any cap. This also proves the necessity of the condition λ ∈ (0, 1) in (i).
      iii. From (11) we know V ∗ > v 0 if λ ∈ (0, 1] . Since limC−→0 V (C, t(C)) = v 0 there exist
suﬃciently low caps s.t. V (C, t(C)) < V ∗ . If λ = 0 then V = v0 for any cap.
      iv. A binding cap Cj ∈ [0, ∞) changes the government’s reservation utility in bargaining with i
to g 00 and it also changes its maximum utility to g m0 . The additive separability of policies in diﬀerent
sectors in G implies that t∗ in 7 is unchanged. Therefore contributions are used as before to distribute
                  0
the surplus g m − g 00 . But additive separability also implies that the change in g m and g 0 is identical
        0
so g m − g 00 = g m − g 0 . Moreover, since v m − v0 = g m − g 0 and v0 = li + π(p) (recall αi −→ 0) we
have that lobby i’s utility, in (11) is unchanged.
Proof of Proposition 2
    i. This follows immediately from (14), the definition of F (n) with F 0 (n) > 0, and the indepen-
dence of V u from caps and n.
    ii. d(n(C̄)C(C̄))/(−dC̄) = (εnκ − 1)n∗ , where . εnκ ≡ (dn(C̄)/(−dC̄) )/(n∗ /C ∗ ). Now
εnκ > 1 iﬀ(dn(C̄)/(−dC̄) )/(n∗ /C ∗ ) > 1 ⇔ ( dVF/(−d   C̄)
                                                  0 (n∗ )   )/(n∗ /C ∗ ) > 1, where we use (14) to ob-
tain dn(C̄)/(−dC̄) = dVF/(−d  0 (n)
                                   C̄)
                                       . Since both dV /(−dC̄) and C ∗ are independent of n the condition is
              0  ∗
satisfied if F (n ) is suﬃciently low. Alternatively if F (n = 0) is suﬃciently high then, from (14),
the initial number of lobbies n∗ is suﬃciently low and εnκ > 1.
     iii. The eﬀect of tightening the cap on the total level of subsidies for the set of lobbies L0 that
includes the previously and newly organized sectors is
                £P           0
                               ¤                    £                     ¤
              d    i∈L0 ti π                    ∗ d t(C̄)π 0 (p + t(C̄))       dn(C̄)
                                 |C=C ∗ = n                                 +          t(C̄)π 0 (p + t(C̄))
                   −dC̄                                     −dC̄               (−dC̄)
                                               n∗ (t(C̄)π 0 (p + t(C̄)))
                                           =                             (εT κ + εnκ )
                                                         C∗
                                                                                                             S
              d[t(C̄)π 0 (p+t(C̄))]         C∗                         n∗ (t(C̄)π0 (p+t(C̄)))           d[   i∈L0 ti π
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                             ]
where εT κ ≡         −dC̄
                                          Since
                                    t(C̄)π 0 (p+t(C̄))
                                                       .          > 0, we have sign(
                                                                                C∗                               −dC̄
                                                                                                                                 |C=C ∗ ) =
sign(εT κ + εnκ ).
                                                                       C̄) C ∗
    Rewriting in terms of the elasticity of the subsidy rate, εtκ ≡ dt(
                                                                    −dC̄ t(C̄)
                                                                               , we have:
                                                  £                     ¤
                                                d t(C̄)π 0 (p + t(C̄))              C∗
                         εT κ |C=C ∗ =                                            0
                                                                                              |C=C ∗
                                                         −dC̄             t(C̄)π (p + t(C̄))
                                                dt(C̄) C ∗           t(C̄)π 00 (p + t(C̄))
                                           =                 ((1 +                         )|C=C ∗
                                                 −dC̄ t(C̄)             π 0 (p + t(C̄))
                                                         t(C̄)π 00 (p + t(C̄))
                                           =    εtκ (1 +                        )|C=C ∗
                                                            π 0 (p + t(C̄))
                                                         1
                                           =    εtκ (1 + )
                                                         a
Therefore                                  £P                  ¤
                                       d                   0
                                               i∈L0 ti π                                   1
                              sign(                                |C=C ∗ ) = sign(εtκ (1 + ) + εnκ )
                                               −dC̄                                        a

                                                                        32
Since εT κ is independent of n the condition εT κ + εnκ > 0 is satisfied if either F 0 (n∗ ) is suﬃciently
low or F (n = 0) is suﬃciently high.
    iv. All derivatives, π 0 , π 00 evaluated at p + t(C̄).
                   £P                     ¤       £P           0
                                                                 ¤
    dW           d     i∈L0 π(p + t(C̄))        d    i∈L0 ti π
            =                               −                      |C=C ∗
    −dC̄                   −dC̄                     −dC̄
                    dπ(p + t(C̄)) dt           dn(C̄)                          n∗ (t(C̄)π 0
            = n∗                           +           (π(p + t(C̄)) − π(p)) −              (εT κ + εnκ )|C=C ∗
                          dt         −dC̄ (−dC̄)                                    C∗
                 n∗ (t(C̄)π 0          1
            =           ∗
                              (εtκ + 0 εnκ (π(p + t(C̄)) − π(p)) − (εT κ + εnκ ))|C=C ∗
                     C                tπ
                 n∗
            =        {(εtκ /εT κ − 1)εT κ tπ 0 + εnκ (π(p + t(C̄)) − π(p) − tπ 0 )}|C=C ∗
                 C∗
                 n∗        1
            =        {(           − 1)εT κ tπ 0 + εnκ (π(p + t(C̄)) − π(p) − tπ 0 )}|C=C ∗
                 C ∗ 1 + tππ000
                 n∗          t∗2 π 00                ∗            ∗ 0
            =       {−εT κ        ∗ 00 + εnκ (π(p + t ) − π(p) − t π )}
                 C∗        1 + t ππ0
                 n∗
            =       {−εtκ t∗2 π 00 + εnκ (π(p + t∗ ) − π(p) − t∗ π 0 )}
                 C∗
                                                    S
                                               d[ i∈L0 π(p+t(C̄))]
Note that in the second equality we have             −dC̄
                                                                   = n∗ dπ(p+t(
                                                                            dt
                                                                               C̄)) dt
                                                                                   −dC̄
                                                                                          dn(C̄)
                                                                                        + (−dC̄)
                                                                                                 (π(p + t(C̄)) −
π(p)) . The last term corresponds to the increase in profits for the lobbies that were previously
unorganized and thus had profits of π(p). Since εT κ , t∗ , π(p + t∗ ) and π(p) are independent of n and
−(π(p + t∗ ) − π(p) − t∗ π 0 ) > 0 (the additional profit form the subsidy is more than oﬀset by the cost
                                                                                 ∗2 00
of the subsidy) the condition εnκ (−(π(p + t∗ ) − π(p) − t∗ π 0 )) > −εT κ t t∗ππ00 is satisfied when εnκ is
                                                                               1+   π0
suﬃciently large, which occurs if either F 0 (n∗ ) is suﬃciently low or F (n = 0) is suﬃciently high.
Proof of Proposition 3
Consider a cap that is binding in the absence of a tax on contributions (C < C ∗ ). Let the tax
on contributions be defined as in (18). A uniform tax on contributions will lower the equilibrium
contribution, which we denote C µ ≡ C(µ(C), C), with nµ and tµ defined analogously. There are two
cases to consider, depending on whether C µ > C or C µ ≤ C.
Case a: C µ ≤ C (Cap does not bind)
      i. Unorganized lobbies face no change in prices or subsidies or labor endowment so V u (µ(C), C) =
V u∗ . To determine the maximized objective of organized lobbies we use (8) but rewrite the Pareto
frontier in (9). the frontier is still linear because transfers take place through C which enters G and
V linearly. But now v mµ < v m and g mµ < g m because the government requires higher contributions
to remain indiﬀerent to a given subsidy.

                                V = v mµ − (G − g 0 )/(1 − (1 − a(1 − β))µ)                                (25)

It is simple to verify that the linear frontier in (25) still implies a solution of the same form as (10)
and (11) but now, since v mµ < v m and g mµ < g m and g 0 , v 0 and λ are unchanged we have

                                G∗µ − g 0 = (1 − λ)(g mµ − g 0 ) < G∗ − g 0                                (26)
                                    ∗µ        0           mµ     0    ∗    0
                                V        −v       = λ(v        −v )<V −v                                   (27)

where V ∗µ ≡ V (µ(C), C) ≤ V ∗ . Since V u (µ(C), C) = V u∗ , no new lobbies form because, according
to (14), prior to the reform all unorganized lobbies have V ∗ − V u∗ < F (n∗ ).

                                                           33
     ii. The equilibrium contribution C µ satisfies C µ ≤ C < C ∗ so that nµ C µ < n∗ C ∗ since nµ = n∗ .
     iii. The subsidy rate is defined similarly to (7) so that we have for each lobby Gt /GC = Vt /VC

                                   Gt /GC = −atµ π 00 (tµ )/(1 − (1 − a(1 − β))µ)
                                    Vt /VC = −π 0 (tµ )

                                              tµ π 00 (tµ ))   1 − (1 − a(1 − β))µ
                                                 0     µ
                                                             =                                                    (28)
                                               π (t ))                  a
                        t∗ π00 (p+t∗ )       1
From (7) we have         π 0 (p+t∗ )     =   a.   Assuming a < 1 implies 1 − (1 − a(1 − β))µ ≤ 1 for µ ≥ 0.
                                                                           1  −
 Thus, from (28), as µ → 0, tµ → t∗− and as µ → 1−a(1−β)                          , tµ → 0+ . So for µ > 0 we have
  µ     ∗                           00                      0      µ    0       ∗
tP < t . Moreover, since   P π ∗ >0 0 implies           π (p + ti ) < π (p + ti ), with no change in n, we also have
         µ 0       µ                               ∗
    i∈L ti π (p + ti ) <       i∈L ti π (p + ti ) .
P     iv.   With  no   new     lobby formation the change in social welfare reflects the reduction in taxes
         ∗  0      ∗       µ 0           µ
    i∈L ti π (p + ti ) − ti π (p + ti ) which more than oﬀsetsP           the lost profit from the lower subsidy rate,
and the redistributed contribution tax revenue per lobby i∈L (1−β)µC µ , both of which imply higher
 social welfare.
              X                                                               X
                     {π(p + tµi ) − tµi π 0 (p + tµi ) + (1 − β)µC µ } −             {π(p + t∗i ) − t∗i π 0 (p + t∗i )}
                 i∈L                                                             i∈L
              X                                                                 X
         =           {t∗i π 0 (p + t∗i ) − tµi π 0 (p + tµi ) + (1 − β)µC µ } −        {π(p + t∗i ) − π(p + tµi )} > 0
                  i∈L                                                             i∈L

Case (b): C µ > C (Cap binds)
      When the cap is zero and λ > 0 the lobby is worse oﬀ under the cap. Moreover, in Proposition
1, we show there is a binding cap that leaves the lobby better oﬀ for λ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore there is a
critical value of a binding cap that leaves the lobby indiﬀerent relative to the unconstrained political
equilibrium level V ∗ . If C is below that critical value then we can simply take µ = 0 to obtain:
      i. V (µ, C) ≤ V ∗ and V u (µ, C) = V u∗ so that no new lobbies form.
      ii. The equilibrium contribution is C . Therefore C ∗ > C = C µ =⇒ nµ C µ < n∗ C ∗ .
      iii. As is clear from Figure 1, there is a fall in the unit production subsidy t and in total subsidies
since π 00 > 0 =⇒ π 0 (p + tµi ) < π 0 (p + t∗i ).
      iv. Similarly to case (a) the reduction in subsidies increases social welfare, but now there is no
contribution tax revenue collected.
      If C is above that critical value and below C ∗ then, when µ = 0, the eﬀects in Propositions 1
                                                                             1
and 2 are present. Therefore we must show that a rate µ ∈ (0, 1−a(1−β)           ) exists such that i-iv are
satisfied.
                                                                                                       1
      Define the rate µ   b s.t. v mµ (µ = µ     b) = V ∗ . To prove the existence of a µb ∈ (0, 1−a(1−β)   )
note that limµe→0 vmµ = vm (C) > V ∗ (C) where the first equality is due to the equivalence between
the tax rate for C > C and a cap of C and the last inequality is due to λ ∈ (0, 1). Second,
limµe→ 1 − vmµ = v 0 < V ∗ (C) where the first equality is due to limµe→ 1 − GC = 0 and the
       1−a(1−β)                                                                          1−a(1−β)
last inequality is due to λ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore since vmµ is continuous in µ (recall v mµ is the maximum
                                                           1
lobby utility that maintains G(µ, .) = g 0 ) a µ
                                               b ∈ (0, 1−a(1−β) ) exists.
     i. From the definition of µb and vmµ we have that at µ = µ  b , so that V (µ(C), C) ≤ vmµ (·) = V ∗ .
            u                  u∗
Moreover V (µ(C), C) = V .Thus no new lobbies form because, according to (14), prior to the
reform all unorganized lobbies have V ∗ − V u∗ < F (n∗ ).
     The proof for ii,iii and iv follows exactly as shown above.




                                                              34
                              Table 1a
                           Summary statistics
    Variable                  Mean      Std. Dev.    Min         Max
    ln n (PACs)                  3.70          1.16        0       6.18
    ln n (Sponsors)              3.63          1.13        0       6.13
    1(C)                         0.54          0.50        0          1
    1(C)*ln C                    4.30          4.04        0      11.20
    Prohib_corp_union            0.67          0.83        0          2
    hhi [λ]                      0.04          0.01    0.03        0.08
    reg_con                     0.008         0.008 0.0008        0.006
    Ln voter information [a] -0.468           0.115 -0.775        -0.47
    Lnpop                        8.07          1.01    6.12       10.42
    lny_capita                  10.07            .17   9.61       10.57
    lny_taxes                   15.61          1.16   13.26       18.81
      Obs. 399. VT had no registered federal PACs in 1996.

                              Table 1b
 Summary statistics for restricted sample and excluded instruments
Variable                      Mean        Std. Dev.       Min        Max
ln n (PACs)                         3.70          1.17           0      6.18
ln n (Sponsors)                     3.64          1.14           0      6.13
1(C)                                0.54          0.50           0         1
1(C)*ln C                           4.25          4.00           0      9.90
Prohib_corp_union                   0.68          0.83           0         2
hhi [λ]                             0.36          0.01        0.27      0.08
reg_con [c]                        0.008         0.008 0.0008         0.041
Ln voter information [a]          -0.467         0.115     -0.775      -0.47
Lnpop                               8.09          1.01        6.12    10.42
lny_capita                         10.07            .17       9.61    10.57
lny_taxes                          15.63          1.17      13.26     18.81
dem1                                0.56          0.17        0.13      0.95
dem1sq                              0.34          0.19        0.02      0.90
chdem1                             -0.01          0.06       -0.32      0.29
Demgov                              0.48          0.50           0         1
Chdemgov                           -0.04          0.41          -1         1
Chdemgovx chdem1                    0.00          0.02       -0.17      0.12
Lntransf_capita_lag                16.12          1.07      13.84     18.57
Initcliberal                       22.00         25.36           0    93.91
Initiative                          0.47          0.50           0         1
cit6099                            48.71         14.64        9.25    93.91
Obs. 391. VT had no registered federal PACs in 1996. Legislators to the
unicameral legislature in Nebraska are non-partisan. Thus some of our
instruments reflecting the make-up and change of the legislature do not exist
for Nebraska.




                                    35
                                                  Table 2a
                 Contribution limits as a determinant of the number of PACs: average effect
                                (OLS estimates within US states: 1986-2000)
                               (1) PACs       (2) PACs (1) Sponsor (2) Sponsor (1r) PAC (2r) PAC
        1(C)                   0.084***      0.073*** 0.084***          0.071***        0.073*** 0.061**
                               (0.026)       (0.025)     (0.026)        (0.025)         (0.027)       (0.026)
         Prohib_corp_union                   0.068*                     0.077**                       0.070*
                                             (0.040)                    (0.035)                       (0.040)
         hhi [λ]                10.576       9.723       5.368          4.405           11.281        10.505
                                (27.485)     (27.625)    (26.726)       (26.913)        (27.649)      (27.806)
         hhi squared            -297.648 -303.1          -280.9         -287.2          -301.9        -308.5
                                (303.105) (304.0)        (289.5)        (291.1)         (305.0)       (306.2)
         reg_con [c]            3.077        4.254       5.861          7.206           2.31          3.492
                                (4.583)      (4.626)     (4.515)        (4.651)         (4.554)       (4.601)
         Ln voter info [a]      -0.656** -0.606**        -0.636**       -0.579**        -0.689**      -0.640**
                                (0.268)      (0.267)     (0.278)        (0.278)         (0.266)       (0.265)
         lnpop                  0.047        0.02        0.106          0.075           0.099         0.073
                                (0.295)      (0.286)     (0.299)        (0.291)         (0.297)       (0.287)
         lny_capita             1.190*** 1.166**         0.958**        0.931**         1.201*** 1.175**
                                (0.450)      (0.454      (0.439)        (0.442)         (0.453)       (0.459)
         lny_taxes              -0.252       -0.224      -0.244         -0.213          -0.264        -0.235
                                (0.188)      (0.176      (0.179)        (0.169)         (0.188)       (0.176)
         Observations           399          399         398            398             391           391
         R-squared1             0.50         0.51        0.60           0.61            0.51          0.52
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. State and year
effects included in all specifications but not reported.
1. The R-squared refers to the regression using deviations from the state means.




                                                          36
                                                     Table 2b
                  Contribution limits as a determinant of the number of PACs: non-linear effects
                                  (OLS estimates within US states: 1986-2000)
                        (1)                     (2)                       (1r)                        (2r)
1(C)                    -0.280**                -2.18                     -0.222*                     -6.826*
                        (0.113)                 (2.198)                   (0.129)                     (4.076)
1(C)*lnC                0.043***                0.84                      0.036**                     2.783*
                        (0.013)                 (0.826)                   (0.015)                     (1.64)
1(C)*(lnC)2                                     -0.108                                                -0.374*
                                                (0.100)                                               (0.217)
1(C)*(lnC)3                                     0.005                                                 0.017*
                                                (0.004)                                               (0.009)
hhi [λ]                 14.44                   14.389                    13.677                      12.667
                        (26.712)                (27.052)                  (26.902)                    (27.099)
hhi squared             -320.187                -324.766                  -314.26                     -316.07
                        (294.684)               (299.29)                  (296.47)                    (297.13)
reg_con [c]             2.63                    2.286                     2.257                       1.879
                        (4.301)                 (4.430)                   (4.344)                     (4.427)
Ln voter info [a]       -0.584**                -0.634**                  -0.605**                    -0.614**
                        (0.273)                 (0.276)                   (0.280)                     (0.280)
Lnpop                   0.027                   0.058                     0.064                       0.061
                        (0.291)                 (0.294)                   (0.294)                     (0.294)
lny_capita              1.149**                 1.155**                   1.173**                     1.186***
                        (0.452)                 (0.453)                   (0.455)                     (0.457)
lny_taxes               -0.248                  -0.258                    -0.258                      -0.289
                        (0.188)                 (0.187)                   (0.189)                     (0.189)
Observations            399                     399                       391                         391
R-squared1              0.51                    0.51                      0.51                        0.52
Critical value2         $673                    $234                      $477                        $278
Joint sig p3            0.00                    0.00                      0.00                        0.00
  Robust standard errors in parentheses. .* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. State and year
  effects included in all specifications but not reported.
  1. The R-squared refers to the regression using deviations from the state means.
  2. Contribution caps above this value imply larger number of PACs relative to no cap.
  3. Probability value of joint test of significance of the coefficients in (δ1+ δ2lnC)*1(C)it for (1) and (1r) and (δ1+ δ2lnC +
          2         3
  δ3(lnC) + δ4(lnC) )*1(C)it for (2) and (2r).




                                                               37
                                                       Table 3
                            Contribution limits as a determinant of the number of PACs
                                (IV-GMM estimates within US states: 1986-2000)
                                               Table 2a                            Table 2b
                                             (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
                  1(C)†                      0.286***        0.298***          -0.057           -39.224
                                             (0.110)         (0.106)           (0.757)          (37.174)
                  Prohib_corp_union‡                         0.041
                                                             (0.035)
                  1(C)*lnC†                                                    0.036           14.72
                                                                               (0.078)         (15.104)
                  1(C)*(lnC)2†                                                                 -1.815
                                                                                               (2.034)
                  1(C)*(lnC)3†                                                                 0.074
                                                                                               (0.091)
                  hhi [λ]                    0.638           -2.122          8.258             -0.534
                                             (26.481)        (26.359)        (28.763)          (36.802)
                 hhi squared                 -240.874        -225.603        -293.403          -214.431
                                             (270.062)       (269.088)       (272.624)         (321.414)
                 reg_con [c]                 0.483           1.168           1.061             6.339
                                             (4.025)         (4.065)         (3.658)           (8.447)
                 ln voter info [a]           -0.557**        -0.527**        -0.466*           -0.305
                                             (0.233)         (0.232)         (0.283)           (0.346)
                 Lnpop                       -0.096          -0.118          -0.089            0.002
                                             (0.236)         (0.233)         (0.238)           (0.275)
                 lny_capita                  1.189***        1.178***        1.206***          1.245***
                                             (0.385)         (0.389)         (0.374)           (0.388)
                 lny_taxes                   -0.294*         -0.291*         -0.300**          -0.256
                                             (0.154)         (0.154)         (0.146)           (0.239)
                 Observations                391             391             391               391
                 Hansen's J p 1              0.369           0.382           0.247             0.31
                 Schwarz criterion           -3.10           -3.08           -3.15             -2.91
                 Exogeneity test p 2         0.13            0.08            0.39              0.34
                 Homosk. p 3                 0.00            0.00            0.00              0.04
                 Joint sig p4                NA              0.00            0.02              0.07
                 No. of parameters           63              64              64                65
Robust standard errors in parentheses. State and year effects included but not             reported.* Significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
1. Test of over-identifying restrictions. Probability at which we reject the null hypothesis that the excluded instruments
are uncorrelated with the error term, and correctly excluded from the estimated equation.
2. Regression based Hausman specification test for the endogeneity of the variables marked with a “†”. Probability value
at which we reject the consistency and efficiency of OLS.
3. Pagan-Hall homoskedasticity test using the fitted value of the dependent variable.
4. Probability value of joint test of significance of (1(C),Prohib_corp_union) in (2), (1(C), 1(C)*lnC) in (3), of (1(C), 1(C)*lnC
terms) in (4).
‡ Can’t reject the exogeneity at p<0.83




                                                               38
                                                      Table 4
                               First stage regressions for the regressions in Table 3

              Specification               (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)
              Dependent variable      1(C)            1(C)        1(C)*lnC       1(C)*(lnC)2 1(C)*(lnC)3
              Lnpop                   1.212***        1.093**     11.508*** 107.995*** 1,006***
                                      (0.466)         (0.461)     (3.879)        (33.659)    (299.6)
                lny_capita            0.691           0.578       7.235          72.099      697.8*
                                      (0.629)         (0.622)     (5.242)        (45.483)    (404.8)
                hhi [λ]               75.981*         69.422      526.80         3,681       25,919
                                      (45.012)        (44.481) (375.05)          (3,254)     (28,964)
                hhi squared           -453.315        -427.95     -2,948.5       -18,677     -112,449
                                      (482.316)       (476.15) (4,018.7)         (34,869)    (310,358)
                reg_con [c]           5.087           7.138       37.593         325.361     3,136.84
                                      (8.938)         (8.847)     (74.471)       (646.173)   (5,751.30)
                ln voter info [a]     -0.682          -0.568      -8.026**       -83.99**    -830.90***
                                      (0.480)         (0.476)     (4.004)        (34.74)     (309.19)
                lny_taxes             -0.034          0.05        -0.882         -10.916     -111.15
                                      (0.277)         (0.275)     (2.312)        (20.059)    (178.54)
                dem1                  -0.646          -0.492      -7.024         -70.954     -686.62
                                      (0.894)         (0.884)     (7.450)        (64.643)    (575.36)
                dem1sq                0.305           0.125       4.096          46.411      485.01
                                      (0.711)         (0.704)     (5.923)        (51.396)    (457.45)
                Chdem1                0.831***        0.850*** 7.028***          59.845***   512.06***
                                      (0.300)         (0.296)     (2.502)        (21.707)    (193.20)
                Chdem1sq              -0.462          -0.741      -13.634        -186.705    -2,121.7*
                                      (1.899)         (1.877)     (15.826)       (137.323)   (1,222.3)
                Demgov                -0.086**        -0.088** -0.908*** -8.989***           -85.955***
                                      (0.039)         (0.038)     (0.322)        (2.798)     (24.904)
                Chdemgov              0.021           0.024       0.19           1.658       14.083
                                      (0.038)         (0.038)     (0.319)        (2.764)     (24.601)
                chdemgovxchdem1       -1.276*         -1.270*     -12.346** -117.3**         -1,102.8**
                                      (0.670)         (0.661)     (5.583)        (48.44)     (431.18)
                Initcliberal          0.005           0.007*      0.05           0.475       4.453*
                                      (0.004)         (0.004)     (0.034)        (0.295)     (2.622)
                cit6099               -0.007**        -0.007** -0.060**          -0.526**    -4.646**
                                      (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.028)        (0.245)     (2.185)
                Prohibit                              0.146***
                                                      (0.048)
                Observations           391               391      391            391         391
                R-squared              0.32              0.34     0.32           0.32        0.31
                F-test p1              0.00              0.00     0.00           0.00        0.00
Standard errors in parentheses. State and year effects included but not reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%. ‡ Instruments tested for exogeneity, see C-stat in table 1.
In this table column 1 corresponds to the first stage regression of Table 3, column 1. Column 2 corresponds to the first
stage of Table 3, column2. The first stages of Table 3, column 3 are the columns 1 and 3 of this table. The first stages of
Table 3, column 4 are columns 1, 3, and 4 of this table.
1. P-value of the F-test of joint significance of the instruments in first-stage regression




                                                           39
                                                    Table 5
                            Marginal effect of finance laws on the number of PACs
                                                            ∂E(ln n |ln C)/∂1(C)1
                            State cap ($)       (1)            (2          (1r            (2r)
                               2†
                            OR 200
                            ME 500
                                 †
                            MO2 550
                            MN 600
                            CT 1000           0.017         0.035          0.024         0.052
                            FL 1000
                            KS 1000
                               †
                            MA 1000
                            MI 1000
                            MT 1000
                            WI 1000
                            DE 1200
                                †
                            WA 1200
                            AK 2000           0.047         0.050         0.048*         0.046
                            AR 2000
                            HI     2000
                               †
                            KY 2000
                              †
                            RI        2000
                               †
                            SC        2000
                            WV        2000
                                †
                            GA        3000    0.064** 0.058*               0.063**       0.043
                               †
                            AZ        3020         **       *                   **
                            VT        4000    0.076*** 0.064**             0.073***      0.047
                              †
                            LA 5000                   ***           ***            ***           *
                               †
                            OH 5000                ***           ***            ***           *
                                  †
                            MD        6000         ***           ***            ***           *
                                †
                            NY        6200         ***           ***            ***           *
                            NC        8000     0.11***       0.09***        0.10***      0.086***
                               †
                            ID        10000       ***               ***            ***           ***
                            NH        10000       ***               ***            ***           ***
                                †
                            NV        10000       ***               ***            ***           ***
                            OK        10000       ***               ***            ***           ***
                                †
                            TN      10000      0.12*** 0.10***          0.11***     0.11***
                                 †
                             NJ 11800               ***         ***          ***        ***
                                  †
                             CO 20000               ***         ***          ***        ***
                                  †
                             NE 73000          0.20*** 0.34***          0.18***     0.86***
1. ∂E(ln n |ln C)/∂1(C)=δ1+δ2lnC for (1) and (1r) and δ1+δ2lnC +δ3(lnC)2+δ4(lnC)3 for (2) and (2r) in table 2b. The
asterisks represent the level at which we can reject the null of ∂E(ln n |ln C)/∂1(C)=0 using a Wald test. 10% (*);
5%(**) and 1%(***). 2. OR had a limit only in 1996. MO had a limit in 1996 ($500) and 1998 ($550). † Denotes
states that imposed limits after 1986.

                                                             40
                                                 Table 6
                                             Data description
NAME                DESCRIPTION                                                  SOURCE
ln nit              Number of organizations from state i at t registered as      Federal Election
                    federal PACs                                                 Commission
1(C)                State campaign finance law imposing limit on contributions   Campaign Finance
                    from state PACs                                              Laws (FEC)
1(C)* lnC           1(C)*log($ contribution limit)                                  ″″
Prohib_corp_union   =1,2 if state Prohib_corp_unions contributions from either      ″″
                    or both corporations and unions, otherwise zero
Hhi [λ]             Herfindahl-Hirschman index calculated from the wage          BEA
                    employment in a state at the 3-digit SIC code k.
                    Σk(eiktlikt/eitlit)2
Reg_con [c]         Regional concentration index, calculated from wage              ″″
                    employment in a state at the 3-digit SIC code k
                    Σk {wikt * abs((eikt /Σk (eikt) - POPk/ΣkPOPkt )}

                    wikt = eikt//Σk (eikt)
Lny_taxes           Log(state government income taxes)                             ″″
voter information   National election study – transformed as described in the    National Election Study
[a]                 text
Lnpop               Log(state population)                                        Statistical Abstract
                                                                                 of the United States
Lny_capita          Log(state income/capita)                                        ″″
dem1                Share of seats held by Democrats in the state assembly       Book of the States
dem1sq                                                                              ″″
chdem1              Change in dem1                                                  ″″
Demgov              =1 if governorship is held by a democrat, 0 otherwise.          ″″
chdemgov            Change in demgov                                                ″″
chdemgovxchdem1     Chdemgov* dem1                                                  ″″
Initiative          =1 if state has an initiative process, 0 otherwise              ″″
Cit6099             Index of how liberal citizens are in state i at t            ICPSR study 1208
initcliberal        Initiative* cit6099




                                                    41
                                               Figure 1
                            Equilibrium Contribution and Transfer with caps


                                                                   V0

                                                              Gm

                                                                   G0
                                                                         Vm
Contribution




                                        m
                                                         Vc
                                     g

               C*                   N
                                               Gc

               Ccap   gmc
                               Nc
               C0
                                          m
                                        v



                0
                                     t*
                                              Transfer
                                      Figure 2
    V                Bargaining Solution with Contribution Caps



m       mc
                                             UN=(G-g0)1-λ(V-v0)λ
v =v




                     Uc



            c
                      Nc
        v



                                                          N
    vN                    A


                                                                   -1

    v0
                g0   gc       gmc                         gN            gm   G
