NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN PUBLIC DISCUSSION ENHANCE PROGRAM OWNERSHIP?
Allan Drazen
Peter Isard
Working Paper 10927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

Allan Drazen holds the Jack and Lisa Yael Chair in Comparative Economics at Tel Aviv University and is
Professor of Economics at the University of Maryland. This is a revised version of a paper prepared for the
IMF Conference in Honor of Guillermo Calvo, Washington, DC, April 15-16, 2004; it will be published in
the forthcoming conference volume. We thank our discussant Raquel Fernandez, as well as Jim Boughton,
Eddie Dekel, Thomas Dorsey Marcela Eslava, Judith Gold, Caroline Kende-Robb, and Nuno Limão for
helpful comments and discussions. Parts of this paper were written while the first author was visiting the
IMF, which he thanks for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the International Monetary
Fund.
© 2004 by Allan Drazen and Peter Isard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Can Public Discussion Enhance Program Ownership?
Allan Drazen and Peter Isard
NBER Working Paper No. 10927
November 2004
JEL No. D72, D74, F34
ABSTRACT
We use the concepts of deliberative democracy from political science and cheap talk from economics
to develop a better understanding of how public discussion can contribute to building and
demonstrating ownership of IMF programs and hence to program success. We argue that ownership
is more complex than many discussions of it would suggest, since it must include not only the
willingness to carry out a program, but also the technical capacity and especially the political ability
to do so. Public discussion can serve a number of purposes, each of which can be better understood
by moving to a more formal treatment. We illustrate our points by means of simple examples. We
also consider some of the drawbacks of public discussion, especially as applied to IMF programs.
Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University fo Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu
Peter Isard
IMF Institute
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
pisard@imf.org

-1-

I. INTRODUCTION
IMF-supported programs have a mixed record of success. A significant share of
programs fail to reach their originally scheduled “completion dates,” many others require
substantial modifications along the way,2 and many countries remain under IMF-supported
programs for prolonged periods of time.3
An often-cited reason that IMF-supported programs get off track is a lack of
ownership on the part of the program country, where ownership refers loosely to the extent
to which a country is “committed” to the general reform process and the conditions specified
by the program independently of the incentives provided by multilateral institutions. Genuine
ownership on the part of a country, combined with sufficient lending from the IMF and good
program design, is believed to yield program success (or at least a high probability of
success). And indeed, when the IMF refers to ownership it defines the concept in a circular
way, based implicitly on the vision of reaching program completion dates: “National
ownership refers to a willing assumption of responsibility for a program of policies, by
country officials who have the responsibility to formulate and carry out those policies, based
on an understanding that the program is achievable and is in the country’s best interest.”4
The main challenges that arise in wrestling with the concept of ownership do not stem
primarily from disagreement over the most appropriate definition, but rather reflect the
difficulties of making the concept of ownership operational.5 How can the IMF determine
whether a country is likely to remain committed to the reform effort and comply with the
conditions of its program through the completion date? And how can the IMF design
programs to enhance the prospect that countries will remain committed and completion dates
will be reached? These questions identify and distinguish between two central issues:
demonstrating that ownership is present and building or creating ownership when it is
thought to be weak. The former issue is perhaps most relevant for countries that have failed
2

For readers unfamiliar with IMF jargon, the term “completion date” refers to the date at
which the borrowing country becomes eligible for the last installment of the IMF loan, based
on demonstrated compliance with, or agreed waivers or modifications of, the performance
criteria and other conditions of the program. Out of the 615 IMF-supported programs
approved between 1973 and 1997, only 70 percent achieved their originally agreed
“completion dates” (in many cases with modifications along the way); an additional 12
percent were extended beyond their original durations; another 11 percent were canceled
early but were followed promptly by successor arrangements; and 7 percent were effectively
suspended. See Mussa and Savastano (2000).
3
Under a definition that treats a country as a prolonged user of IMF resources if it has had
IMF-supported programs for 7 or more years within a 10-year period, 44 countries were
prolonged users during some part of the 1971-2000 period; see Independent Evaluation
Office (2002).
4
IMF (2002).
5
See Boughton and Mourmouras (2002).

-2to comply with the conditions of programs in the past and must demonstrate that, contrary to
perceptions based on past performance, they are now truly interested in and committed to
reform.6 The latter issue recognizes that ownership is endogenous, not an innate or
exogenous characteristic. Ownership can be improved and fostered through various devices.
That is why we argue that a key challenge that a reform-minded government faces is building
ownership—that is, creating support for the process of reform and for the specific measures
embodied in an IMF-supported program.
Among the general public and especially critics of the IMF (and the World Bank), the
lack of ownership and the failures of IMF-supported programs are often attributed to a lack
of public discussion of the programs during the formulation stages. Our use of the term
“public discussion” in this paper refers broadly to mechanisms through which policymakers
disseminate and exchange information with the public, including discussions both to
formulate programs and to explain program design. It appears to be similar to what others
have called “participation” in the recent literature on economic development and poverty and
social impact analysis.
Critics of the IMF often characterize the process of formulating a program as one of
negotiations between the IMF (seen as having its own agenda) and a thin layer of high-level
government officials, with little or no input from the public, from NGOs, or from other
interested parties. The failure of a program to lead to a significant bettering of the economic
condition of the general population is often seen as reflecting this lack of public input.
Demonstrations (or riots) against the IMF and the programs it supports are taken as evidence
of the seriousness of the problem. Public discussion is considered to be an important vehicle
for establishing ownership, and lack of public discussion is perceived as part of the reason
that some programs are never adopted or fail to reach completion.
The need for public discussion is recognized within the IMF and World Bank.7 To
date, however, the case for public discussion is not much more developed than the cases for
other terms that sound unambiguously positive. In particular, the discussion of “public
discussion” seems quite unfocused and lacking in coherent analysis of what form it should
take and how it can contribute to strengthening IMF-supported programs and/or
demonstrating or building ownership. Such lack of careful, analytic argument on the role of
public discussion can leave the unfavorable impression that the IMF and World Bank simply
view public discussion as “politically correct” rather than as a vehicle that can significantly
improve program design—or that they engage in public discussion primarily to make the
public feel “more comfortable with” or “warm and fuzzy about” their programs. A more
serious concern is that the lack of a clear understanding of how public discussion works can
leave the impression that public discussion “strengthens” ownership only by leading
counterproductively to the adoption of weaker programs. At worst, public discussion is seen
6

It is not only to the IMF that ownership must be demonstrated. Demonstration of
ownership may also have a “catalytic” effect in inducing both official bilateral lending and
private capital flows that exceed or add substantially to official multilateral loans.
7
See, for example, IMF (2003a), paragraph 7.

-3as making strong program design very difficult or impossible by giving too much voice to
groups that are either against real reform or hold views strongly at odds with generally
accepted economic wisdom. Thus, it is not surprising that public discussion has a bad name
in some circles, at least when it is not discussed publicly.
Both the association of public discussion with fuzzy thinking and the view that it
detracts from successful program design are especially unfortunate. In our view, careful
public discussion of programs can increase necessary public support and in any case is often
unavoidable. The purpose of this paper is to distinguish a number of different functions that
public discussion can serve and to illustrate its potential for improving collective choice.
The paper does not break new theoretical ground, but it uses the tools of economic
theory and political science to help develop a better understanding of how public discussion
can contribute to building and demonstrating ownership. The first task is to develop a better
understanding of both ownership and public discussion. In Section II, we argue that
ownership is more complex than many discussions of it would suggest. Ownership must
include not only willingness but also technical capacity and political ability to carry out a
program, especially the political ability to do so. In Section III, we argue that public
discussion can serve a number of purposes—including educating the public, revealing public
preferences and constraints (or educating policymakers), demonstrating the unbiasedness of
policymakers, finding common ground among heterogeneous interests—each of which can
be better understood by moving to a more formal treatment. What public discussion can or
cannot achieve depends on what the ownership problem is, and the different purposes of
public discussion may interact with one another. Here too, understanding the political
constraints on a government may help one to understand what to expect from public
discussion. In Section IV, we illustrate our arguments using simple examples relevant to
actual program design. In Section V we consider some of the drawbacks of public discussion,
especially as applied to IMF-supported programs.

After having developed a clearer sense of ownership and a more formal
understanding of what public discussion can achieve in different types of circumstances, we
focus in Section VI on the design of IMF-supported programs and the role that public
discussion can play in enhancing program ownership. We argue that the difficulties of
attaining program ownership depend on the nature of the conditions involved, that this should
be taken into account in designing programs and seeking to build overall program ownership,
and that the recent emphasis on streamlining IMF conditionality can be counterproductive if
it results in the elimination of conditions for which ownership is potentially very high. We
also suggest that the effectiveness of both IMF-supported programs and the IMF’s
surveillance of nonprogram countries might be enhanced through more explicit focus ex ante
on the obstacles to building ownership for policies and programs and on how those obstacles
can be overcome or mitigated through public discussion. Section VII provides a summary of
our arguments and conclusions.
II. DEFINING OWNERSHIP
Ownership is a more complex concept than it may seem. As noted above, the degree
to which a country “owns” an IMF-supported program can be broadly defined as the extent

-4to which the country is oriented toward meeting the conditions specified by the program
independently of any incentives provided by multilateral lenders. Alternatively, and from the
perspective of seeking to draw meaningful implications for the design of IMF-supported
programs and the role of public discussion, the degree of ownership can be defined as the
probability that an IMF-supported program will be adopted and reach completion without a
significant weakening of the reform effort.
The latter definition points to a number of factors on which ownership depends. One
is the willingness of the government to meet the conditions of the program. Without such
willingness, the probability of reaching completion is unlikely to be high. Suppose, however,
that there is willingness but a lack of technical capacity to collect taxes or carry out other
measures on which the program crucially depends. (“The spirit is willing, but the
infrastructure is weak.”) It would not seem meaningful to suggest that a country owns a
program that it has no hope of carrying out: ownership also depends on technical capacity.
Conversely, ownership for its own sake is not a desirable objective. Just as it is not very
meaningful to design diets that overweight individuals are willing and able to undertake
because they require only minimal changes in eating habits, it would not be very desirable to
design programs that countries are willing and technically able to carry out simply because
they require only minimal changes in policy.
A third crucial factor for ownership is the political ability of the government to carry
out a meaningful program. To illustrate the point, suppose policymakers in a country with
continuing large fiscal deficits want to implement a program of fiscal austerity but face
powerful special interest groups (SIGs), either inside or outside government, who can block
fiscal reform. One could not argue that there is country ownership if the SIGs do not agree to
the fiscal austerity program, even if the government is willing and technically able to carry
out the program.8 The same argument suggests that ownership can be strengthened by
weakening either the power or the incentives of SIGs to block the program. The nature of the
political system can very much determine the power of SIGs, while both the design and
public discussion of programs can affect their incentives. We return to the latter point in our
analysis of how public discussion can affect ownership.
Willingness, technical capacity, and political ability are not independent of each other
as determinants of program ownership. The distinction between the willingness of the
government to carry out reforms and its political ability to do so is often unclear, as is the
distinction between its technical capacity and its political ability to collect taxes or discipline
public spending. In some cases, distinguishing between technical and political capacity may
be unimportant or irrelevant. One may want to think simply of “institutional capacity,”
broadly defined to reflect the technical characteristics of fiscal processes as well as the nature
of the political institutions that influence what comes out of fiscal processes.

8

This distinction between country and government (or authority) ownership is central to the
arguments on conditionality presented in Drazen (2002) and is explored in detail there.

-5The IMF is unlikely to find itself involved in a program in which country ownership
is ex ante complete. Were ownership complete—that is, if a country had the willingness,
technical capacity, and political ability to pursue serious reforms—it would not have to
approach the IMF for support.9 In this sense, the challenge faced by the IMF in negotiating
and designing programs—and in considering how to make effective use of public
discussion—is not simply to try to determine the degree of ownership but also to try to
increase—that is, to build and strengthen—ownership. This leads to the question of the role
of public discussion in designing effective programs and especially in enhancing ownership.
III. A FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF PUBLIC DISCUSSION
Public discussion has an image problem: calls for public discussion are often
perceived to be based primarily on the desire to increase ownership by making the public feel
“more comfortable” about a program in some general way. Our aim in this paper is to move
away from the “warm and fuzzy” and try to analyze public discussion more rigorously.
From a more analytical perspective, public discussion of a program may be seen as
having a number of functions, which may be grouped into four categories:
•

to educate the public about the nature of the program and, more generally, about
macroeconomic realities, including the trade-offs between short-run costs and
medium-run benefits and the implications of the program for relevant interest groups.
It can also provide a vehicle for the government (and/or the IMF) to make the public
aware of information on which the program is based;

•

to learn public preferences and constraints, and to convince the public that program
design takes this information into account, which (along with educating the public)
may enhance compliance and cooperation with the program;

•

to demonstrate unbiasedness—that is, to convince the public that the program is
designed for the general good, rather than to serve the interests of the authorities or
the IMF; and

•

to find common ground among heterogeneous interests.

“Public discussion” might appear to be a topic not easily formalized and discussed
with any rigor. However, there are two highly relevant strands of literature—one in
economics, the other in political science—that are rigorous and, we believe, potentially quite
relevant for developing a more concrete awareness of the different ways that public
discussion can effect policy outcomes. As discussed below, the economics literature on
9

IMF involvement might be crucial in inducing complete country ownership (as in the use of
conditionality in Drazen [2002]), so that one could observe IMF-supported programs where
country ownership appears to be complete (ex post).

-6“cheap talk” is useful for illustrating how discussion can help country governments and/or
the IMF to learn about preferences and constraints, demonstrate their unbiasedness, or find
common ground among different interest groups. And the political theory literature on
deliberative democracy is helpful in thinking about the educational role of public discussion.
A. Cheap talk
Economic theory distinguishes between costly signaling mechanisms and “cheap
talk,” where the latter is defined as a signal that an agent can send that is neither costly nor
binding and that does not directly affect the payoffs associated with any given outcome.10 As
an example of costly signaling, suppose that two jobs require different levels of ability, but
that individual ability is unobserved. If innately high-ability individuals find it less costly to
become educated than do low-ability individuals, observable educational attainment may
serve as a signal of unobserved ability. The signal works because it is differentially costly for
different types of individuals to send it.
Suppose, however, that individuals simply announce to employers what their ability
is, with it being costless for an individual to make any announcement he wants (hence, the
term cheap talk). One might think that such costless signals are completely uninformative.
However, under certain conditions cheap talk can in fact convey information about
unobserved characteristics. Cheap public discussion may enable the government to convey
information that its objective is maximizing social welfare (rather than having its own
agenda); and cheap talk may enable the public to convey information about its preferences to
those who design programs. We return below to this application of public discussion.
Cheap talk may also be a useful coordination mechanism—that is, a device for
finding common ground. The challenge of program design presents the government not only
with the difficulties of convincing the populace of its good intentions, but also with the need
to forge an agreement among different special interest groups. We also consider how public
discussion applies to the latter task.
Note that in considering the importance of “talking” we have not made any reference
to bargaining or negotiations per se. The issue of how bargaining affects outcomes can, of
course, be analyzed formally, but that is not our intention in studying public discussion.
B. Deliberative democracy
Political science has generated quite a bit of literature on communication between
political leaders and the public, and on the role of such communication in shaping policy
decisions and generating support for policies and political leaders. Much of this literature is
empirical or illustrative, arguing the importance of communication yet not providing a
theoretical or formal way to understand why public discussion may be important.

10

Farrell and Rabin (1996) present an excellent, easily accessible introduction to the subject.

-7There is, however, a rigorous strand of literature that focuses on why public
discussion may be important in a democracy (Elster, 1998a).11 This is the analysis of
“deliberative democracy,” which can be roughly defined as “decision making by discussion
among free and equal citizens” (Elster, 1998b, p. 1), with the stress on “discussion.”
According to this literature, a crucial part of the democratic process is discussion and
deliberation before a collective choice is made. The central question in assessing discussion
is put clearly by Fearon (1998):
What good reasons might a group of people have for discussing matters
before making some collective decision, rather than simply voting on
the issue or using some other decision rule that does not involve
discussion? In other words, what is the point or value of discussing
things before making political decisions? (p. 44, italics in original)
Advocates of deliberative democracy argue that decision making in a democracy is not
simply the aggregation of (existing) policy preferences among heterogeneous agents in a
society. That is, it is not simply a collective choice rule (such as majority voting) for reaching
an aggregate policy decision when individual citizens do not agree on their most preferred
policy. Instead, and perhaps more important, democratic decision making involves the
transformation of individual preferences through deliberation and discussion (Habermas,
1987).12 In common parlance, if two individuals have different opinions, the free and open
discussion of issues that is part of the democratic process enables each side to attempt to
convince the other of the correctness of its own position. Thus, discussion provides a
mechanism for trying to narrow differences of opinion. In the limit, deliberation and
discussion would bring about a consensus of opinion, so there would be no need to use
voting or some other mechanism to aggregate preferences.
In applying this perspective to IMF-supported programs, the relevant question is: how
can public discussion lead to a consensus, or at least a narrowing of differences of opinion,
on what policy should be followed? It is crucial to note that the focus here is on policies and
not on outcomes. Two constituencies may differ in their desires for narrowing income
inequality, for example, as an outcome, or they may agree on the desired degree of income
inequality but differ over the best way to achieve it. Hence, their disagreement is not about
goals but about the best way to achieve them.13 That is, they disagree about the connection
between policies and outcomes, or more generally, about how the world works. We term this
an issue of “causal policy-to-outcome relations,” or simply causal relations.
11

From a formal point of view, political scientists have also used cheap talk models to study,
for example, communication in legislatures.
12
Some critics argue that this transformation may actually be a distortion of individual
preferences. See Section V below.
13
The reader will probably quickly point out that individuals may view income inequality not
as itself the outcome, but rather in terms of its effect on other variables, such as growth. That
is, individuals may favor high growth but differ on the connection between income inequality
and growth. For illustration, see the discussion in Chapter 11 of Drazen (2000).

-8-

We note this point because—in the context of IMF-supported programs—the
possibility of educating the public about the effects of policies is a key consideration. That is,
public discussion can make the public aware of the “payoff matrix” they face and thus
perhaps lead them to choose to comply with the proposed program (to choose “ownership”)
as leading to better outcomes for all parties than the outcomes associated with
noncompliance.
In addition to the positive question of whether deliberation can lead to ownership,
there is a normative question of whether deliberation leads to welfare-improving outcomes.
As already mentioned in the introduction, some observers stress the possible negative
implications, a point we consider in detail in Section V.
C. Voting versus program design
Many discussions of deliberative democracy focus on the role of public discussion
prior to voting on policy. By contrast, we are interested in the value of public discussion of
policy proposals before a government commits to a policy program with the IMF.
That public discussion is followed by the government adopting a program, rather than
voting, is a key distinction between our framework and most applications in the political
theory literature. This difference may have implications for the functions of public discussion
as well as for the pathologies (i.e., circumstances in which public discussion may be
counterproductive). A second factor that distinguishes our framework, and that may
influence the relative importance of various arguments, is that IMF-supported programs—
especially difficult ones that need the most public discussion—are typically designed when
the economic outlook is particularly bad. As we shall see, these features of our framework
introduce some considerations not present in a voting setup.
IV. ILLUSTRATING THE FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC DISCUSSION
Public discussion is a vehicle for transmitting information. This includes both
economic information about the state of the economy and the links between policies and
economic outcomes and socio-political information about the preferences and agendas of the
government, relevant national constituencies, or the IMF itself. This section focuses on how
the design and ownership of programs can be strengthened by the transmission of such
information. Our purpose is not to break new theoretical ground, but to illustrate these points
by means of simple examples as applied to actual IMF-supported programs.
In analyzing the various functions that public discussion may serve, it is useful to
address three separate questions sequentially. First, as a reference case, what are the
functions of public discussion when the government is known to maximize social welfare
(rather than being thought to have its own “agenda”) and the public is homogeneous (rather
than having heterogeneous interests)? Second, how can public discussion help in convincing
the public that the government’s objective is in fact maximization of social welfare (thus
presumably increasing public support and compliance)? Third, what additional functions

-9might public discussion have in addressing the conflicting (heterogeneous) interests of
groups in society?
Throughout this section we restrict attention to communication between two parties,
focusing on communication either between the government and the public or between two
interest groups. We assume that the IMF’s objectives coincide with those of the
government.14 This assumption implies that the argument that the IMF’s interests do not
coincide with those of countries entering programs can be captured by Case 2 below on the
role of public discussion when the authorities in a country may not be acting in the interests
of social welfare.
A. Case 1: Government known to maximize the social welfare of a homogeneous public
Consider first the case where it is common knowledge that the government’s
objective is maximization of social welfare and the public is homogeneous in its preferences
and beliefs.15 These two assumptions are admittedly extreme and unrealistic, but this case is
useful in understanding the importance of public uncertainty about the government’s
objectives and of heterogeneity in agents’ objectives.
In this reference case we ask: since the public knows that the government is
maximizing its welfare, why isn’t it effective for the government simply to announce its
program without any prior discussion? Our answer is that the achievement of the optimal
outcome may depend on a number of functions that public discussion can serve: (i) revealing
the public’s preferences; (ii) convincing the public that the government is aware of what it
values; (iii) educating the public; (iv) revealing information about available resources and/or
efficient choices; and (v) making the government’s commitment to a program more credible.
When the government has imperfect information about what the public wants, public
discussion can serve the function of revealing information. This can be a serious problem
when program negotiation involves only the IMF and a “thin layer” of high government
officials. Since preferences are necessarily complex, it can be argued that the government
and the IMF cannot possibly design a program that is socially optimal (or perceived as such)
without consulting the public. In comparison with other ways of forming judgments about
ownership, public discussion has the attraction of being a relatively quick and resourceefficient way to seek feedback.16
14

Financial constraints on the IMF, for example, may lead its objectives to differ from those
of a country’s authorities. See Drazen (2002) for a discussion of some of the issues involved
in whether the government and the IMF have the same or different objectives.
15
“Common knowledge” means not only that something is known by all parties, but that
everyone knows that everyone knows, everyone knows that everyone knows that everyone
knows, etc.
16
By contrast, the methods that Wimmer, de Soysa, and Wagner (2002) suggest for assessing
the feasibility and sustainability of reforms would appear to require considerable resources
and time to implement.

- 10 We may illustrate our points in simple matrices of payoffs to the government and a
homogeneous public. Consider Matrix 1. (In this case the use of a formal model is perhaps
trivial, but it sets the stage for later examples.) Public’s type is Left, but Government does
not know this. (Formally, the game is either Left or Right, which Public knows but
Government does not.) For example, Left means relatively large tax-financed social welfare
programs, and Right means relatively small tax-financed social welfare programs. A policy
of High (government spending) is optimal when Public prefers Left and a policy of Low
(government spending) is optimal when Public prefers Right. (Since Government is known to
maximize social welfare, the payoffs are identical to both Public and Government in each
cell.) Government must choose the optimal policy, where it does not know what Public
wants. In the absence of communication, Government must choose on the basis of its prior
beliefs about Public’s preferences (where we assume that once Government chooses a policy
it cannot change). Suppose Government assigns probability of ½ to each possibility (actually,
any interior probabilities will suffice for this example), so that the expected payoff is (2, 2).
Matrix 1
Public
Government program

Left

Right

High

3,3

1,1

Low

1,1

3,3

Here, the problem is solved if Public simply announces that it is Left, which it is
optimal for it to do. Public discussion increases welfare since it allows the public to credibly
signal its preferences even though such discussion is cheap talk. (Formally, Public’s
preferences are self-signaling.)17
A related role for public discussion is to convince the public that the government is
really aware of what the public values. This is relevant when the public knows that the
government’s objective is maximization of social welfare but feels the government may not
be aware of society’s preferences. This is clearly related to the previous argument, but it is
not identical: the previous argument applies when the government does not have information
on the public’s preferences; the second role recognizes that even a perfectly informed
government must sometimes convince people that it is informed. Put another way, in the first
17

When the public consists of groups with conflicting interests, then public discussion meant
to elicit information on preferred policy may not serve the same function, since groups have
the incentive to reveal information strategically. We return to this problem in Section IV.C.

- 11 case public discussion is used to shape a program; in the second, to help “sell” a program.
Formally, the public’s preferences must not simply be known, but must also be common
knowledge. This possibility suggests one interpretation of the notion that “people want to be
included” in program formulation, in this case, enough so to be convinced that the decisionmaker really does know their preferences. In other words, public discussion may serve to
increase the legitimacy of policy.
Another function of public discussion is to address the possibility that the general
public knows the government’s preferences (or at least knows that the government’s
objective is maximization of the public’s welfare) but is uninformed about “how the world
works”—that is, about what we above termed causal relations.18 In other words, the function
of public discussion is to educate the public about “economic realities.” Przeworski (1998),
for example, argues that transmitting knowledge about such causal relations is central to what
deliberation is supposed to do (p. 144):
The preferences on which people act are contingent on their beliefs
about the consequences of their actions. And, indeed, parties and
candidates competing for office do not offer merely policies: they
explain to the electorate how these policies will affect the outcomes,
trying to persuade citizens that their policies, as distinct from those of
their opponents, will lead to the outcomes they want.
We may represent this case by making a number of changes to Matrix 1. First, “Left”
and “Right” now refer not to the public’s type, but to the “state of the world.” Second, it is
now Government that has superior information—it knows the state of the world and the
associated optimal policy, while Public does not. For purposes of the example, let the state be
Right, calling for a policy of low government spending. (That is, in the matrix above, the true
“game” is only the right-hand column.) Third, a government program can be enacted only if
Public favors it. (Hence, it is Public that chooses High or Low.) Finally, Public does not
know the true payoffs connected with different policies. As a concrete example, one may
think of the state of the world as “overheated,” with Public not fully understanding the
longer-run effects of countercyclical and procyclical policies. Though the true payoffs are as
in Matrix 1, Public believes that the payoffs associated with different policies are as in
Matrix 2. In this case, Public would favor high government spending even if Government
announced that the state was Right and that announcement was believed. Hence, though
Government has superior information, it must convince Public not only about the state of the
economy, but also about “what works.” Once it does that (that is, once it convinces Public
that the payoffs are those in Matrix 1 rather than Matrix 2), then it need simply announce the
state of the world, and a policy of low spending would be supported.

18

Since programs are economically complex, the public will never fully understand all the
details. Hence, there must be a degree of “trust” in the government. This can be attained by
generating a feeling of inclusion in the process.

- 12 Matrix 2
State of the world
Left

Right

Government program
High

2,2

1,1

Low

-1,-1

-2,-2

The “educational” function of public discussion may be especially important in
countries where IMF-supported programs have historically been viewed as “bitter pills
prescribed by the malevolent international financial community,” as represented by the
public belief in payoffs being described by Matrix 2. In these cases, public discussion has the
potential to help identify the truth by sifting through whatever valid or invalid inferences
have been drawn from historical experience.
Educating the public about causal relations may also be important to ensure
compliance with a program. A program may be successful only if the public complies with it,
which depends on their understanding of why it is beneficial. To illustrate, suppose “Left”
and “Right” in the previous two matrices now refer to actions Public may take, and High and
Low to actions Government takes. Government moves first, but knows how Public will react
(that is, whether the public will comply with a government program). Both Public’s and
Government’s actions are fully observable. Suppose the true payoffs are as in Matrix 3, but
Public believes that Matrix 2 represented the true payoffs. Public would then choose Left, no
matter what Government chose. Government would be induced to choose High. If Public
knew the true payoffs to their actions, it would choose Right—that is, to “comply” with a
program of low government spending.

- 13 Matrix 3
Public actions
Left

Right

High

2,2

1,1

Low

1,1

4,4

Government program

Consider, for example, a program of fiscal restraint that requires replacing
government supply of goods (high government spending) with reliance on the private sector
(low government spending) for supply. Success of the market solution requires public
compliance. Public willingness to rely on the market rather than government is represented
by Right rather than Left. Matrix 2 thus might represent public distrust of the market’s ability
to supply services, combined with an unwillingness to use the market. Public education thus
means educating the public on the value of greater reliance on the market when there is a
need to reduce the size of government, with Matrix 3 showing the value of the public acting
in accordance with this view.
The functions of public discussion in revealing information to the government and in
eliciting optimal public responses interact when public discussion enables the government to
learn about the resources the public has. That is, public discussion can also play an important
role in “educating the government” and identifying policy choices that are likely to be most
efficient, or elicit the greatest ownership, when there are a number of options. (We leave it to
the reader to combine the previous cases to demonstrate this formally.) Governments are
rarely (if ever) fully informed of the effects of their policies on society, and there are endless
examples of situations in which public discussion has made governments aware of adverse
policy effects on certain groups of society and of the possible desirability of policy
adjustments or compensating policy actions. This may be seen in the broad consultation that
takes place among stakeholders and development partners during the process of preparing
country strategy papers under the IMF and World Bank’s poverty reduction initiative. For
example, public discussion made governments aware of the regressive nature of local
graduated taxes in Uganda and commune-level revenue-raising measures in Vietnam; of the
effects of energy price liberalization on the livelihoods of fishing communities and low-paid
casual laborers who were heavily affected by transportation costs in Mozambique; and of the
scope for building ownership by addressing these public concerns.19 In addition to making
19

See Robb (2003, Box 3).

- 14 the government more aware of the effects of its policies, public discussion and participation
sometimes identify resources that can be mobilized to pursue policy objectives more
efficiently.20
Yet another function of public discussion is to induce the government to make a
greater commitment to a program and hence make it more credible that it will be carried
through. One way to think of this is in terms of solving a time consistency problem. By
taking publicly announced positions, the government changes the payoff structure associated
with following a given policy in order to commit itself to a specific course of action.
For example, following a severe banking and currency crisis that led to near
hyperinflation in early 1997, and in the context of negotiations with the IMF, the newly
elected president of Bulgaria engaged in discussions with major political parties to forge a
commitment to an economic program that included, inter alia, the introduction of a currency
board. The commitment that resulted from the discussions was formalized in a “declaration”
proclaiming the readiness of the major political parties to cooperate in fulfilling the
agreement with the IMF. Elections in April 1997 shifted political power to a new majority,
but the negotiated program continued to enjoy broad national ownership and was endorsed
by the new parliament.21
B. Case 2: Public uncertainty about government objectives
We now focus on the issue of uncertainty about the government’s objectives in the
design of a program. That is, the government faces the problem of convincing the public that
it is acting in the public’s best interests, rather than having its own “agenda.” Though the
imperfect information issues discussed in the previous case may still be present (that is,
where the government does not know the public’s preferences, etc.), we assume these away
in order to focus on the problem of the government making it credible to the public that it is
acting in the public’s best interests. We also continue to assume that the public is
homogeneous (though not necessarily informed about what policies would maximize its
welfare).
If the public believes that the government’s preferences are not correlated with its
own, then cheap talk may fail to convey information. Specifically, suppose that only
Government knows the state of the economy, High or Low, which Public cannot observe,
though it knows how the world works (that is, the true payoff matrix). Let us interpret More
and Less as Public’s action (say the level of wage demands). Public discussion (cheap talk)
precedes any actions, where Government announces the state of the economy.
We now assume that the government’s and the public’s objectives can differ, which
might reflect, for example, the weight Government puts on the reaction of global capital
markets. Hence, suppose that instead of a payoff matrix such as Matrix 1, payoffs were
20
21

See IMF (2003b)
See IMF (2001).

- 15 described by Matrix 4 (where Government’s payoff is listed first). In this case, Government
would like Public to play Less, no matter what the economic situation is. Hence, Government
would like Public to believe that the state of the economy is Low. But Public, knowing the
payoff matrix, knows Government has this incentive and so does not believe any
Government announcement. “Talk” doesn’t reveal Government’s information because it is
believed to have an objective other than maximization of social welfare—that is, to have
different preferences than those of Public.
Matrix 4
Public behavior
More

Less

High

1,3

5,1

Low

-6,-3

3,2

State of economy

However, even if the preferences of Government and Public are not perfectly
correlated, information can be conveyed, but the type of message sent will be crucial in
determining whether it is. Suppose, more realistically, that the state of the economy is not
discrete as in Matrix 4, but is continuous. Suppose the payoffs are such that Government
wants Public to believe that the state of the economy is somewhat worse than it really is
(perhaps to give the incentive to accept lower wages as part of a “tough” program). For
simplicity, suppose that if the state of the economy was S, Government would want Public to
believe that the state was S – x, where this incentive is known to Public. One might think that
cheap talk can convey no information here, since if Public discounts Government’s
announcement by some amount y (that is, in response to an announcement of S – x, Public
believes the state is S – x + y), Government will simply announce S – x – y.
A key result in the literature on cheap talk (Crawford and Sobel, 1982) is that
imprecise messages can convey information as long as the incentive to distort information (in
the example above, the amount x by which Government wants to understate S) is not too
large. That is, while a supposedly precise announcement of the state of the economy will not
be believed, a “crude” announcement of the state of the economy, such as simply High or
Low even when the state is continuous, will convey information.
This result has applications not only to cases in which Public is uncertain about
Government’s preferences, but also to cases in which Public knows that Government has

- 16 different preferences, as long as the difference in preferences is not too large. In such
situations, trying to get Public to comply with Government-recommended policies may be
difficult when the choice set includes a continuum of policies (for example, different degrees
of adjustment). However, presenting a choice between two discretely different alternatives
may allow Government to credibly convey its superior information to a skeptical Public and
thus gain acceptance of a program (roughly) tailored to the economic situation.
Such a situation is often encountered in IMF-supported programs—say, in fiscal
tightening in response to the state of the economy. Let the state of the economy be
continuous, with High and Low being very good or very bad states. The degree of possible
fiscal tightening is also continuous, but with Government and Public differing on what is
optimal in each state of the economy, owing to different discount rates for evaluating the
trade-offs between current costs and future benefits. Both parties know that Public discounts
the future more than does the Government. The Government has more information than the
Public about the economic situation, both ex ante or ex post, and Public’s support is required
for fiscal tightening.
The differences in discount rates gives Government an incentive to overstate the
seriousness of the economic situation by a discrete amount, and Public in turn is fully aware
of Government’s incentive. Suppose however that the Public is presented with a discrete
choice—either government enacts no policy change or a specific amount of fiscal tightening.
(One may think of the choice of either accepting or rejecting a specific IMF-supported
program.) Accordingly, if the difference between the discount rates of Government and
Public is not too large, Government’s characterization of the economic situation (cheap talk)
in combination with a choice restricted to two options can be successful in inducing Public to
accept the proposed amount of fiscal tightening.
On the other hand, if the difference between Government and Public preferences is
too large relative to the outcomes associated with the two choices, or—to return to the case
where Public is uncertain about Government’s preferences—if Public believes, rightly or
wrongly, that the difference between Government’s objectives and its own is sufficiently
large (that is, that Government has too strong an incentive to mislead Public), then cheap talk
cannot convey information.
When cheap talk provides no information, a government may need to use costly
signals to convey information about its preferences. For example, a government whose
objective is social welfare maximization may reveal this by taking actions that would not be
mimicked by a government with other objectives because the latter finds them too costly. In
formal terms, this is the issue of unobserved type, where one can think of two types of
governments: a “good” or social-welfare-maximizing government; and a “bad” or non-socialwelfare-maximizing government. How can a government whose objective is social welfare
maximization separate itself from one that has other objectives? For the “good” government
to care (and for the “bad” government to have an incentive to try to masquerade as a “good”
government), there must be a favorable response to the government, or its program, being
perceived as in the public interest. Such a response is present when public support is required
for programs to succeed and when the public complies only with programs that it either

- 17 perceives to be associated with a good government (i.e., accepts because it is associated with
a government it trusts) or is otherwise convinced to support.
Even when costly signals are used to reveal type, public discussion may play a role.
Jamaica provides an interesting example in which the government established “good”
credentials by taking the “costly” action of relinquishing IMF financial support and by
employing transparency (public discussion) to win support for a homegrown macroeconomic
program.22 Following three decades of heavy reliance on IMF support from the 1960s
through 1996, and while still facing very large adjustment problems, the government
declared its “independence from the IMF,” essentially rejecting the IMF’s push for a
devaluation to restore competitiveness along with workout measures for the financial sector.
It opted instead for its own strategy of tight fiscal and monetary policies, guarantees for bank
deposits and other liabilities, and a gradual approach to dealing with problem financial
institutions. The government also made a strong commitment to transparency by agreeing to
the publication of the IMF’s fairly critical Public Information Notice following the 1997
Article IV consultation,23 along with subsequent IMF reports, and by issuing its own
“commentaries” in which it emphasized both points of agreement and disagreement, thereby
fostering public debate. Although it is difficult to judge whether the government’s
homegrown approach was more appropriate than the IMF’s approach would have been in the
absence of political commitment, it is clear that the government succeeded in building a
strong degree of ownership for its homegrown program by putting its credibility on the line,
incurring the cost of foregoing IMF credit, and fostering public discussion through its
transparency policy.
When the government demonstrates its commitment to social welfare by choosing
policies favored by the public, another problem may arise. What if the authorities believe that
the public does not necessarily know what the best policy is? (The notion that a key function
of public discussion is to educate the public about economic realities presumes that this is
often the case.) A government that cares about social welfare faces a problem. Choosing the
policy that the public says it prefers enables the government to demonstrate that it has
ostensibly the same objectives as the public, but often at the cost of not maximizing the
public’s welfare! (This distinction is sometimes referred to as the difference between a
government being responsive to citizens’ expressed preferences and representative of public
preferences. See Manin, Przeworski, and Stokes, 1999. This suggests that the only effective
strategy that a “good” government can use to convince an uncertain public of its type is to
“educate” the public that it is indeed advocating a “good” program—that is, a set of policies
that is likely to generate attractive payoffs for the public relative to the payoffs associated
with other courses of action (or inaction).
Genuine public discussion may serve a purpose here that cannot be achieved through
simple announcement of policy or assertions about the economic realities on which policy is
22

See the discussion in Independent Evaluation Office (2002), Chapter 12, pp. 198-200.

23

PIN Number 97/28, October 2, 1997, available at www.imf.org.

- 18 based.24 The reason is that the requirement that positions be argued and justified to the public
(either directly or by convincing experts who have credibility with the public) will eliminate
some arguments as convincing rationale for policy. Exposing the (supposed) rationale for
policy to the cold light of open public debate and scrutiny can often reveal whether or not the
rationale is really social welfare maximization. (Fearon [1998] provides a nice discussion of
this point.) Public debate can thus serve the purpose of demonstrating unbiasedness or
revealing government type. The willingness itself to engage in public discussion may itself
signal that the government’s objective is maximization of social welfare, independent of any
information that public discussion reveals. “Good” programs may face a lower cost of
exposure to public discussion as they are more likely to survive public scrutiny. Public
discussion may thus have different costs for different types of governments, or different types
of programs.25
C. Case 3: The public is heterogeneous
In the third case, we focus on the role of public discussion when groups in society
have conflicting interests. Conflict among members of a society is central to political
economy in general (Drazen, 2000) and is a key problem in formulating reform and
stabilization programs. Though the problem of the public having imperfect information about
the government's preferences may be important here as well, we abstract from it to focus
more exclusively on how public discussion might help hammer out an acceptable program
when the public is heterogeneous. For the same reason, we also assume that the problem is
not that the government must make credible that its objective is social welfare maximization.
(Of course, there are interesting questions here—for example, the government must make
credible that it is not too closely aligned with one interest group, such as the financial sector.)
Suppose the public is divided into three groups: the “general” public; and two SIGs
(special interest groups) denoted “Green” and “Blue,” who must consent for a program to be
adopted. The general public is unorganized and lacks the power that the SIGs have to block
an IMF-supported program. The government may be seen as maximizing the welfare of the
general public. Here we focus on public discussion as revealing information about SIGs or
coordinating their actions. It might also weaken their ability to achieve “selfish” aims by
making it necessary for them to justify their demands, analogous to the discussion at the end
of Section IV.B.

24

In the examples of cheap talk, there is no real discussion or deliberation—the informed
party sends a single message to the uninformed party. This is not unique to these examples.
As Aumann and Hart (2003, p. 1619) point out, “Most formal models in this area [strategic
information transmission] allow for at most one message from each player.” They consider
multistage cheap talk (“long cheap talk”), but the application of their results to public
discussion is an issue yet to be explored.
25
However, the signal is less than perfect, both because some regimes seem adverse to public
discussion per se, and because public discussion may have adverse effects, as discussed in
the next section.

- 19 Getting the approval of SIGs may be seen as a coordination problem when it is not
known exactly what they might be willing to concede (though their general preferences are
known) or when there is initial disagreement about how the world works. Let’s start with the
simple reference case shown in Matrix 5. Each group must simultaneously choose an action,
and each perceives that the payoffs depend as follows on the different combinations of
actions. As in Matrix 4, public discussion—that is, an announcement by both Blue and Green
precedes any actions. Here, cheap talk works as a coordination device because there is no
real conflict of interest. If Blue announces that its interest is Down, then Green will clearly
want to say Right, and we get to a better solution than we could expect without
communication. In formal terms, Blue’s message is both self-signaling and self-committing.
It is self-signaling in that Blue wants to announce Down if and only if it is best. It is selfcommitting in that if Green believes Blue (which we just argued it should), the
announcement creates the incentive for Blue to actually carry it out. Public discussion has the
function of simply informing groups of where there may be common ground. If there is, then
the program adopted will be superior to what would be adopted in the absence of public
discussion.
Matrix 5
Green
Left

Right

Up

3,3

1,1

Down

1,1

3,3

Blue

Of course, this example is too simple because there is no conflict of interest, only a
problem of coordination. Farrell and Rabin (1996) point out that when the interests of SIGs
are not so potentially well-aligned, cheap talk messages are less likely to be self-signaling or
self-committing. A simple example is the well-known “prisoner’s dilemma,” where the
payoffs are as in Matrix 6. Cheap talk precedes simultaneous action by the two groups. Here,
for Blue it is optimal to choose Down for any choice Green makes, while for Green it is
optimal to choose Right for any choice Blue will make. Cheap talk will not allow them to
coordinate.26 Messages are not self-committing. Though one may argue that repeated play of
the game by the same players may lead to a cooperative solution, and that is what is seen in
26

It is argued that “players” in situations like this often play “cooperatively” and that
communication may have a coordinating effect. See footnote 14 in Farrell and Rabin (1996).

- 20 experimental studies (see the previous footnote), the basic message is clear: if SIGs see their
interests as sufficiently in conflict in relation to a stabilization program, public discussion in
the sense of simply exchanging information may have limited value.

Matrix 6
Green
Left

Right

Up

7,7

4,8

Down

8,4

5,5

Blue

An argument put forward in discussing Case 2 is relevant here as well. Public
discussion that requires interest groups to justify their demands may eliminate some claims
because they are unjustifiable in a setting of genuine, open discussion. Forums to elicit public
input and reaction to proposed programs may be effective in revealing useful information
only to the extent that they are not too “warm and fuzzy.” More exactly, eliciting credible
information about preferences of groups is not easy once the groups know they have strongly
conflicting objectives.
The situation is somewhat different when government and IMF actions (including
actions other than public discussion) can influence the payoffs that SIGs associate with
different outcomes. When the interaction is among SIGs, but the authorities can change the
payoff matrix, they could, for example, transform a prisoner’s dilemma as in Matrix 6 to a
coordination game as in Matrix 5. More concretely, the ability to modify proposed programs
and “sweeten the deal” for interest groups can be seen in this light. In the process of drafting
legislation that can get through national parliaments, this is common—amendments being
added to legislation to win the support of specific legislators or groups. IMF-supported
programs are often structured with similar political constraints in mind. When the ownership
problem is one of getting the political consent of powerful groups, building ownership may
in fact be identified with cases in which the cooperative outcome is made credible, as distinct
from cases in which it is not. We return to this issue in Section VI below.

- 21 D. Public discussion and democratic values
A very different, but important point is that public discussion can be instrumental in
strengthening democratic values, independent of the outcome of specific discussions. That is,
encouraging public discussion on one type of issue may increase the likelihood that public
discussion is used in other contexts as well. If the political culture is such that government
decisions are not generally subjected to public discussion—that is, if the paradigm of
deliberative democracy is not well-developed—then public discussion of economic policy
can have a valuable learning effect. This may well be the case in new democracies.27 An
outside body, such as the IMF, may be effective in fostering such a discussion in countries
where this tradition is weak or nonexistent.
V. DRAWBACKS OF PUBLIC DISCUSSION
Public discussion may have significant drawbacks as well. Przeworski (1998) and
Stokes (1998) have argued, for example, that when public discussion is followed by voting,
lobbyists and interest groups may have incentives to mislead voters in the process of public
discussion, such that voting actually becomes less informed rather than more informed. The
possibility that public discussion could cause people to be misled by SIGs is also present in
the context of program design, but we don’t think that this is the central problem of public
discussion of IMF-supported programs. In fact, the key drawbacks of public discussion in the
context of adopting an IMF-supported program may be quite different than the drawbacks of
discussion as a prelude to voting.
In the case of public acceptance of an IMF-supported program, one problem is that
public discussion may essentially give interest groups more veto power over a proposed
program, or a heightened awareness of adverse implications and stronger incentives to use
their veto power. To the extent that public discussion simply informs governments about the
public’s true preferences, as in Case 1 (where the public as a whole is seen as homogeneous),
discussion improves program design. But, when the public includes strong SIGs whose
interests are not those of the general public (Case 3), there is a danger that a policymaking
process that gives them too large a voice will result in a program that does not serve the
public good. Social welfare may thus be higher when the authorities make “take-it-or-leaveit” offers, rather than allowing public discussion to give too much influence to SIGs. This has
been a criticism, for example, of giving NGOs a large say in program design, where the
implicit assumption is that their interests do not necessarily reflect the broader public interest.
Second, public discussion can be time consuming and may slow the process of
shaping a program. This is potentially quite a serious problem when the economy is in crisis
27

Brender and Drazen (2004) find that political deficit cycles are far stronger in new
democracies than in established democracies and suggest that lack of availability and
analysis of information about the fiscal process may lead to this observed difference. They
also find that as a country gains experience with democracy, the political cycle disappears.
See also Akhmedov and Zhuravskaya (2003) for evidence of this effect in Russia after the
transition to democracy.

- 22 and a program needs to be put in place quickly. The problem of having exactly the “right
amount” of discussion is obviously a very difficult one that probably is not conducive to any
general rules. The right amount of public discussion will be very much situation specific.
Third, since programs may go through a lot of changes, making discussion public will
involve groups (and the government) in espousing positions that may subsequently be
rejected and even become viewed as incorrect. The costs of being put in such a situation may
induce groups to refrain from putting forward public positions at all, or to take positions in
public that differ from the positions they would put forward in private. Hence, public
discussion could actually greatly hinder information transmission relative to more
confidential means of discussion.
Fourth, since the discussion of IMF-supported programs tends to focus attention on a
country’s bad economic situation, making information public may in itself make the situation
even worse. Some types of information may “spook” financial markets and lead to major
capital outflows, making it even harder to design a successful program. This appears to be
the main concern expressed in relevant IMF Board meetings by those Executive Directors
who oppose full “transparency”—that is, who oppose full revelation of the IMF’s
information and/or concerns about countries.28
None of these concerns is easy to address, since they are all both genuine and
situation specific (and hence hard to address in any generality). They should not be taken as
arguments against public discussion per se, but only as cautions in considering how public
discussion of a program should be structured.
VI. THE DESIGN OF IMF-SUPPORTED PROGRAMS
The importance of national ownership is clearly recognized in the principles that
govern the design of IMF-supported programs. The IMF’s Guidelines on Conditionality,29 as
revised in September 2002, indicate that national authorities have the lead role in shaping
program documents30 and that the IMF should encourage countries to build broad support for
sound policies. Moreover, in association with the Guidelines, the set of general operational
instructions provided to IMF staff engaged in program design is based on five key principles:
(i) “national ownership of reform programs; (ii) parsimony in program conditions; (iii)
tailoring of programs to a member’s circumstances; (iv) effective coordination with other
multilateral institutions; and (v) clarity in the specification of conditions.”31
In moving from principles to procedures, the operational instructions emphasize that
IMF staff “should seek proposals from national authorities at an early stage in the policy
28

See IMF (2003c).
IMF (2002).
30
There is no requirement that country authorities draft program documents, but rather the
directive that the IMF staff be responsive when the authorities desire a greater role in the
drafting process.
31
IMF (2003a), paragraph 2.
29

- 23 dialogue.” They also stress that IMF staff “should encourage the authorities to engage in a
transparent participatory process in developing a policy framework, and should continue to
be prepared to assist the authorities in this process by giving seminars, meeting with various
interest or political groups (parliamentary committees, trade unions, business groups, etc.)
and by being available to the media...[while being mindful] of the authorities’ views on staff
contact with domestic groups....” In addition, the operational guidance note stresses that
documents prepared by the IMF staff in the course of briefing the IMF’s management and
reporting formally to the Executive Board should assess the challenges to broad ownership,
including key capacity weaknesses and issues relating to political structures. It also clarifies
the principle of parsimony in program conditions: performance criteria, prior actions, and
other program conditions must be limited to those that, if excluded, “would seriously threaten
the achievement of program goals or the IMF’s ability to monitor implementation.”32
The emphasis on ownership and transparent participatory processes in the recently
revised IMF Guidelines and guidance notes is consistent with the position of the IMF’s
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO). In its evaluation of cases in which IMF-supported
programs have not succeeded in weaning countries off the need for official financial support,
the IEO concluded that the extent and structure of program conditions was much less
important than securing an underlying commitment to core policy adjustments. It consistently
suggested that the aim in program design should be to move as quickly as possible to a
situation in which the core elements of a program are subject to a policy debate within the
country’s own policymaking institutions, and that the IMF staff should actively seek to
present policy options, analyze the trade-offs between them, and encourage open debate on
the alternatives.33
These recommendations are supported by case studies of Pakistan, the Philippines,
and Senegal, where lack of political commitment was a major factor in program failures, and
of Morocco and Jamaica, where a “real difference seems to have been made by strong
domestic ownership.”34
In the case of Senegal, for example, despite significant progress during the 1980s in
transforming the economy away from excessive state intervention, roughly one-third of the
measures envisioned under World Bank structural adjustment loans were not implemented as
scheduled. These measures were concentrated in areas such as labor regulations, where there
was strong opposition from vested interests, and where the government apparently made little
prior effort to generate public discussion and reach consensus on key issues. Senegal’s failure
to pursue adequate public discussion also contributed to a lack of clarity and progress in its
efforts to restructure the groundnut sector during the 1980s, which was a source of income
for the majority of the rural population and a key sector in the effort to reduce poverty.35
32

IMF (2003a), paragraphs 6 and 7.
Independent Evaluation Office (2002), pp. 12-14.
34
Independent Evaluation Office (2002), pp. 16-18.
35
Independent Evaluation Office (2002), Chapter 11, which cites reports of the World
Bank’s Operational Evaluation Department.
33

- 24 -

By contrast, in Morocco, where evaluation reports have found no major differences in
the approach to economic program design from that followed in other countries with IMFsupported programs, “increasing transparency in putting information and policies out for
public discussion … appears to have helped develop a broader consensus [for reform]” and
was a critical factor in weaning the country from prolonged reliance on IMF loans.36
Despite the heightened awareness of the importance of country ownership and the
relevance of public discussion (“participation”), most references to public discussion or
participation in IMF documents are cast in broad terms, with little or no explicit recognition
of the different functions that public discussion can serve, and little or no explicit focus on
which specific functions it can usefully serve in specific circumstances. Of course, IMF staff
rarely engage in public discussion without advanced brainstorming or other forms of
preparation, which often is not reflected in any written documents; and it would be
misleading to suggest that IMF staff engage in public discussion without a fairly clear
implicit sense of what they are trying to achieve. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of public
discussion in building and assessing ownership of IMF-supported programs might be
significantly enhanced by greater awareness of the range of functions that public discussion
can serve and a more systematic focus on strategies for engaging in public discussion in
specific circumstances.
Although public discussion can enhance ownership in various ways, it would be
misleading to suggest that discussion alone can induce complete ownership of IMFsupported programs. Many of the countries that seek to negotiate IMF-supported programs
require fiscal adjustment to restore and maintain macroeconomic stability. Because such
adjustment necessarily leaves some interest groups worse off in the short run, complete
ownership of the fiscal components of IMF-supported programs is generally difficult to
achieve. Nevertheless, public discussion in this context—with sufficient efforts to keep it
well-focused—can be particularly important for building ownership by educating the public
about the overall economy-wide benefits of fiscal adjustment in the short run, about
prospects that the benefits will be widely shared over the medium run, and about the gains
from a cooperative solution that elicits financial support from the IMF and other sources. It
can also contribute to building ownership by helping governments find the type of
cooperative solution or policy mix that stands the best chance of sustaining political
support—particularly so when the IMF gives policymakers broad freedom to design the
specific details of the fiscal adjustment effort. In this context, it may be very important for
the IMF to refrain from pressuring governments to adopt policies that are appealing on
efficiency grounds but typically provoke strong public resentment, such as raising or
eliminating ceilings on the price of necessities.
Despite these various ways that public discussion can enhance ownership of fiscal
adjustment policies, it cannot overcome the fact that various interest groups may continue to
have incentives to seek to benefit in the short run by undermining the fiscal adjustment effort.
36

Independent Evaluation Office (2002), Chapter 12, page 196.

- 25 This is why the effectiveness of many IMF-supported programs depends critically on
appropriate prior conditions, fiscal performance criteria, and the phased provision of IMF
credit.37
Although public discussion on its own cannot achieve complete ownership of
programs for countries in which the restoration of macroeconomic stability requires fiscal
adjustment, IMF-supported programs need not be (and generally are not) limited to policy
actions that impose short-run costs. Indeed, one approach to enhancing the overall ownership
of IMF-supported programs is to try to counteract conditions that impose short-run costs with
conditions that the public correctly perceives to convey major benefits. In this context, public
discussion—through many of the functions it can serve (e.g., eliciting information about
what the public wants, educating the public, educating the government and the IMF,
revealing that the government is indeed oriented toward maximizing social welfare, leading
heterogeneous interests to a cooperative solution)—may well be able to strengthen the
overall ownership of programs by building virtually complete support for various types of
structural measures (e.g., clarification of property rights, strengthening of tax-collection
mechanisms and accounting standards) that do not impose costs on any powerful interest
groups, at least in the context of a “good government” where there is little or no inherent
incentive to oppose important growth-enhancing structural reforms.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
There has been growing recognition in recent years that the effectiveness of IMFsupported programs depends importantly on the degree of country ownership, and that
ownership can be promoted by seeking to broaden and deepen the base of support for sound
policies among a country’s domestic interest groups. These perceptions are reflected both in
the September 2002 revision of the IMF’s Guidelines for Conditionality (IMF, 2002) and in
the international community’s decision to link debt-relief for highly indebted poor countries
(HIPCs) to the formulation of poverty reduction strategies through processes that involve the
broad participation of stakeholders.
This paper has focused on public discussion as one potentially important vehicle for
enhancing program ownership, where the functions of public discussion are summarized at
the beginning of Section III. The motivation comes from our sense that economists do not yet
have a very clear understanding of the various channels through which public discussion can
work, or of the types of circumstances in which public discussion can be effective. This lack
of understanding has contributed to the view—held in some quarters—that public discussion
37

The time dimension of IMF-supported programs provides an interesting direction for
further thought on the role of public discussion. In particular, given that the IMF is often
criticized for being too willing to waive or modify performance criteria (not being a
sufficiently “tough cop”), it is interesting to consider whether public discussion that starts at
the time of the initial request for financing can strengthen compliance with program
conditions by making it more credible that the IMF will say “no” on test dates for subsequent
installments of financing when governments breach the conditions established at the outset of
their programs.

- 26 strengthens ownership primarily by leading counterproductively to the adoption of weaker
programs. More seriously, failure to appreciate and distinguish between the range of
functions that public discussion can serve and the circumstances that determine its
effectiveness or ineffectiveness in those functions implies that country governments and the
IMF may not be exploiting the potential of public discussion in the most effective ways. A
better understanding of public discussion can contribute to the effort to design strong
programs that can command broad country ownership. We have argued, primarily by way of
example in illustrating the functions that public discussion may serve, that it can in fact be an
important tool in raising the probability of program success.
It would be wishful thinking, however, to suggest that public discussion alone can
lead to complete ownership of a program that imposes significant costs in the short-run.
Those interest groups that stand to incur the short-run costs pose significant risks to the
adjustment effort in the absence of appropriately structured conditionality that provides
financial incentives for countries to remain in compliance with their policy commitments.
Moreover, as we argued in Section V, there are drawbacks to public discussion, especially in
the presence of strong interest groups.
By contrast, public discussion may be able to achieve virtually complete ownership of
growth-enhancing structural reforms that impose no significant costs in either the short run or
the longer run. Accordingly, public discussion has the potential to contribute importantly to
growth by inducing the public to want to pursue more growth-enhancing structural reforms
as parts of their policy programs. In principle, program conditionality is not necessary for
achieving compliance when there is complete ownership of reforms, although in practice it
may be useful for spurring progress.
Ironically, the efforts that the IMF has made to build program ownership by
streamlining conditionality in recent years appear to have shifted the focus of IMF-supported
programs away from the types of growth-enhancing structural policies on which ownership
would seem relatively easy to build. We attribute this in part to the limited attention that
economists have paid to the concept of ownership and to the process of building ownership
through public discussion.

- 27 REFERENCES
Akhmedov, A. and E. Zhuravskaya, 2003, “Opportunistic Political Cycles: Test in a Young
Democracy Setting,” Working Paper.
Aumann, R. and S. Hart, 2003, “Long Cheap Talk,” Econometrica, Vol. 71, pp. 1619–60.
Boughton, J. and A. Mourmouras, 2002, “Is Policy Ownership An Operational Concept?”
IMF Working Paper 02/72.
Brender, A. and A. Drazen, 2004, “Political Budget Cycles in New versus Established
Democracies,” NBER Working Paper 10539.
Crawford, V. and J. Sobel, 1982, “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica,
Vol. 50, pp. 1431–51.
Drazen, A., 2000, Political Economy in Macroeconomics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press).
_______, 2002, “Conditionality and Ownership in IMF Lending: A Political Economy
Approach,” IMF Staff Papers 49 (Special Issue).
Elster, J., ed., 1998a, Deliberative Democracy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press).
______ , 1998b, “Introduction,” in Elster, J., ed., Deliberative Democracy.
Farrell, J. and M. Rabin, 1996, “Cheap Talk,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10,
pp. 103–18.
Fearon, J., 1998, “Deliberation as Discussion,” in Elster, J., ed., Deliberative Democracy.
Habermas, J., 1987, Theory of Communicative Action (Boston: Beacon Press).
Independent Evaluation Office, 2002, Evaluation of the Prolonged Use of Fund Resources
(Washington: International Monetary Fund), available at www.imf.org.
International Monetary Fund, 2001, “Strengthening Country Ownership of Fund-Supported
Programs,” December 5, available at www.imf.org.
——— , 2002, “Guidelines on Conditionality,” September 25, available at www.imf.org.
——— , 2003a, “Operational Guidance on the New Conditionality Guidelines,” May 8,
available at www.imf.org.
——— , 2003b, “Chad: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper,” IMF Country Report No. 03/209
(July), available at www.imf.org.

- 28 -

——— , 2003c, “IMF Reviews the Fund’s Transparency Policy—Issues and Next Steps,”
Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 03/122 (October 10), available at www.imf.org.
Manin, B., A. Przeworski, and S.C. Stokes, 1999, “Elections and Representation,” in A.
Przeworski, S.C. Stokes, and B. Manin, eds., Democracy, Accountability, and
Representation (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).
Mussa, M. and M. Savastano, 2000, “The IMF Approach to Economic Stabilization,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1999 (Cambridge: MIT Press), pp. 79–122.
Przeworski, A., 1998, “Deliberation and Ideological Domination,” in Elster, J., ed.,
Deliberative Democracy.
Robb, C.M., 2003, “Poverty and Social Impact Analysis—Linking Macroeconomic Policies
to Poverty Outcomes: Summary of Early Experiences,” IMF Working Paper 03/43.
Stokes, S.C., 1998, “Pathologies of Deliberation,” in Elster, J., ed., Deliberative Democracy.
Wimmer, A. I. de Soysa, and C. Wagner, 2002, “Political Science Tools for Assessing
Feasibility and Sustainability of Reforms,” paper prepared for the Independent
Evaluation Office (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

