                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE STEADY-STATE GROWTH THEOREM:
                               A COMMENT ON UZAWA (1961)

                                             Charles I. Jones
                                             Dean Scrimgeour

                                          Working Paper 10921
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10921


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Charles I. Jones and Dean Scrimgeour. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Steady-State Growth Theorem: A Comment on Uzawa (1961)
Charles I. Jones and Dean Scrimgeour
NBER Working Paper No. 10921
November 2004
JEL No. E1, O4

                                          ABSTRACT

This brief note revisits the proof of the Steady-State Growth Theorem, first provided by Uzawa

(1961). We provide a clear statement of the theorem and a new version of Uzawa's proof that makes

the intuition underlying the result more apparent.

Charles I. Jones
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
chad@econ.berkeley.edu

Dean Scrimgeour
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
dscrim@econ.berkeley.edu
2                 CHARLES I. JONES AND DEAN SCRIMGEOUR


                              1. INTRODUCTION
    The Steady-State Growth Theorem says that if a neoclassical growth
model exhibits steady-state growth, then technical change must be la-
bor augmenting, at least in steady state.1 It did not escape the attention
of economists, either in the 1960s or more recently, that this is a very
restrictive theorem. We often want our models to exhibit steady-state
growth, but why should technical change be purely labor-augmenting?
The induced-innvoation literature associated with Fellner (1961), Kennedy
(1964), Samuelson (1965), and Drandakis and Phelps (1966) explicitly pon-
dered this question without achieving a clear answer. Recently, Acemoglu
(2003) and Jones (2004) have returned to this puzzle.
    Perhaps surprisingly, then, given its importance in the growth literature,
we have been unable to find a clear statement and proof of the theorem.
Uzawa (1961) is typically credited with the proof of the result, 2 and there
is no doubt that he proved the theorem. However, Uzawa is primarily con-
cerned with showing the equivalence of Harrod-neutral technical change
(i.e. technical change that leaves the capital share unchanged if the inter-
est rate is constant) and labor-augmenting technical change, formalizing
the graphical analysis of Robinson (1938). It is of course, only a small and
well-known step to show that steady-state growth requires technical change
to be Harrod neutral. But again, the modern reader of Uzawa will be struck
by the absence of a statement and direct proof of the steady-state growth
theorem.
    Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995, Chapter 2) come closest to providing a
clear statement and proof of the theorem. However, their statement of the

  1
    It is sometimes added that an alternative is for the production function to be Cobb-
Douglas, at least in steady state. But this is really subsumed in the original version of
the theorem since technical change can always be written in the labor-augmenting form in
steady state if the production function is Cobb-Douglas.
  2
    For example, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) and Solow (1999).
                  THE STEADY-STATE GROWTH THEOREM                            3

theorem is more restrictive: if technical change is factor augmenting at a
constant exponential rate, then steady-state growth requires it to be labor-
augmenting. This leaves open the door, however slightly, to the possibility
that there might be some perverse non-factor augmenting twist of technical
change that could be consistent with steady-state growth.
  This comment fills the gap in the literature. We provide a clear statement
and proof of the steady-state growth theorem. The inspiration for the proof
is Uzawa (1961), but we present the crucial steps in a slightly different way
that allows the economic intuition for the proof to come through.


                     2. STATING THE THEOREM
  The steady-state growth theorem applies to the one-sector neoclassical
growth model. We begin by defining the model precisely and then defining
a balanced growth path.
  Definition 2.1. A neoclassical growth model is given by the follow-
ing economic environment:

                             Yt = F (Kt , Lt ; t),                         (1)

                 K̇t = Yt − Ct − δKt , K0 > 0, δ ≥ 0,                      (2)
and

                       Lt = L0 ent , L0 > 0, n ≥ 0.                        (3)

The production function F satisfies the standard neoclassical properties:
constant returns to scale in K and L, positive and diminishing marginal
products of K and L, and the Inada conditions that the marginal product of
a factor input goes to zero as that input goes to infinity and goes to infinity
as the input goes to zero.


  A balanced growth path in the neoclassical growth model is defined as a
situation in which all quantities grow at constant exponential rates (possibly
4                CHARLES I. JONES AND DEAN SCRIMGEOUR


zero) forever. We follow the usual convention of also refering to this as a
steady state.
    Finally, we will define FK K/Y to be the capital share and FL L/Y to
be the labor share. As usual, the two factor shares sum to a value of unity,
by Euler’s theorem. We follow standard notation in denoting y ≡ Y /L
and k ≡ K/L, and we will use an asterisk superscript to denote a variable
along the steady-state path.
    With these definitions, we can now present the Steady-State Growth The-
orem:

    Theorem 2.1 (The Steady-State Growth Theorem, Uzawa 1961).               If
a neoclassical growth model possesses a steady state with constant, nonzero
factor shares and ẏt∗ /yt∗ = g > 0, then it must be possible along the steady-
state path to write the production function as Yt∗ = G(Kt∗ , At Lt ), where
Ȧt /At = g and where G is a neoclassical production function.


    Before presenting the theorem, we pause to make several remarks. First,
the restriction to the case of positive factor shares is primarily intended
to rule out “AK” style models. Second, as is well-known, in the case of
Cobb-Douglas production, capital- and labor-augmenting technical change
are equivalent. One sometimes sees the theorem interpreted as saying
that technical change must be labor-augmenting or the production function
must be Cobb-Douglas. This is equivalent to the statement of the theorem
as given.
                      THE STEADY-STATE GROWTH THEOREM                                        5

                         3. PROVING THE THEOREM
  This proof largely follows Uzawa (1961) in spirit. It differs in that we
provide more economic intuition, highlight the key steps of the proof more
clearly, and fill in some details.3
  The capital-output ratio is a key variable throughout the proof, so we de-
fine x ≡ K/Y . We also make the standard definition f (k; t) ≡ F (k, 1; t).
  The proof now follows.

  1. The first step of the proof is to rewrite the production function in terms
of the capital-output ratio: yt = φ(xt ; t). Intuitively, this step is readily
understood by drawing the production function in (k, y) space: for each
ray through the origin — that is for each capital-output ratio — there is a
unique level of output per worker on that ray.4
  2. Next, we note that the elasticity of yt with respect to xt satisfies a
familiar property:

                                ∂ log yt     α(xt ; t)
                                         =                                                  (4)
                                ∂ log xt   1 − α(xt ; t)
  3
    The only substantive innovation in the proof is in writing the key differential equation
in (4) below in terms of the elasticity of output with respect to the capital-output ratio. This
produces a familiar equation in a way that Uzawa’s consideration of the marginal product
of capital does not.
  4
    Formally, we can use the inverse function theorem to justify this step. The capital-
output ratio depends only on kt and t, since yt is a function of kt and t: xt = kt /yt =
k/f (kt ; t) ≡ h(kt ; t). We can apply the inverse function theorem to show that this function
can be inverted:
                        ∂h(kt ; t)      1       kt fk (kt ; t)
                                   =          −
                          ∂kt        f (k; t)    f (kt ; t)2
                                                                             
                                            1                 fk (kt ; t)kt
                                    =                    1−
                                        f (kt ; t)             f (kt ; t)
                                    6= 0 ∀kt ,

 where the last step follows from the fact that the labor share is strictly between zero
and one. Therefore, by the inverse function theorem, h−1 (· ; t) exists, and we can write
kt = h−1 (xt ; t). Finally, we can substitute this result into the production function to get
yt = f (kt ; t) = f (h−1 (xt ; t), t) ≡ φ(xt ; t).
6                   CHARLES I. JONES AND DEAN SCRIMGEOUR


where α(xt ; t) ≡ fk kt /yt is the capital share. This equation says that the
elasticity of output with respect to the capital-output ratio is equal to the
ratio of the capital and labor shares. Such an equation is well-known in the
case of Cobb-Douglas production, where it has been exploited by Mankiw,
Romer and Weil (1992), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), and Hall and
Jones (1999), among others. Equation (4) shows that this property holds
more generally.5
    3. Now comes the key step of the proof. From this point on, we assume
the economy is on a balanced growth path. Because the capital share is
constant in steady state, the right side of equation (4) is invariant over time.
Then, since yt = φ(xt ; t), we can write this equation as

                             ∂ log φ(x∗ ; t)     α(x∗ )
                                             =            ,                                (5)
                                ∂ log x∗       1 − α(x∗ )
where we use an asterisk to indicate a quantity along a balanced growth
path.

        Because the right-hand side of this equation does not depend on time,
this partial differential equation can be solved to yield6
                                                        α(x∗ ) dx∗
                                                  Z
                      log φ(x∗ ; t) = a(t) +                                               (6)
                                                      1 − α(x∗ ) x∗

for some function a(t). And therefore

                             yt∗ = φ(x∗ ; t) = A(t)ψ(x∗ ),                                 (7)
                                                             R                 
                                                                   α(x∗ ) dx∗
where A(t) ≡ exp(a(t)) > 0 and ψ(x∗ ) ≡ exp                       1−α(x∗ ) x∗       .

        This is the crucial result. We’ve shown that the effects of t and x ∗ can be
separated. This implies, for example, the familiar result that y t∗ /At = x∗ is

    To derive this equation, begin with kt = yt xt . This implies that dkt /kt = dyt /yt +
    5

dxt /xt . Multiply through by y/dy to get dk   t yt
                                             dyt kt
                                                           dxt yt
                                                    = 1 + dy  t xt
                                                                   , which can be rearranged to
yield the desired result.
  6
    This can be readily verified by differentiating the solution.
                        THE STEADY-STATE GROWTH THEOREM                               7

constant along a balanced growth path, where At ≡ A(t). Since yt∗ grows
at rate g by assumption, it must therefore be the case that Ȧt /At = g as
well.
  4. To conclude the proof, note that k = xy, so that
                         kt∗  y∗      yt∗                          yt∗
                                                                  
                             = t ψ −1                 ≡ G̃−1           .             (8)
                         At   At      At                           At

Inverting7 , we have
                                        yt∗      kt∗
                                                         
                                            = G̃                                     (9)
                                        At       At
and therefore
                                        Kt∗
                                                 
                       Yt∗   = At Lt G̃               ≡ G(Kt∗ , At Lt ).            (10)
                                        A t Lt
And this proves the key result: technical change is labor-augmenting along
the balanced growth path. Finally, since Yt∗ = F (Kt∗ , Lt ; t) = G(Kt∗ , At Lt ),
it must be the case that G satisfies the standard neoclassical properties as
well.



                                     4. DISCUSSION
  Here’s the one paragraph version of the proof. The crux of the proof is
step 3 above. To begin, we notice that the familiar Cobb-Douglas property
also holds more generally: the elasticity of output per worker with respect
 7
     To show invertibility, differentiate:

                               G̃−1 (z) = zψ −1 (z)
                                  dG̃−1                dψ −1 (z)
                              ⇒         = ψ −1 (z) + z
                                   dz                     dz
                                                    z
                                        = ψ −1 + dψ 
                                                       dx
                                             > 0 ∀z > 0

as ψ = y/A is always positive and dψ/dx is also always positive. So G̃(·) exists.
8                CHARLES I. JONES AND DEAN SCRIMGEOUR


to the capital-output ratio is α(x; t)/(1 − α(x; t)). Then, the fact that the
capital share must be constant in steady state means that the production
function must be factorable. That is, it must be possible, at least in steady
state, to write the production function as yt = A(t)ψ(x). But this means
that y/A and k/A must be constant as well, and one can really just look
at the production function y/A = F (k/A, 1/A; t) to see that this requires
technical change to be labor augmenting. The intuition that is closest to the
spirit of this proof, then, is that technical change must be labor-augmenting
in order to keep the capital share constant.
    A related intuition can be obtained by looking at the marginal product of
capital. Because both the capital-output ratio and the capital share must be
constant in steady state, we know the marginal product of capital must be
constant as well. This marginal product is F1 (K, L; t) = F1 (k/y, 1/y; t)
since the marginal product is homogeneous of degree zero in the factor
inputs. Since k/y is constant in steady state and y grows at a constant
exponential rate, technical change must exactly offset the fact that “effective
labor” is falling at the rate of growth of y. That is, technical change must
be labor-augmenting. If this were not the case, then the marginal product
of capital would trend over time.


                              REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, “Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change,” Journal
   of European Economic Association, March 2003, 1, 1–37.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Drandakis, E.M. and Edmund S. Phelps, “A Model of Induced Invention, Growth,
   and Distribution,” Economic Journal, December 1966, 76 (304), 823–840.
Fellner, William, “Two Propositions in the Theory of Induced Innovations,” Eco-
    nomic Journal, 1961, 71 (282), 305–308.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
    More Output per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    February 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.
                   THE STEADY-STATE GROWTH THEOREM                             9

Jones, Charles I., “The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Tech-
    nical Change,” April 2004. U.C. Berkeley mimeo.
Kennedy, Charles M., “Induced Bias in Innovation and the Theory of Distribution,”
   Economic Journal, September 1964, 74 (295), 541–547.
Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
   Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg,
   eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, “A Contribution to the Em-
   pirics of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1992, 107
   (2), 407–438.
Robinson, Joan, “The Classification of Inventions,” Review of Economic Studies,
   February 1938, 5 (2), 139–142.
Samuelson, Paul A., “A Theory of Induced Innovations Along Kennedy-Weisacker
   Lines,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1965, 47, 343–356.
Solow, Robert M., “Neoclassical Growth Theory,” in John Taylor and Michael
   Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, New York: Elsevier, 1999.
Uzawa, Hirofumi, “Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium,”
   Review of Economic Studies, February 1961, 28 (2), 117–124.
