                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FDI IN SPACE: SPATIAL AUTOREGRESSIVE RELATIONSHIPS
                          IN FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                           Bruce A. Blonigen
                                           Ronald B. Davies
                                            Glen R. Waddell
                                           Helen T. Naughton

                                         Working Paper 10939
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10939


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We thank Peter Egger, Eric Strobl, participants at the Fall 2004 Mid-West International Economics Group
meeting and participants at the DIW/GEP Workshop on FDI and International Outsourcing. Any errors or
omissions are the responsibilities of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Bruce A. Blonigen, Ronald B. Davies, Glen R. Waddell, Helen T. Naughton. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
FDI in Space: Spatial Autoregressive Relationships in Foreign Direct Investment
Bruce A. Blonigen, Ronald B. Davies, Glen R. Waddell, Helen T. Naughton
NBER Working Paper No. 10939
December 2004
JEL No. F21, F23

                                           ABSTRACT

Theoretical models of foreign direct investment (FDI) have only recently begun to model the role

of third countries, and the empirical FDI literature has almost exclusively examined bilateral FDI

data without recognizing the potential interdependence between FDI decisions to alternative host

countries. This paper uses spatial econometric techniques to examine the spatial correlation between

FDI to alternative (neighboring) regions. The sign of such correlations can provide evidence for or

against alternative theories for FDI motivations. Using data on OECD countries from 1980-2000,

we find evidence consistent with export platform FDI in Europe.

Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

Ronald B. Davies
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
rdavies@uoregon.edu

Glen R. Waddell
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
waddell@uoregon.edu

Helen T. Naughton
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
htammela@darkwing.uoregon.edu
1. Introduction

       Since 1980, worldwide foreign direct investment (FDI) has grown at a remarkable rate.

According to Markusen (2002), in the latter half of the 1990s FDI flows grew by nearly 32

percent. When compared to the 1.5 percent increase in exports and the 0.6 percent increase in

world GDP, it comes as no surprise that increasing attention has been devoted to the

determinants of FDI. The bulk of the theory on the creation of multinational enterprises (MNEs)

stems from the general equilibrium models of Markusen (1984) and Helpman (1984) which use

two-country frameworks. Since these early models, the literature has progressed to richer

general equilibrium models that allow for more complex forms of imperfect competition (e.g.,

Markusen, 2002; Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple, 2004). Nevertheless, most FDI models maintain

the simple two-country, two-factor framework.

       With the advent of these richer models, there has also been recent recognition in the

theoretical literature that the complex motivations for FDI likely require modeling in a

multilateral context, a context in which an MNE considers home, host, and third country

characteristics when choosing firm activities. If FDI into a particular country stems only from a

market-access motive to substitute for trade flows (simple horizontal FDI), then a bilateral

country framework is likely sufficient to explain patterns in FDI data. However, other

motivations certainly exist. For example, an MNE may use a host country as a low-cost “export

platform” to other nearby markets. In fact, evidence on US FDI in Ireland suggests that as much

as 94 percent of production is intended for export, 76 percent of which is bound for the European

Union (IDA, 2004). Recent work by Ekholm, Forslid, and Markusen (2003), Yeaple (2003), and

Bergstrand and Egger (2004) formalize this export platform FDI. Alternatively, an MNE may

set up its vertical chain of production across countries to exploit the comparative advantages of

various locales. In either case, these possibilities each suggest that FDI decisions are multilateral

in nature and are therefore not accounted for by a two-country FDI model. By extension,
                                                                                                    1
observed FDI patterns are likely to be better captured by empirical specifications that take direct

account of the interdependence implied.

        Like much of the theoretical literature, an inherent assumption of almost all empirical

work on FDI has been that MNE decisions are bilateral in nature with no interdependence

between host destinations. Most empirical FDI analysis constructs bilateral panel data of FDI

activity and specifies a list of gravity regressors that include the GDP of the host and home

countries as well as distance between the home and host country. While recent work by Carr,

Markusen and Maskus (2001) has introduced a modified gravity framework that is more

grounded in theory, this work also relies on bilateral transaction data to estimate the efficacy of

the theoretical predictions. The difficulty in this is that using bilateral panels to estimate FDI

patterns is only consistent with an underlying theory where FDI into a particular host country is

independent of FDI into alternative host countries. As the above models suggest, the decision of

which location is best suited for either an export platform or a stage of a vertical chain is a

multilateral, comparative decision that creates interdependence among the observed bilateral FDI

observations.

        Importantly, the above alternative scenarios can imply different relationships between

FDI locations. In the export platform models, plant-level fixed costs create more incentive to

have a single plant in one country and less incentive to expand into nearby countries. Of course,

these savings must be balanced against trade costs that increase with distance, implying that the

degree of substitutability is a decreasing function of distance. Agglomeration economies with

respect to other US investments, on the other hand, suggest that proximity to other FDI increases

the incentive to invest in nearby countries.1



1
  Agglomeration externalities may occur between any firms, but what matters in our context here would be such
externalities between US investment and US firms in neighboring countries. See Blomström and Kokko (1998), for
example, for a general discussion of how agglomeration economies may arise in the context of FDI.

                                                                                                             2
       There are a few notable exceptions in the empirical FDI literature that have modeled or

otherwise examined the influence of third markets on FDI to a host country. Head and Mayer

(2004) examine Japanese FDI patterns into regions of developed Europe with a particular focus

on the measurement of market potential that extends beyond the host region. In particular, in

addition to the standard inclusion of host GDP, they include the GDPs of adjacent regions in an

empirical specification for Japanese plant location in Europe. They find that both regions with

high GDPs and regions surrounded by large markets tend to attract more FDI. In contrast, Head,

Ries, and Swenson (1995) focus on patterns of related producers in third markets in their

examination of Japanese affiliate locations in US states. Their conditional logit empirical

specification explicitly models interdependence of the location decisions across all possible

locales. They find evidence of agglomeration effects between bordering states, primarily for the

automobile industry. However, they do not include measures to control for the size of

surrounding markets.

       In this paper we take a more general look at the potential interdependence of FDI across

possible host countries by estimating spatial autoregressive models of FDI, precisely suited for

estimating the effect of FDI activity in proximate regions on FDI in another focus region. As a

result, we are not imposing structure to isolate one particular multilateral effect, such as

agglomeration or vertical specialization, but rather estimating the net effect of such forces. A

primary benefit of this estimation procedure relative to conditional logit is that spatial

autoregression allows us to consider the (log) level of FDI rather than the discrete location

choice. This provides us both with new information regarding the impact of agglomeration and

substitution effects as well as estimates that are more comparable to the bulk of the FDI literature

which considers the level of FDI activity. Furthermore, we consider distance effects that extend

beyond bordering locations, something Head, Ries, and Swenson (1995) do not do.



                                                                                                   3
         We estimate our spatial model of FDI using data on US outbound FDI to a panel of

OECD countries from 1980 through 2000. We limit our focus to the OECD for at least two

reasons. First, these countries account for the lion’s share of FDI in the world. In particular, for

the years in our sample, on average these countries hosted 91 percent of US outbound FDI.

Second, focusing on the OECD is also likely to limit vertical specialization as a primary

motivation of FDI allowing us to better disentangle the factors behind any spatial

interdependence. In fact, Blonigen and Davies (2004) find substantial structural differences in

the determinants of FDI in developed versus less-developed countries. As a result, pooling the

rich and poor countries leads to significantly-biased point estimates.

         Our results show that spatial relationships between potential host countries matter

significantly. Initial estimates suggest that there is a significant positive correlation between FDI

to a country and the FDI that neighboring countries receive. This would be consistent with either

international agglomeration economies or third market demand effects. However, we find that

this result is sensitive to the inclusion of variables capturing the market potential of a host (i.e.,

the size of proximate third country markets). If a region’s FDI is positively correlated with its

own market size, as most existing studies of FDI report, then omitting controls for market

potential will tend to bias the estimated coefficient on the spatial relationship upwards.

Consistent with our priors, we do find that the spatial estimates decline significantly after

controlling for market potential. In fact, when we focus on Europe and include a measure of

market potential, we find a strong negative correlation between FDI in proximate countries. This

pattern of substitution between industrialized countries of Europe, after controlling for market

demand in neighboring countries, provides perhaps the strongest evidence to date of export

platform FDI.2


2
 To be clear, there are two necessary conditions for evidence of export platform FDI. The first is that FDI will be
attracted to countries that are located near other valuable markets because these locations make good platforms for

                                                                                                                      4
         Only two other papers have used spatial econometric techniques to examine FDI activity

to our knowledge.3 Coughlin and Segev (2000) consider US FDI across Chinese provinces and

find a positive spatial lag coefficient, attributing this to agglomeration economies. However,

they do not include controls for the market size of surrounding regions as we do, thus this result

may be indicative of the importance of including market potential as a regressor, rather than of

agglomeration externalities.4 Baltagi, Egger and Pfaffermayr (2004) focus on US outbound FDI

for seven manufacturing industries across both developed and less-developed destinations and

find evidence for a negative spatial lag coefficient which is consistent with export platform FDI

for the industries that comprise their sample. By way of contrast, in line with most existing work

on FDI, we use country level data. Furthermore, we restrict ourselves to the developed countries

in order to better compare the horizontal and export platform models.

         An alternative to using FDI data to examine this issue is to consider the exports of

affiliates directly. Unfortunately, the data made available by the BEA do not specify to what

extent these flows are meant for immediate distribution to consumer markets or as intermediate

inputs. The former would be more consistent with an export platform model, whereas the latter

would be connected with a vertical specialization/fragmentation model, which would have quite

different implications for the spatial lag as we discussed earlier. Thus, given the available data,

the use of spatial econometrics using FDI data is a useful method of testing current models.




reaching these third countries. The second is that, in the presence of plant-level fixed costs, FDI in one country acts
as a substitute for FDI into other countries since the MNE can more cheaply export from a single, well-situated
subsidiary. Thus, in order to test for export platform FDI, it is necessary to control for both spatial lags and market
potential.
3
  In fact, we are aware of only one other paper applying spatial methods to trade issues. Keller and Shiue
(forthcoming) analyze 18th-century trade patterns within China. Given the considerable interest in issues of trade and
distance in the international economics (e.g., Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003; Redding and Venables, 2004) and
the usefulness of spatial econometrics in their study, we hope that our paper fosters additional use of spatial
techniques.
4
  In addition, they only consider FDI into a single country whereas we use a panel of twenty hosts. Furthermore,
one can ask whether data originating in a centrally-planned economy such as China is representative of overall FDI
patterns.

                                                                                                                     5
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss

hypotheses concerning the implications of various models of multinational firm behavior for

spatial relationships between FDI into various regions. Section 3 provides a brief overview of

spatial econometric methods and discusses our data. Section 4 presents our estimates and

highlights the importance of including both market potential and spatially-dependent variables.

Section 5 concludes.

2. Hypotheses

       There are a variety of FDI motivations that have been illustrated in the literature, each

with distinct implications for the spatial relationships we expect to observe through our

estimates. The type of spatial relationship we focus on is what is referred to as spatial

autoregression in the spatial econometrics literature. Analogous to a lagged dependent variable

in time series analysis, in our context the estimated spatial lag coefficient characterizes the

correlation between one region’s FDI and geographically-proximate regions’ FDIs. Before

providing econometric details of our empirical specification and estimation procedure, we first

outline the expected sign of this spatial lag coefficient for various models of FDI.

       One of the most basic forms is horizontal FDI in which investment is motivated by

market access and avoidance of trade frictions such as transport costs and import protection in

the host country. In its simplest form, such a model would predict that there is no spatial

relationship between markets, as the multinational firms make independent decisions for each

destination market about the extent to which it wishes to serve that market through exports or

affiliate sales. A sufficient condition for such a theoretical prediction is that the destination

markets have sufficiently high trade protection against imports from other destination markets.

       If trade protection between destination markets (or at least a group of destination

markets) is low enough relative to trade frictions between the parent and destination countries,

then export platform FDI is a plausible outcome. In this scenario, the multinational firm will
                                                                                                    6
choose the most preferred destination market and use it as a platform to serve other markets

through exports. This implies a negative spatial lag in FDI, as FDI to the platform comes at the

expense of FDI to the other destination markets. In addition, the amount of FDI going into the

export platform region will depend on the size of the proximate markets it will be serving

through exports. Thus, if export platform FDI is occurring we would expect to find both a

negative spatial lag and positive correlation between FDI and the market size of neighboring

regions. This market potential effect is important to identify this form of FDI from the next form

– vertical FDI.

       The purest form of vertical FDI is a model where a multinational firm evaluates all

potential destination markets to find the one that is the lowest cost provider of the activity it

wishes to outsource. This clearly predicts a negative spatial lag coefficient, as the FDI going into

the preferred region is at the expense of the other regions. However, the market potential of

neighboring regions should be of no significance in this form of FDI. As we mentioned above,

restricting our sample to only OECD countries makes it unlikely that we will find evidence for

this type of FDI in our sample.

       A more complicated variation of a vertical model is vertical specialization (or

fragmentation) FDI, where multinational firms separate out a number of production activities,

each of which may be in a separate geographic region (e.g. Davies, forthcoming). In this form of

FDI and production, having suppliers (related or unrelated) in neighboring regions is likely to

increase FDI to a particular market. More generally, there may be other cross-region forces that

generate agglomeration incentives besides supplier networks. To the extent that these

agglomerative forces are operating amongst US firms, we should expect to see a positive spatial

lag coefficient in our estimates of US outbound FDI determinants. In these scenarios, market

potential per se should not matter. However, the level of industrial production in neighboring

countries should be correlated with increasing potential for vertical suppliers, including non-US
                                                                                                    7
suppliers. Since industrial production and market potential measures will be highly correlated,

our market potential variable likely proxies for both and we may therefore expect a positive

coefficient on market potential if this model generally describes that data best. Thus,

agglomeration externalities arising among US firms across regional borders would be evidenced

by a positive spatial lag coefficient, whereas such agglomeration effects with non-US forces

could potentially be captured by our market potential variable to the extent it is a close proxy for

related industrial production in neighboring countries.

        Table 1 summarizes our expected signs for various forms of FDI behavior. Of course,

there may be a mixture of motivations behind the data we observe. Thus, we are only able to

estimate net effects with our country-level data. To the extent that one form dominates the

others, however, our results will identify that form.

3. Data and Empirical Methods

        In this section, we begin with an overview of spatial econometric techniques and then

discuss our initial econometric specification for FDI and characterize the sample of countries on

which we test the above models.

3.1. Spatially-Dependent FDI

        In general, one would be interested in fitting data with a spatial model for one of two

reasons.5 First, a spatial autocorrelation or "spatial error" model places additional structure on

the unobserved determinants of FDI that would otherwise be captured by the traditional error

term.6 Second, and of particular interest in testing the theories of FDI offered above, the

estimation of a spatial autoregressive or “spatial lag” model accounts directly for relationships

between dependent variables that are believed to be related in some spatial way. As such, these

5
  See Anselin (1988) for detailed discussion.
6
  Spatially-correlated errors can be thought of as analogous to the better-known practice of clustering error terms
where the econometrician is relaxing the OLS assumption of independence between all errors and assuming, instead,
that while the errors are independent across groups they need not be independent within groups. If the researcher


                                                                                                                 8
methods allow the data to reveal patterns of substitution or complementarity, as well as the

strength of any such patterns, through the estimated spatial lag coefficient. For our purposes, the

spatially-treated error structure is of secondary interest because although it may improve

standard errors, it does not affect point estimates. In addition, it will not provide direct evidence

of substitution or complementarity of FDI across countries and will therefore not inform theory,

the objective and focus of this paper. In any case, we find little evidence of spatial errors in our

data.7

3.2. A Modified Gravity Model

         With theoretical ambiguity in the relationship across host country FDI, we therefore test

for patterns in the data by employing a spatial lag model that allows the data to reveal whether

and how the dependent variable in one observation relates to the dependent variables of other

observations. For our empirical specification we begin with a “gravity” model, which is

arguably the most widely used empirical specification of FDI (e.g., Eaton and Tamura, 1994;

Brainard, 1997; Blonigen and Davies, 2004), and modify it based on the recent literature to

include variables measuring skill endowments and the market potential of countries proximate to

the host. In particular, ignoring time subscripts for notational purposes and where all non-

discrete variables are measured in natural logs, our specification is:

[1]               FDI = α 0 + α1 HostVariables + α 2 Market Potential + ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI + ε ,

where FDI is an n ×1 vector with row j equal to FDI from the US (the parent country) to host

country j. While the standard specification would include characteristics of the parent country

(e.g., real GDP, population and measures of trade costs, etc.), we discard such correlates since

the parent country is always the US and these variables only have time-series variation. We


believes that “groups” are not so much defined by specifically observable characteristics but, rather, by “likeness” in
a way that is best captured by geographic proximity, a spatial error model would correct for such relationships.
7
  Moreover, the primary explanatory variables do not differ from OLS estimates in terms of either their point
estimates or their significance. Therefore, we omit these results here and instead make them available on request.

                                                                                                                      9
instead capture such time-series variation in US FDI into our sample of countries by allowing for

a quadratic trend in FDI. In unreported results, such home-variable controls are statistically

insignificant and do not affect our results in any significant manner. We specify our model in

log-linear form because, as documented by Blonigen and Davies (2004), such a model more

likely leads to well-behaved residuals given the skewness of most FDI data samples. Such a log-

linear model also allows for interactions of the underlying linear forms of the variables, as found

in Carr, Markusen and Maskus (2001). We include host-skill variables and a measure of market

potential as previous studies find such characteristics significant in explaining observed variation

in FDI. Thus, to this point, our framework can be seen as a reduced form model that informally

nests these previous specifications. The addition of ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI reflects the spatial

autoregression term, discussed further below. Next we discuss the right-hand side variables of

[1] in more detailed fashion.

       “Host Variables” captures standard gravity-model variables for the host countries (GDP,

population, distance from parent to host, and trade/investment friction variables), as well as a

measure of skilled-labor endowments. Given the existing literature, our priors are that the higher

is host GDP, the higher will be FDI. Holding GDP constant, increasing a country’s population

reduces its per capita GDP and therefore FDI as well. Populations are therefore included to

control for the known tendency for FDI to move between wealthy markets. We anticipate

negative coefficients on population. With regard to trade costs, if FDI is undertaken to exploit

vertical linkages, then higher host trade costs reduce the value to FDI. Alternatively, if FDI is

primarily horizontal (as is likely in this particular sample) and intended to replace US exports,

then higher host trade costs should induce tariff-jumping FDI. Thus, we remain agnostic on the

effect of trade costs. Following Carr, Markusen, and Maskus (2001), we include information on

skill endowments to proxy for the abundance of skilled laborers who are required for skilled-


                                                                                                    10
labor intensive production by MNEs and expect that greater skill levels (particularly for the

typically skill-deficient host) will be positively correlated with FDI. As a measure of investment

risk we adopt a composite index that includes measures of political risk, financial risk, and other

economic indicators. Our expectation is that higher risk is correlated with higher investment

costs, implying lower FDI. As in the traditional gravity model, distance between the home and

host is also included, which may proxy for both higher management costs (which reduce FDI)

and higher trade costs (with an ambiguous effect).

       The “Market Potential” variable for a country j is defined as the sum of distance-

weighted GDPs of all other k ≠ j countries in the sample, by year. This is similar to the Harris

(1954) measure of market potential of neighboring regions which Head and Mayer (2004) find

has the best explanatory power out of a number of market potential measures for their analysis of

Japanese investment in the European Union. We use the same set of weights for construction of

this variable as we will use for our construction of the spatial lag term which we discuss next.

As we note in that discussion, there is little theory to guide the choice of weights. Thus, our

empirical analysis section explores the robustness of our results to various weighting schemes.

       Finally, ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI in Eq. [1] reflects the addition of the spatial lag term, where W is the

spatial lag weighting matrix and where ρ is to be estimated and indicates the strength and sign

of any spatial relationship. W itself is a matrix of dimension n × n , block-diagonal with each

block capturing a single year's observations. It is important to recognize that ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI

captures the proximity of the observed host to other host countries; ρ ⋅W ⋅ FDI should therefore

not be confused with the standard gravity distance that measures the distance between the home

and host countries.

       For any year, y ∈ [1980, 2000] , the form of any Wy can be defined as:




                                                                                                   11
                        ⎡ 0              wy ( d i , j ) wy ( d i , k ) ⎤
                        ⎢                                              ⎥
[2]               W y = ⎢ wy ( d j , i )     0          wy ( d j , k ) ⎥ ,
                        ⎢ wy ( d k , i ) wy ( d k , j )     0 ⎥⎦
                        ⎣

where wy(di,j) defines the functional form of the weights, declining in the distance, di,j, between

any two host countries i and j. As distances are time-invariant, it will generally be the case that

W1980 = W1981 = … = W2000.8, 9 With our sample of FDI over years 1980 through 2000, the full

weight matrix, W, is given by

                       ⎡W1980           0  0 ⎤
[3]               W = ⎢⎢ 0              .  0 ⎥⎥ .
                       ⎣⎢ 0             0 W2000 ⎦⎥

         In the construction of the weights themselves, the theoretical foundation for wy(di,j) is

quite general and the particular functional form of any single element in Wy is therefore not

prescribed. In our baseline results, we calculate weights using a simple inverse distance function

where the shortest distance within the sample (the 173 kilometers separating Brussels and

Amsterdam) gets a weight of unity and all other distances within the sample a weight that

declines according to

                                      173
[4]                wy ( d i , j ) =          ∀i≠ j,
                                      di , j

where d[i,j] is the distance between hosts i and j, measured between capital cities. According to

the above rule, a non-zero entry in the kth column of row j indicates that the kth observation will

be used to adjust the prediction of the jth observation ( j ≠ k ) .10 The diagonal elements of Wy are

set equal to zero in order that no observation of FDI predict itself. As is common, we use a row-

8
  The single exception to this in our sample is due to three missing observations in 1989. Thus, W1989 is of
dimension 17x17 while all other years are of dimension 20x20.
9
  Since distance is time invariant, it is not surprising that in unreported results, after controlling for host-country
fixed effects, we do not find a significant spatial lag. A similar result is found in Baltagi, Egger, and Pfaffermayr’s
(2004) fixed effects estimates.




                                                                                                                      12
standardized weighting matrix where W is normalized so that each row sums to unity. Multiplied

by the vector of dependent variables, the spatially-weighted variable, W ⋅ FDI , then has the

simple interpretation of row-sums being a proximity-weighted average of FDI into alternative

countries.

         After reporting initial results below, we explore the effect of various weighting schemes

on our estimates. Before continuing, however, it is important to note that the linear combination

of the FDI's appearing on the right-hand side of Eq. [1] is clearly endogenous and correlated with

the error term. To see this point more formally, note that the random component of FDIk is equal

to the inner product of the kth row of the matrix ( I − ρW ) −1 and the vector of errors, ε . Each

element of FDI thus depends on all of the error terms. As a result, each of the FDIi on the right-

hand side depends on the equation's error term. Thus, OLS estimates are inconsistent. We

instead follow the literature by estimating the model in [1] using maximum likelihood (ML)

methods, described in more detail in Appendix A.

3.3. Sample Data

         In our estimation, we use a panel of annual data on US outbound FDI activity into the

twenty OECD countries listed in Table 2 for the period 1980-2000. Our sample includes only

those countries who were OECD members for the entire data period.11 We restrict ourselves to

the OECD countries in order to compare our results on export platform FDI to traditional

horizontal FDI. As demonstrated by Markusen and Maskus (2002) and Blonigen, Davies, and

Head (2003), this sample includes the large majority of US FDI activity, which in their results is

consistent with the horizontal model.12 We restrict ourselves to outbound data from a common

10
   For example, the distance between France and Germany will weight the US-outbound FDI to France in predicting
the US-outbound FDI to Germany. Likewise, the distance between Great Britain and Germany will weight the US-
outbound FDI to Great Britain in predicting the US-outbound FDI to Germany, and so on.
11
   After New Zealand joined OECD in May 29, 1973, no new members were admitted to OECD until Mexico in
May 18, 1994.
12
   The cost to this, however, is that it assumes that excluded countries exert no influence on FDI patterns within the
remaining data. For the European countries, one might be especially concerned about this due to the increased

                                                                                                                    13
parent country (the US) because existing FDI theory provides obvious reasons to expect that a

parent country’s FDI into host markets is interdependent, but little treatment of interdependence

of FDI decisions by parent countries into a common host country (although if one considers

competition in goods or host-country factor markets, there could well be such a link).13 Second,

as demonstrated by Markusen and Maskus (2001) and Blonigen, Davies, and Head (2003), when

estimating the effects of variables such as the endowment of skilled labor on FDI, estimates

relying on pooled outbound and inbound data can give very different estimates than separate

regressions on each sub-sample.

        Our measure of FDI is the real stock of FDI as reported by the Bureau of Economic

Analysis. We use the FDI stock evaluated at historical cost and then convert it into real millions

of dollars using the chain-type price index for gross domestic investment from the Economic

Report of the President.14 As these data are among the most widely used FDI data, it is

straightforward to consider how spatial estimation adds to the results of earlier studies. Host

country real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and population data come from Penn

World Tables (PWT), which reports such data for 1950 through 2000.15 Our trade-cost measure

is the inverse of the openness measure reported by the PWT, which itself is equal to exports plus

imports divided by GDP.

        Host country skill is measured by average years of schooling for those over age 25,

reported every five years for 1960-2000.16 Linear interpolation was used for other years. Host

country investment costs are measured as the inverse of a composite index comprising operations


openness of the Central and Eastern European countries during the 1990s. However, as Markusen (2002) reports,
these countries collectively receive less than four percent of annual world-FDI flows. Thus, we believe that this
effect is likely small.
13
   This may be an explanation for why Markusen and Maskus (2001) and Blonigen, Davies, and Head (2003) find
that the determinants of FDI activity for US inbound and outbound data yield very different estimates. We leave
this issue for future research.
14
   The BEA’s FDI data can be found at http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/di/di1usdbal.htm. The price deflator can be
found at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/usbudget/fy05/sheets/b7.xls.
15
   The PWT Version 6.1 data are available online at http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php.


                                                                                                                    14
risk index, political risk index and remittance and repatriation factor index. These indices are

developed by Business Environment Risk Intelligence S.A. and are available from 1980 to

2003.17 Missing data from this source forces us to exclude Iceland and New Zealand. As such,

our final sample spans from 1980 to 2000 for twenty OECD countries. Denmark, Finland and

Portugal are also missing from our 1989 sample as FDI data were censored by the BEA due to

confidentiality. To control for transport costs and other distance-related costs, we follow the

literature in using great circle distances between capital cities, measured in 10,000s of

kilometers.18 Table 2 provides summary statistics of the variables in our model.

4. Empirical Results

        In this section, we present our initial results followed by some discussion of issues related

to the specification of our baseline estimation.

4.1. Initial Results

        Table 3 present our initial results. Column (1) presents OLS results of our model without

a spatial lag or market potential variable, and columns (2) and (3) present ML estimates that

sequentially add the spatial lag and the market potential variables. One reason to sequentially

add in the spatial lag and market potential variable is to examine the potential for omitted

variable bias on the spatial lag from not including the market potential variable. If country-k

GDP correlates with FDI into country k and country-k GDP also correlates with FDI into country

j, then including country-k FDI in the prediction of j's FDI (e.g., through ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI ) while not

directly including country-k’s GDP leaves the estimation of ρ prone to bias. Of course,

including market potential without ρ ⋅ W ⋅ FDI would also yield biased estimates of the effect of

market potential (e.g., Head and Mayer, 2004).


16
   Acquired from Barro and Lee (2000), International Data on Educational Attainment.
17
   For more information see http://www.beri.com.
18
   With the exception of Belgium, these data were provided by Raymond Robertson at his website. Belgian
distances were acquired from http://www.indo.com.

                                                                                                          15
       Turning to our results one sees that host country variables are generally significant in all

specifications, with host GDP, host population, host skill, and host investment costs all matching

their predicted coefficients. Consistent with nearly all FDI studies, distance between home and

host is negatively correlated with FDI. Host trade costs are negative, the opposite of what the

tariff-jumping horizontal theory predicts. Of particular interest is that the coefficients on these

host variables are relatively stable as we add the spatial lag and market potential variables.

       With respect to the estimated strength of the spatial lag relationship, our estimates reveal

that, on average, FDI invested into the average country in our sample is positively associated

with proximity-weighted FDI into other countries. The point estimates of our log specification

also afford the simple interpretation that a 10% increase in FDI into the weighted-average

proximate countries increases the FDI a destination country receives from the U.S. by

approximately 5% (i.e., the estimated spatial lag coefficient suggests a proximity-weighted

average elasticity of 0.5). This suggests the existence or dominance of agglomeration effects

across country borders amongst US investing firms.

       One would expect that the positive spatial lag would be accompanied by a positive sign

on the market potential variable if such agglomeration externalities extended between US and

non-US firms, provided the market potential variable proxies for industrial production in

neighboring countries. This does not bear out in our data, as the results in Column (3) suggest a

negative point estimate on the market potential variable. This negative sign on the market

potential variable is a puzzle and motivates, in part, our sensitivity analysis with respect to

various weighting schemes one might use for the spatial lag and market potential variable.

Subsequently, we will also explore geographic subspaces of our data.

4.2. Robustness

       As addressed in the construction of the initial assumptions on the weighting matrix, W, in

Section 3.2, the theoretical foundation for wy(di,j) is quite general and the particular functional
                                                                                                      16
form of any single element of W is therefore not prescribed. While our baseline results are

founded on the reasonable assumption that weights decline according to a simple inverse

distance function, we next explore the robustness of the reported results to alternative

specifications of our weighting matrix. Equations [5] through [7] accomplish this, with results

being reported in Table 4 for the following three alternatives to the weighting scheme of [4]:
                                     − di , j /1000
[5]             wy ( d i , j ) = e                    ∀ i ≠ j,

                                                            2
                                 ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞ 2 ⎞
                wy ( d i , j ) = ⎜ 1 − ⎜        ⎟                ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 11,155; 0 otherwise ,
                                 ⎜ ⎝ 11,155 ⎟⎠ ⎟
[6]
                                 ⎝              ⎠

and,
                                                            2
                                 ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞2 ⎞
                wy ( d i , j ) = ⎜ 1 − ⎜        ⎟                ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 18, 074; 0 otherwise ,
                                 ⎜ ⎝ 18, 074 ⎟⎠ ⎟
[7]
                                 ⎝              ⎠

where d[i,j] remains the distance between hosts i and j, measured between capital cities. Like our

baseline specification, [5] assigns positive weight to all other observations within each year but

does so according to a different functional form. While assigning positive weight to all other

host countries according to proximity is certainly a reasonable benchmark, we need not rule out

that extreme distances are better modeled by zero weights, contributing nothing to the spatial lag.

Within the sample of countries, 11,155 kilometers is the smallest maximum separation of any

country-pair (i.e., the distance between Lisbon and Tokyo) and 18,074 kilometers is the

maximum separation of any country-pair (i.e., the distance between Lisbon and Sydney). As

such, Eq. [6] gives positive weight only to those pairings closer than 11,155. Eq. [7] adopts the

same functional form as [6] but again allows all observations to receive some positive weight.

As Table 4 reveals, the estimates of the spatial lag and market potential coefficients are fairly

sensitive to the weighting matrix specification. This is particularly noted in Column (3) where




                                                                                                              17
the spatial lag is negative and the magnitude of the market potential variable is sizably larger

than in the other specifications.

4.3. “Country” or “Continental” Agglomeration?

       Given the extensive geographic separation of some countries from others within the

sample of OECD we consider in our baseline specifications, a natural question to be addressed is

whether the documented spatial dependence differs systematically for countries that are

relatively remote within the sample of destination countries. In fact, considering the large area

over which the OECD sample of countries lies, “continental agglomeration” may in fact be a

more likely story and a more appropriate conclusion from the results reported thus far.

       Within our sample of countries, Australia, Canada, and Japan are the most geographically

remote from other potential host destinations. In addition, Australia and Japan lack easy access

to the Atlantic Ocean, something our great circle distances do not account for. As an alternative,

then, we exclude these three most-remote countries and re-estimate the empirical model for the

sub-sample of European OECD countries. Table 5 presents results in similar format to Table 3,

with OLS results presented in Column (1) followed by the sequential addition of the spatial lag

term and the control for market potential.

       Results from this sub-sample of European countries are quite different from those of our

full sample of OECD countries. First, while the host variables are generally of the same sign as

previous results, the effect of host GDP is less than half the size we estimated for the full sample,

while the elasticity of FDI to distance is almost an order of magnitude larger. The sign of host

population for the European sample is positive, where it was negative for the full sample. This

highlights how sensitive determinants of FDI can be for various sub-samples of countries even

before taking into account spatial considerations.

       We also obtain quite different results in the European sample for our focus variables and

reach strikingly different conclusions. Our full specification on European data, reported in
                                                                                                    18
Column (3) of Table 5, provides strong evidence for platform FDI dominating as the primary

form of FDI into Europe, with a negative spatial lag coefficient of almost -0.4 (i.e., a proximity-

weighted average elasticity of -0.4) and a positive market potential elasticity above 1.3.

       For this sub-sample, comparison of results with only a spatial lag (Column 2) to those

including both a spatial lag and market potential variables (Column 3) suggests a substantial bias

to the estimated spatial lag when the market potential variable is omitted. In fact, we estimate a

positive spatial lag coefficient when the market potential variable is omitted, but a negative

spatial lag coefficient when the market potential variable is included. These results suggest that

there may be difficulties in interpreting the findings of Coughlin and Segev (2000) who

estimated a spatial lag in a model of US FDI into China. There, they find positive spatial lags,

which would indicate agglomeration. However, not including a measure of the influence of non-

host markets raises concern that their result is due more to the potential found in nearby markets

rather than to agglomerative-FDI patterns.

       Importantly, we find that our results for the European sub-sample are robust to alternative

specifications of the weighting matrix. Adopting the same alternative specifications of the forms

in [5] through [7], Table 6 reports on the robustness of the results derived from the sample of

European OECD countries.19 In short, results are consistent in their pointing to FDI being

strategically substituted across European countries and encouraged by proximate market

potential, consistent with the predictions of export-platform motivated FDI.

5. Conclusion

       In this paper, we employ spatial econometric techniques to analyze patterns of US FDI

into OECD countries. The vast majority of previous empirical FDI work has examined bilateral

data while ignoring the potential for interdependence in FDI across regions. However, FDI




                                                                                                   19
decisions likely involve such relationships across regions due to agglomeration economies,

motivations to serve multiple markets from a foreign export platform, or a multilateral decision

about the best location for a stage in a vertical chain of production. When we estimate the

degree of spatial dependence between FDI into alternative countries using our entire OECD

sample, we find evidence for agglomeration: FDI activity in proximate countries increases FDI

in a country, ceteris paribus. However, this relationship disappears when we eliminate the

remote countries of Australia, Canada and Japan and control for market potential in neighboring

countries, where we find strong evidence that is consistent with an export-platform motivation

for US FDI into Europe: a negative spatial lag coefficient and a positive coefficient on the

market potential variable. The large differences in results for the European sample versus the

full sample of OECD countries suggests that spatial relationships depend significantly on sub-

samples of geographic space. Modeling this heterogeneity across different spatial dimensions

would be a useful extension to the literature, as would be an examination of spatial relationships

for FDI into less-developed countries.




19
  With the change in sample, we substitute the smallest maximum separation that was between with Lisbon and
Tokyo with the distance between Ankara and Bern (2,183km) and substitute the maximum separation that was
between Lisbon and Sydney with the distance between Ankara and Lisbon (3,585km).

                                                                                                              20
Table 1: Summary of hypothesized spatial lag coefficient and market potential effect
for various forms of FDI.
                                                                                       Sign of Market
FDI Motivation                                          Sign of Spatial Lag
                                                                                      Potential Variable
Pure Horizontal                                                    0                            0
Export Platform                                                    -                            +
Pure Vertical                                                      -                            0
Vertical Specialization with Agglomeration                         +                            +




 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
 Sample of OECD countries for the years 1980-2000. FDI is measured as the real stock of FDI as reported by
 the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Host real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and population data
 come from Penn World Tables (PWT). Host trade costs are the inverse of the openness measure reported by
 the PWT, which itself is equal to exports plus imports divided by GDP. Host skill is measured by average
 years of schooling for those over age 25. Host investment costs are measured as the inverse of a composite
 index comprising operations risk index, political risk index and remittance and repatriation factor index,
 developed by Business Environment Risk Intelligence S.A.. Great circle distances between capital cities are
 used in all specifications, measured in 10,000s of kilometers. Market Potential is measured as the distance-
 weighted real gross domestic product of other host countries in the sample, with weights ascribed according
 to Eqs. [4]through [7], accordingly. For purposes of clarity, below we report market potential in millions of
 dollars.
                                                               Standard
 Variable                                         Mean                         Minimum          Maximum
                                                               Deviation
 FDI                                             19,206         29,676             149           233,128
 Host GDP                                        15,690          5,922            2,473           32,057
 Host Population                                 30,209         31,629            3,401          126,919
 Host Trade Costs                                 0.022         0.012            0.005            0.070
 Host Skill                                       8.328         1.978            2.800           11.860
 Host Investment Costs                           61.387         9.869            37.533          83.133
 Host Distance from US in km                      7,008          2,741             734           15,958
 Market Potential ($millions)                    1,050.0        727.0             72.1           3,220.0
 Sample countries included: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
 Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United
 Kingdom.




                                                                                                                 21
Table 3: Spatial Analysis of US Outbound FDI.
Sample of OECD countries for the years 1980-2000. Ln(FDI) is measured as the real stock
of FDI as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                OLS                      Spatial ML
Independent Variable                              (1)              (2)                (3)
Ln(Host GDP)                                      1.703           1.511             1.711
                                               (6.86)**         (6.35)**          (7.23)**
Ln(Host Population)                              -0.491          -0.386            -0.509
                                                 (1.94)          (1.60)            (2.15)*
Ln(Host Trade Cost)                              -1.258          -0.945            -1.491
                                               (9.28)**         (6.77)**          (8.06)**
Ln(Host Skill)                                    1.177           1.350             1.026
                                               (4.34)**         (5.20)**          (3.89)**
Ln(Host Investment Costs)                        -1.499          -1.389            -1.400
                                               (4.24)**         (4.13)**          (4.27)**
Ln(Host Distance from US in km)                  -0.379          -0.449            -0.324
                                               (4.52)**         (5.57)**          (3.88)**
Trend (1980 = 1)                                 -0.138          -0.136            -0.128
                                               (4.37)**         (4.54)**          (4.38)**
Trend 2                                           0.003           0.002             0.001
                                                (2.56)*          (1.73)             (1.06)

Spatially weighted FDI a                                         0.505              0.552
  (i.e., W ⋅ FDI )                                              (5.75)**          (6.71)**
Market Potential a                                                                 -0.314
  (i.e., weighted GDPs)                                                           (4.38)**

Constant                                       -28.618          -28.312           -27.512
                                              (13.75)**        (14.33)**         (14.22)**

Observations                                     417               417              417
Adj R2 / Log-Likelihood                          .78             -489.77          -480.46
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. a Weights, W, are defined as wy (di , j ) = 173 / di , j ∀ i ≠ j .




                                                                                                 22
Table 4: Spatial Analysis of US Outbound FDI – Sensitivity Tests
Sample of OECD countries for the years 1980-2000. Ln(FDI) is measured as the real stock of FDI
as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The three alternative assumptions on the
weighting matrix, W, are as follows (see text for details):
                            − d /1000
Column (1): wy (di , j ) = e i , j    ∀i≠ j .
                                             2
                           ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞2 ⎞
Column (2): wy (di , j ) = ⎜ 1 − ⎜    ⎟ ⎟        ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 11,155; 0 otherwise.
                           ⎜ ⎝ 11,155 ⎠ ⎟
                           ⎝             ⎠
                                             2
                           ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞2 ⎞
Column (3): wy (di , j ) = ⎜ 1 − ⎜     ⎟ ⎟       ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 18, 074; 0 otherwise.
                           ⎜ ⎝ 18, 074 ⎠ ⎟
                           ⎝             ⎠

                                        Table                               Spatial ML
Independent Variable                     3(3)                  (1)               (2)            (3)
Ln(Host GDP)                             1.711                1.265              1.762          1.566
                                       (7.23)**             (5.93)**          (7.91)**        (7.50)**
Ln(Host Population)                     -0.509               -0.072             -0.536         -0.451
                                        (2.15)*              (0.33)            (2.36)*         (2.13)*
Ln(Host Trade Cost)                     -1.491               -1.338             -1.883         -1.773
                                       (8.06)**             (9.04)**         (12.80)**       (14.34)**
Ln(Host Skill)                           1.026                1.051              0.509          0.403
                                       (3.89)**             (4.41)**           (2.01)*          (1.71)
Ln(Host Investment Costs)               -1.400               -1.766             -1.480         -1.680
                                       (4.27)**             (5.97)**          (4.40)**        (5.62)**
Ln(Host Distance from US                -0.324               -0.446             -0.506         -0.616
   in km)                              (3.88)**             (6.23)**          (6.60)**        (8.42)**
Trend (1980 = 1)                         -0.128              -0.121             -0.108          0.030
                                       (4.38)**             (4.67)**          (3.66)**          (0.99)
Trend 2                                  0.001                0.001              0.001          0.002
                                         (1.06)              (0.99)             (1.12)          (1.50)

Spatially weighted FDI                   0.552                0.691             0.328          -0.613
  (i.e., W ⋅ FDI )                     (6.71)**            (12.47)**          (3.16)**        (2.91)**
Market Potential                        -0.314               -0.078            -0.534          -1.592
  (i.e., weighted GDPs)                (4.38)**             (3.98)**          (6.39)**       (12.51)**

Constant                               -27.512              -29.191            -20.219        14.164
                                      (14.22)**            (16.97)**          (6.44)**       (3.34)**

Observations                             417                  417               417            417
Log-Likelihood                         -480.46              -439.44           -462.10        -435.29
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                         23
Table 5: Spatial Analysis of US Outbound FDI to European OECD.
Sample of OECD countries for the years 1980-2000. Ln(FDI) is measured as the real stock of
FDI as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                   OLS                     Spatial ML
Independent Variable                                (1)              (2)                (3)
Ln(Host GDP)                                        0.742             0.704           0.320
                                                 (3.40)**          (3.29)**           (1.57)
Ln(Host Population)                                 0.466             0.463           0.635
                                                  (2.11)*           (2.15)*         (3.17)**
Ln(Host Trade Cost)                                -1.069            -0.934          -0.326
                                                 (7.24)**          (5.98)**          (1.97)*
Ln(Host Skill)                                      1.311             1.349           1.090
                                                 (5.37)**          (5.64)**         (4.87)**
Ln(Host Investment Costs)                          -1.810            -1.787          -1.116
                                                 (5.39)**          (5.44)**         (3.54)**
Ln(Host Distance from US in km)                    -4.683            -4.443          -4.364
                                                (12.33)**         (11.50)**        (12.04)**
Trend (1980 = 1)                                   -0.076            -0.078          -0.127
                                                 (2.79)**          (2.93)**         (4.98)**
Trend 2                                             0.003             0.002           0.005
                                                  (2.48)*           (2.02)*         (4.90)**

Spatially weighted FDI a                                            0.236            -0.377
  (i.e., W ⋅ FDI )                                                 (2.25)*           (2.54)*
Market Potential a                                                                    1.347
  (i.e., weighted GDPs)                                                             (7.58)**

Constant                                          16.949           14.188            2.451
                                                 (3.73)**         (3.08)**           (0.54)

Observations                                       354               354              354
Adj R2 / Log-Likelihood                            .85             -345.48          -317.90
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. a Weights, W, are defined as wy (di , j ) = 173 / di , j ∀ i ≠ j .




                                                                                                 24
Table 6: Spatial Analysis of US Outbound FDI to European OECD – Sensitivity Tests
Sample of OECD countries for the years 1980-2000. Ln(FDI) is measured as the real stock of FDI as reported
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The three alternative assumptions on the weighting matrix, W, are as
follows (see text for details):
                            − d /1000
Column (1): wy (di , j ) = e i , j    ∀i≠ j .
                                             2
                           ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞2 ⎞
Column (2): wy (di , j ) = ⎜ 1 − ⎜    ⎟ ⎟        ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 2,183; 0 otherwise.
                           ⎜ ⎝ 2,183 ⎠ ⎟
                           ⎝             ⎠
                                             2
                           ⎛ ⎛ di , j ⎞2 ⎞
Column (3): wy (di , j ) = ⎜1 − ⎜     ⎟ ⎟        ∀ i ≠ j if di , j ≤ 3,585; 0 otherwise.
                           ⎜ ⎝ 3,585 ⎠ ⎟
                           ⎝             ⎠

                                                     Table                             Spatial ML
Independent Variable                                  5(3)               (1)                 (2)         (3)
Ln(Host GDP)                                          0.320             -0.105              -0.108      -0.284
                                                      (1.57)            (0.50)              (0.43)      (1.14)
Ln(Host Population)                                   0.635              1.058               1.091       1.325
                                                    (3.17)**          (5.21)**             (4.51)**    (5.33)**
Ln(Host Trade Cost)                                  -0.326             -0.361              -0.551      -0.498
                                                     (1.97)*           (2.41)*             (3.87)**    (3.44)**
Ln(Host Skill)                                        1.090              1.026               0.861       1.158
                                                    (4.87)**          (4.63)**             (3.62)**    (5.07)**
Ln(Host Investment Costs)                            -1.116             -1.129              -1.477      -1.537
                                                    (3.54)**          (3.75)**             (4.94)**    (5.18)**
Ln(Host Distance from US in km)                      -4.364             -4.348              -4.733      -5.039
                                                   (12.04)**         (10.63)**             (9.16)**   (10.85)**
Trend (1980 = 1)                                      -0.127            -0.121              -0.077      -0.145
                                                    (4.98)**          (5.00)**             (3.11)**    (5.41)**
Trend 2                                               0.005              0.006               0.005       0.007
                                                    (4.90)**          (5.37)**             (4.67)**    (6.28)**

Spatially weighted FDI                               -0.377            -0.529               -0.512     -0.879
  (i.e., W ⋅ FDI )                                   (2.54)*          (3.35)**             (4.30)**   (4.76)**
Market Potential                                      1.347             1.711                1.098      2.212
  (i.e., weighted GDPs)                             (7.58)**          (9.46)**             (8.91)**   (7.62)**

Constant                                             2.451             -0.927              12.642      -5.852
                                                     (0.54)            (0.19)              (2.44)*     (0.72)

Observations                                          354               354                  354        354
Log-Likelihood                                      -317.90           -306.90              -312.41    -312.78
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                  25
Figure 1: Sample of OECD.
Sample countries included: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom.
Figure 2: Sample of European OECD.
Sample countries included: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom.




                                                                                                                       27
                                           References

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. (2003) “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review 93(1), 170-92.

Anselin, Luc. (1988) Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models, Kluwer Academic Publishers:
Boston, MA.

Baltagi, Badi H., Peter Egger, and Michael Pfaffermayr. (2004) “Estimating Models of Complex
FDI: Are There Third-Country Effects?” Mimeo.

Barro, Robert and J.W. Lee. (1996) “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling
Quality.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 86, 218-23.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. and Peter Egger. (2004) “A Theoretical and Empirical Model of
International Trade and Foreign Direct Investment with Outsourcing: Part I, Developed
Countries.” Mimeo.

Blomström, Magnus and Ari Kokko. (1998) “Multinational Corporations and Spillovers,”
Journal of Economic Surveys 12, 247-77.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Ronald B. Davies. (2004) “The Effects of Bilateral Tax Treaties on US
FDI Activity,” International Tax and Public Finance 11(5), 601-22.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head. (2003) “Estimating the Knowledge-
Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise: Comment,” American Economic Review 93(3):
980-94.

Brainard, S. Lael. (1997) “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off
Between Multinational Sales and Trade,” American Economic Review 87(4): 520-44.

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus. (2001) “Estimating the Knowledge-
Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise.” American Economic Review 91(3), 693-708.

Coughlin, Cletus and Eran Segev. (2000) “Foreign Direct Investment in China: A Spatial
Econometric Study.” The World Economy 23 (1), 1-23.

Davies, Ronald B. (forthcoming) “Fragmentation of Headquarter Services and FDI,” North
American Journal of Economics and Finance.

Eaton, Jonathan and Akiko Tamura. (1994) “Bilateralism and Regionalism in Japanese and US
Trade and Direct Foreign Investment Patterns,” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies 8(4), 478-510.

Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen. (2003) “Export-Platform Foreign
Direct Investment,” NBER Working Paper No. 9517.

Harris, C. (1954) “The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the United States,”
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64, 315-48.
                                                                                               28
Head, Keith, John Ries, and Deborah Swenson. (1995) “Agglomeration Benefits and Location
Choice: Evidence from Japanese Manufacturing Investments in the United States,” Journal of
International Economics 38(3-4), 223-47.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. (2004) “Market Potential and the Location of Japanese
Investment in the European Union,” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Helpman, Elhanan. (1984) “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy 92(3), 451-71.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. (2004) “Export Versus FDI with
Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review 94(1), 300-16.

IDA Ireland (2002) Annual Business Survey. Dublin.

Keller, Wolfgang and Carol Shiue. (forthcoming) “The Origins of Spatial Interaction,” Journal
of Econometrics.

LeSage, James P. (1999) “The Theory and Practice of Spatial Econometrics,” Working Paper.

Markusen, James R. (1984) “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from
Trade,” Journal of International Economics 16(3-4), 205-26.

Markusen, James R. (2002) Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade.
Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus. (2001) “Multinational Firms: Reconciling Theory
and Evidence,” in Magnus Blomström and Linda S. Goldberg, eds., Topics in Empirical
International Economics: A Festschrift in Honor of Robert E. Lipsey. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus. (2002) “Discriminating among alternative theories of
the multinational enterprise.” Review of International Economics 10(4), 694-707.

Overman, Henry G., Stephen Redding and Anthony J. Venables. (2003) “The Economic
Geography of Trade, Production, and Income: A Survey of the Empirics,” in E. Kwan Choi and
James Harrigan, eds., Handbook of International Trade. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.

Redding, Stephen, and Anthony J. Venables. (2004) “Economic Geography and International
Inequality,” Journal of International Economics 62(1), 53-82.

Yeaple, Stephen R. (2003) “The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinationals and Cross
Country Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of International
Economics 60(2), 293-314.




                                                                                                29
                                               Appendix A


        In the spatial lag models we use in this paper, the error terms are typically assumed to be
normally distributed with constant variance, which implies the following log-likelihood function:
                          n            1            n
                 log L = − log( 2π ) − 2 ∑ i=1ε i2 − logσ 2 + log I − ρW
                                           n
[8]                                                                                 .
                          2           2σ            2
Eq. [8] differs from a standard log-likelihood function for a linear regression model with the last
term – the Jacobian of the transformation from ε to FDI. The first-order condition for σ 2

implies that σˆ 2 = n −1 ∑ i=1(Yi − ρ ⋅W ⋅ FDI i − X i β ) , where X represents all our covariates on the
                          n                            2



right-hand side of equation [1] in the text other than the spatial lag term. Substituting this
expression into [8], the log-likelihood function is
                          n             n
[9]              log L = − log( 2π +1) − logσˆ 2 + log I − ρW      .
                          2             2
The Jacobian term makes estimation difficult as calculating the determinant of the n by n matrix
is computationally costly. However, estimation may be simplified by first calculating the

eigenvalues of W, ωi , as log I − ρW = ∑i =1 log(1 − ρω i ) . Although calculating eigenvalues of
                                               n



an n by n matrix is also time-consuming, the calculation need only be made once.
                                                                ′
        Letting Z =W ⋅ FDI , where A = (I-ρW)-1 and θ = (β , ρ ) , the score vector and information
matrix implied by [9] are:
                 ∂L 1 ⎛       X ′u       ⎞
[10]               = 2⎜                  ⎟=G
                 ∂θ σ ⎝ Z ′u − tr ( AW ) ⎠
and,

                       ∂2 L   1 ⎛ X ′X            X ′Z        ⎞
[11]             −E         = 2⎜                              ⎟ =V ,
                      ∂θ∂θ ′ σ ⎝ Z ′X     Z ′Z +σ tr ( AWAW ) ⎠
                                                   2



respectively. Standard iterative maximum-likelihood estimation procedures use these matrices to
calculate the change in θ across iterations: θj+1 = θj + V-1G. The presence of the tr(AW) in [10]
and tr(AAWW) in [11] imply that the change in coefficients across iterations j and j+1 cannot be
calculated via a simple regression of ε on X and Z.




                                                                                                            30
