                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   DO TAX HAVENS FLOURISH?

                                            James R. Hines Jr.

                                          Working Paper 10936
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10936


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




I am indebted to Claudia Martinez for excellent research assistance, to her and to Rosanne Altshuler, Reuven
Avi-Yonah, Daniel Mitchell, Joel Slemrod, and particularly James Poterba, for helpful comments on previous
drafts of this paper.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by James R. Hines Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Tax Havens Flourish?
James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 10935
November 2004
JEL No. H87, H25

                                           ABSTRACT

Tax haven countries offer foreign investors low tax rates and other tax features designed to attract

investment and thereby stimulate economic activity. Major tax havens have less than one percent of

the world's population (outside the United States), and 2.3 percent of world GDP, but host 5.7

percent of the foreign employment and 8.4 percent of foreign property, plant and equipment of

American firms. Per capita real GDP in tax haven countries grew at an average annual rate of 3.3

percent between 1982 and 1999, which compares favorably to the world average of 1.4 percent. Tax

haven governments appear to be adequately funded, with an average 25 percent ratio of government

to GDP that exceeds the 20 percent ratio for the world as a whole, though the small populations and

relative affluence of these countries would normally be associated with even larger governments.

Whether the economic prosperity of tax haven countries comes at the expense of higher tax countries

is unclear, though recent research suggests that tax haven activity stimulates investment in nearby

high-tax countries.

James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.     Introduction.

       Countries design their tax systems to fit circumstances and opportunities, and as a

consequence, tax regimes exhibit considerable diversity. Countries known as “tax havens” offer

very low tax rates and other tax features that make them particularly attractive to foreign

investors. Rising volumes of international investment contribute to the growing importance of

tax havens, which in turn has exposed tax haven activities to greater attention, and has prompted

a number of policy responses in higher-tax countries.

       The purpose of this paper is to review the use of tax havens by international businesses,

and to evaluate the effect of their tax systems on economic outcomes in tax haven countries and

elsewhere. Countries offer low tax rates in the belief that, by doing so, they attract greater

investment and economic activity than would otherwise have been forthcoming. The extent to

which this expectation is fulfilled certainly varies, though there are spectacular examples of tax

haven countries, such as Ireland, that have enjoyed very rapid economic growth rates that

coincide with dramatic inflows of foreign investment. The empirical evidence presented in

section 4 confirms that Ireland’s experience, while extreme, is not anomalous, in that tax haven

countries as a group exhibited 3.3 percent annual per capita GDP growth from 1982-1999,

whereas the world averaged just 1.4 percent annual GDP growth over the same period. While

national economic statistics, particularly those describing the performance of small tax havens,

must always be treated with some caution, the available indicators consistently show that tax

haven economies outperform the economies of other countries. Controlling for country size,

initial wealth, and other observable variables, does not change the conclusion that the period of

globalization has been favorable for the economies of countries with very low tax rates.




                                                                                                     1
       The policy of offering investors very low tax rates is potentially costly to tax haven

governments, if doing so reduces tax collections that might otherwise have been used to fund

worthwhile government expenditures. It is far from clear, however, that tax haven countries face

significant tradeoffs of this nature. Governments have at their disposal many tax instruments,

including personal income taxes, property taxes, consumption or sales taxes, excise taxes, and

others, that can be used to finance desired expenditures. Furthermore, even very low rates of

direct taxation of business investment may yield significant tax revenues if economic activity

expands in response, producing wealth and expenditure that augment tax bases. As an empirical

matter, the public sectors of tax haven countries are of comparable sizes to those of other

countries, though there is evidence that they may be somewhat smaller than would otherwise

have been predicted on the basis of their populations and affluence.

       Tax havens are viewed with alarm in parts of the high-tax world. The concern is often

expressed that the availability of foreign tax haven locations may have the effect of diverting

economic activity away from countries with higher tax rates, and eroding tax bases that might

otherwise be used to raise government revenue. These considerations are commonly thought to

be most acute in the case of nearby tax havens, those that might divert activity from other

countries within the same region or economic federation. The evidence, however, suggests a

different conclusion. Foreign tax haven activity and nearby investment in higher-tax countries

appear to be complementary, one percent greater likelihood of establishing a tax haven affiliate

being associated with two thirds of a percent greater investment and sales in nearby non-haven

countries. This pattern implies that the availability of nearby tax havens stimulates, rather than

diverts, economic activity within a region or federation.




                                                                                                     2
       The empirical regularity that economic activity in high-tax countries benefits from the

availability of nearby tax havens does not resolve the impact of tax havens on the welfare of

high-tax countries. Tax haven operations may stimulate activity in nearby countries by

facilitating the avoidance of taxes in that country, the avoidance of taxes elsewhere, or by

reducing the cost of goods and services that are inputs to production or sales in high-tax

countries. Tax avoidance activity carries mixed implications for governments of nearby

countries, since it may erode tax bases and therefore tax collections, implying that the greater

economic activity associated with nearby tax havens might come at a high cost in terms of

foregone government revenues. Any evaluation of this effect relies, however, on careful

consideration of the type of tax avoidance uses to which tax haven affiliates are put. In

particular, it is possible that the use of tax haven operations by multinational firms permits

governments of high-tax countries to refine their tax systems by subjecting multinational firms to

different effective tax rates than domestic firms.

       Section two of the paper reviews international taxation in practice, and its implications

for international investment and the tax policies in capital-importing countries. Section three

considers American evidence of the extent to which investors concentrate their foreign

investment and tax-avoidance activity in tax havens. Section four evaluates the economic

experience of tax havens over the period since 1982. Section five considers the effect of foreign

tax havens on the welfare of high-tax countries. Section six is the conclusion.



2.     Tax havens and international taxation.

       The investor appeal of tax haven operations is easy to understand. Countries that tax

business activity at very low rates permit investors to retain all, or most all, of locally-earned




                                                                                                     3
pretax income. Investment projects of modest anticipated value, with expected pretax returns too

low to justify undertaking if the returns would be subject to taxation at normal rates, might be

deemed worthwhile if located in tax havens and therefore taxed lightly (if at all). Other

considerations equal, therefore, countries with lower tax rates should be expected to offer a

broader range of attractive investment opportunities, and therefore draw larger volumes of

foreign investment, than do otherwise-similar countries with higher tax rates.

       Foreign investment is attracted to tax havens for reasons beyond the after-tax return to

local activities, since multinational businesses can use tax haven operations to facilitate

avoidance of taxes that would otherwise be owed to governments of other countries. Foreign

affiliates of multinational firms typically have multiple business transactions with each other and

with their parent companies, providing opportunities for reallocating taxable income. Tax

avoidance can take many forms, including the use of financial arrangements, such as intrafirm

lending, that locate taxable income in low-tax jurisdictions and tax deductions in high-tax

jurisdictions. In addition to the tax-motivated use of intercompany loans, firms are often able to

adjust the prices at which affiliates located in different countries sell goods and services to each

other. Most governments require that firms use arm’s length prices, those that would be used by

unrelated parties transacting at arm’s length, for transactions between related parties, in principle

thereby limiting the scope of tax-motivated transfer price adjustments. In practice, however, the

indeterminacy of appropriate arm’s length prices for many goods and services, particularly those

that are intangible, or for which comparable unrelated transactions are difficult to find, leaves

room for considerable discretion. As a result, firms often find that transactions with tax haven

affiliates can be used to reallocate income from high-tax locations to the tax haven affiliates




                                                                                                       4
themselves or else to other low-tax foreign locations. This, in turn, increases the appeal of

locating investment in foreign tax havens.

       There are two circumstances in which foreign investors will not benefit from the

opportunity to locate economic activity in very low-tax areas. The first, and most obvious, is

that firms may be unable to earn reasonable profits on their tax haven activities. It is necessary

to earn taxable income in order to benefit from low tax rates, and there are countries with

extremely low tax rates that nonetheless feature poor economic conditions that make them

unable to support anything other than tiny foreign investment levels. The second circumstance

arises when home country tax systems effectively remove much of the incentive to earn income

in low-tax areas by taxing foreign income earned in tax havens at higher rates than income

earned elsewhere. Since the U.S. system of taxing foreign income has some of this character, it

is useful to review its main features.



2.1    The taxation of foreign income.1

       Almost all countries tax income generated by economic activity that takes place within

their borders. In addition, some countries – including the United States – tax the foreign incomes

of their residents. In order to prevent double taxation of the foreign income of Americans, U.S.

law permits taxpayers to claim foreign tax credits for income taxes (and related taxes) paid to

foreign governments. These foreign tax credits are used to offset U.S. tax liabilities that would

otherwise be due on foreign-source income. The U.S. corporate tax rate is currently 35 percent,

so an American corporation that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 10 percent tax rate pays

taxes of $10 to the foreign government and $25 to the U.S. government, since its U.S. corporate

tax liability of $35 (35 percent of $100) is reduced to $25 by the foreign tax credit of $10.




                                                                                                     5
           The United States is not alone in taxing the worldwide income of its residents while

permitting them to claim foreign tax credits; other countries with such systems include Greece,

Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom. Many other capital exporting countries in the world

effectively exempt from taxation most or all of the foreign income earned by their resident

multinational corporations, a list that includes Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,

Italy, and the Netherlands. Countries that largely exempt foreign income from taxation typically

tax a portion of foreign income, and some of these countries, such as France and Italy, do not

afford favorable tax treatment to income earned in foreign tax havens and other low-tax foreign

locations.

           American corporations are permitted to defer any U.S. tax liabilities on certain

unrepatriated foreign profits until they receive such profits in the form of dividends. This

deferral is available only on the active business profits of American-owned foreign affiliates that

are separately incorporated as subsidiaries in foreign countries. The profits of unincorporated

foreign businesses, such as those of American-owned branch banks in other countries, are taxed

immediately by the United States.

           U.S. tax law contains provisions designed to prevent American firms from delaying the

repatriation of lightly-taxed foreign earnings. These tax provisions apply to controlled foreign

corporations, which are foreign corporations owned at least 50 percent by American individuals

or corporations who hold stakes of at least 10 percent each. Under the Subpart F provisions of

U.S. law, some foreign income of controlled foreign corporations is “deemed distributed,” and




1
    Some parts of this section and the one that follows are excerpted from Desai, Foley and Hines (2003).


                                                                                                            6
therefore immediately taxable by the United States, even if not repatriated as dividend payments

to American parent firms.2

         Since the foreign tax credit is intended to alleviate international double taxation, and not

to reduce U.S. tax liabilities on profits earned within the United States, the foreign tax credit is

limited to U.S. tax liability on foreign-source income. For example, an American firm with $200

of foreign income that faces a U.S. tax rate of 35 percent has a foreign tax credit limit of $70 (35

percent of $200). If the firm pays foreign income taxes of less than $70, then the firm would be

entitled to claim foreign tax credits for all of its foreign taxes paid. If, however, the firm pays

$90 of foreign taxes, then it would be permitted to claim no more than $70 of foreign tax credits.

         Taxpayers whose foreign tax payments exceed the foreign tax credit limit are said to have

“excess foreign tax credits;” the excess foreign tax credits represent the portion of their foreign

tax payments that exceed the U.S. tax liabilities generated by their foreign incomes. American

law permits taxpayers to use excess foreign tax credits in one year to reduce their U.S. tax

obligations on foreign source income in either of the two previous years or in any of the

following five years. In practice, the calculation of the foreign tax credit limit entails certain

additional complications, notable among which is that total worldwide foreign income is used to

calculate the foreign tax credit limit. This method of calculating the foreign tax credit limit is

known as “worldwide averaging.” A taxpayer has excess foreign tax credits if the sum of

worldwide foreign income tax payments exceeds this limit.




2
  Subpart F income consists of income from passive investments (such as interest and dividends received from
investments in securities), foreign base company income (that arises from using a foreign affiliate as a conduit for
certain types of international transactions), income that is invested in United States property, money used offshore to
insure risks in the United States, and money used to pay bribes to foreign government officials. American firms
with foreign subsidiaries that earn profits through most types of active business operations, and that subsequently
reinvest those profits in active lines of business, are not subject to the Subpart F rules, and are therefore able to defer
U.S. tax liability on their foreign profits until they choose to remit dividends at a later date.


                                                                                                                         7
         By taxing foreign income while permitting taxpayers to claim credits for foreign income

taxes, the U.S. tax system reduces the incentives that American firms would otherwise face to

earn income in low-tax foreign locations, since reduced foreign tax liabilities may be offset by

higher U.S. tax liabilities. There are, however, two circumstances in which an American firm

benefits from locating income in low-tax locations abroad. The first arises whenever an

American firm can profitably defer repatriation of foreign profits, thereby reducing the present

value of any associated home country tax liability.3 The second circumstance is one in which a

taxpayer has excess foreign tax credits that can be used to offset U.S. taxes due on lightly-taxed

foreign income. Together, these two cases encompass a sufficient range of the investing

population to make American investors in aggregate highly sensitive to foreign tax rate

differences.



2.2      Evidence of the impact of international taxation.

         International tax rules and the tax laws of other countries have the potential to influence a

wide range of corporate and individual behavior, including, most directly, the location and scope

of international business activity. A sizable literature is devoted to measuring behavioral

responses to international tax rules.4 This literature focuses on the impact of corporate tax rates

on investment behavior as well as various financial and organizational practices used to avoid

taxes.

         The available evidence of the effect of taxation on FDI comes in two forms. The first is

time-series estimation of the responsiveness of FDI to annual variation in after-tax rates of


3
  Hines (1994) and Hines and Rice (1994) analyze the benefits of such deferral, and Altshuler, Newlon and
Randolph (1995) and Desai, Foley and Hines (2001) estimate the effects of home country taxes on dividend
repatriation rates.
4
  See Hines (1997, 1999) for further elaboration and critical analysis of many of the studies surveyed in this section.


                                                                                                                      8
return. Implicit in this estimation is a q-style investment model in which contemporaneous

average after-tax rates of return serve as proxies for returns to marginal FDI. Studies of this type

consistently report a positive correlation between levels of FDI and after-tax rates of return at

industry and country levels.5 The implied elasticity of FDI with respect to after-tax returns is

generally close to unity, which translates into a tax elasticity of investment of roughly -0.6. The

estimated elasticity is similar whether the investment in question is American direct investment

abroad or FDI by foreigners in the United States.

           The primary limitation of aggregate time-series studies is that they are largely identified

by yearly variation in taxes or profitability that may be correlated with important omitted

variables. As a result, it becomes very difficult to identify the effects of taxation separately from

the effects of other variables that are correlated with tax rates. Exceptions include Slemrod

(1990), who distinguishes FDI in the United States by the tax regime in the country of origin,

and Swenson (1994), who distinguishes investment by industry.

           Other studies of investment location are exclusively cross-sectional in nature, exploiting

the very large differences in corporate tax rates around the world to identify the effects of taxes

on FDI. Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Hines and Rice (1994) estimate the effect of national tax

rates on the cross-sectional distribution of aggregate American-owned property, plant and

equipment (PPE) in 1982. Grubert and Mutti analyze the distribution of PPE in manufacturing

affiliates in 33 countries, reporting a –0.1 elasticity with respect to local tax rates. Hines and

Rice consider the distribution of PPE in all affiliates in 73 countries, reporting a much larger –1

elasticity of PPE ownership with respect to tax rates. Altshuler, Grubert and Newlon (2001)

compare the tax sensitivity of aggregate PPE ownership in 58 countries in 1984 to that in 1992,

reporting estimated tax elasticities that rise (in absolute value) from –1.5 in 1984 to –2.8 in 1992.

5
    See, for example, Hartman (1984), Boskin and Gale (1987), and Young (1988).

                                                                                                         9
Altshuler and Grubert (2004) offer evidence of a -3.5 tax elasticity of investment in a sample of

58 countries in 2000, suggesting a continued, and possibly increasing, responsiveness to foreign

tax differences.6

         One of the important issues in considering the impact of taxation on international

investment patterns is the ability of multinational firms to adjust the location of their taxable

profits. It is often attractive to use debt to finance foreign affiliates in high-tax countries and to

use equity to finance affiliates in low-tax countries, thereby accumulating income where tax rates

are low and deductions where tax rates are high.7 The evidence is broadly consistent with these

incentives. Hines and Hubbard (1990) find that the average foreign tax rate paid by subsidiaries

remitting nonzero interest to their American parent firms in 1984 exceeds the average foreign tax

rate paid by subsidiaries with no interest payments, while the reverse pattern holds for dividend

payments. Grubert (1998) estimates separate equations for dividend, interest, and royalty

payments by 3467 foreign subsidiaries to their parent American companies (and other members

of controlled groups) in 1990, finding that high corporate tax rates in countries in which

American subsidiaries are located are correlated with higher interest payments and lower

dividend payout rates. Desai, Foley and Hines (2004b) report that, within groups of affiliates

controlled by the same American parents, debt levels are significantly higher among affiliates

located in countries with higher tax rates.

6
  Other cross sectional evidence is consistent with these findings. Hines (2001) compares the distribution of
Japanese and American FDI around the world, finding Japanese investment to be concentrated in countries with
which Japan has “tax sparing” agreements that reduce home country taxation of foreign income; the estimated FDI
impact of “tax sparing” is consistent with estimated large tax elasticities of foreign investment. Hines (1996)
compares the distributions of FDI within the United States of investors whose home governments grant foreign tax
credits for federal and state income taxes with those whose home governments do not tax income earned in the
United States. One percent state tax rate differences in 1987 are associated with ten percent differences in amounts
of manufacturing PPE owned by investors from countries with differing home-country taxation of foreign-source
income, and three percent differences in numbers of affiliates owned, implying a tax elasticity of investment equal to
–0.6.




                                                                                                                   10
         Contractual arrangements between related parties located in countries with different tax

rates offer numerous possibilities for sophisticated tax avoidance. Evidence of tax-motivated

income reallocation comes in several forms. Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Hines and Rice

(1994) analyze the aggregate reported profitabilities of U.S affiliates in different foreign

locations in 1982. Grubert and Mutti examine profit/equity and profit/sales ratios of U.S.-owned

manufacturing affiliates in 29 countries, while Hines and Rice regress the profitability of all

U.S.-owned affiliates in 59 countries against capital and labor inputs and local productivities.

Grubert and Mutti report that high taxes reduce the reported after-tax profitability of local

operations; Hines and Rice come to a similar conclusion, their data indicating that one percent

tax rate differences are associated with 2.3 percent differences in pretax profitability. Desai,

Foley and Hines (2004a) find that foreign affiliates whose parent companies have nearby tax

haven operations pay lower taxes as a fraction of sales than do other affiliates. While it is

possible that high tax rates are correlated with other locational and firm-specific attributes that

depress the profitability of foreign investment, competitive conditions typically imply that after-

tax rates of return should be equal in the absence of tax-motivated income reallocation. The

negative correlation of pretax profitability and local tax rates, together with the negative

correlation of tax payments and ownership of foreign tax haven affiliates, is suggestive of active

tax avoidance.

         Harris et al. (1993) report that the U.S. tax liabilities of American firms with tax haven

affiliates are significantly lower than those of otherwise-similar American firms over the 1984-

1988 period, which may be indirect evidence of aggressive income reallocation by firms with tax

haven affiliates. Collins, Kemsley and Lang (1998) analyze a pooled sample of U.S.

7
  Hines (1994) identifies exceptions to this rule that stem from the benefits of limiting equity finance in affiliates
located in countries with very low tax rates in anticipation of reinvesting all of their after-tax profits over long


                                                                                                                         11
multinationals over 1984-1992, finding a similar pattern of greater reported foreign profitability

(normalized by foreign sales) among firms facing foreign tax rates below the U.S. rate. And

Klassen, Lang and Wolfson (1993) find that American multinationals report returns on equity in

the United States that rose by 10 percent relative to reported equity returns in their foreign

operations following the U.S. tax rate reduction in 1986.

           Patterns of reported profitability are consistent with other indicators of aggressive tax-

avoidance behavior, such as the use of royalties to remit profits from abroad and to generate tax

deductions in host countries. Hines (1995) finds that royalty payments from foreign affiliates of

American companies in 1989 exhibit a –0.4 elasticity with respect to the tax cost of paying

royalties, and Grubert (1998) likewise reports significant effects of tax rates on royalty payments

by American affiliates in 1990. Clausing (2001) finds that reported trade patterns between

American parent companies and their foreign affiliates, and those between foreign affiliates

located in different countries, are consistent with incentives to reallocate taxable income.

Controlling for various affiliate characteristics, including their trade balances with unaffiliated

foreigners, Clausing finds that ten percent higher local tax rates are associated with 4.4 percent

higher parent company trade surpluses with their local affiliates, which is suggestive of pricing

practices that move taxable profits out of high-tax jurisdictions. Swenson (2001) finds a similar

pattern in the reported prices of goods imported into the United States, in which high unit tariff

rates appear to be associated with unusually low prices.



2.3        Implications for tax havens.

           The evidence indicates that the level and location of foreign direct investment are highly

sensitive to local tax conditions. This sensitivity makes tax haven locations very attractive to


periods.

                                                                                                        12
foreign investors, not only because after-tax profits earned in tax havens are taxed lightly, but

also because tax haven operations can facilitate the avoidance of taxes on income earned

elsewhere in the world. Since foreign investors can choose among tax haven locations,

competitive pressures encourage countries with small indigenous corporate tax bases, facing

highly elastic potential inflows of foreign direct investment, to reduce – often to zero – their tax

rates on mobile international businesses. Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) demonstrate that

efficient taxation in a small open economy entails zero taxation of income earned by foreign

investors, since any positive taxation distorts the economy more than would other tax

alternatives, without shifting any of the tax burden to foreign investors.8 If international capital

flows are increasingly sensitive to tax rate differences, then incentives to reduce tax rates are

presumably rising as well. The analysis also implies that countries that nevertheless persist in

taxing income earned by foreign investors will have lower incomes than those that do not.



2.4        Developments in the OECD.

           In 1998, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)

introduced what was then known as its Harmful Tax Competition initiative (OECD, 1998), and is

now known as its Harmful Tax Practices initiative. The purpose of the initiative was to

discourage OECD member countries and certain tax havens from pursuing policies that were

thought to harm other countries by unfairly eroding tax bases. In particular, the OECD criticized

the use of preferential tax regimes that included very low tax rates, the absence of effective

information exchange with other countries, and ring-fencing that meant that foreign investors

were entitled to tax benefits that domestic residents were denied. The OECD identified 47 such

preferential regimes, in different industries and lines of business, among OECD countries, many

8
    See Gordon (1986) for an elaboration of this argument, and Gordon and Hines (2002) for a further exposition.

                                                                                                                   13
of which have been subsequently abolished or changed to remove the features to which the

OECD objected.

        As part of its Harmful Tax Practices initiative, the OECD also produced a List of Un-

Cooperative Tax Havens, identifying countries that have not committed to sufficient exchange of

information with tax authorities in other countries. The concern was that the absence of

information exchange might impede the ability of OECD and other countries to tax their resident

individuals and corporations on income or assets hidden in foreign tax havens. As a result of the

OECD initiative, along with diplomatic and other actions of individual nations, 33 countries and

jurisdictions outside the OECD have committed to improve the transparency of their tax systems

and to facilitate information exchange. As of 2004, there remain five tax havens that have not

made such commitments,9 but the vast majority of the world’s tax havens rely on low tax rates

and other favorable tax provisions to attract investment, rather than using the prospect of local

transactions that will not be reported.



3.      Tax havens and American multinational activity.

        Section two reviewed the extensive evidence that foreign direct investment is influenced

by local tax rates, in that high-tax countries attract less investment, and low-tax countries more

investment, than they would in the absence of tax differences. Since tax havens feature

extremely low tax rates and other characteristics that make them particularly desirable from the

standpoint of foreign investors, it follows that they should attract considerably more investment

than their small populations and small economies would otherwise warrant.

9
  These tax havens are Andorra, Liberia, Liechtenstein, the Marshall Islands, and Monaco (OECD, 2004). It is
noteworthy that the commitments of other tax haven countries to exchange information and improve the
transparency of their tax systems is often contingent on OECD member countries doing the same. Given the variety




                                                                                                             14
         Table 1 presents selected information on the foreign investment activity of American

multinational firms in 1999. This information is drawn from data collected by the U.S. Bureau

of Economic Analysis (BEA) on the basis of comprehensive surveys of American multinational

firms. Companies owning foreign affiliates with significant sales, assets, or net income are

required to provide extensive information concerning their operations, which is then aggregated

by country and reported by BEA. Information is unavailable for countries in which very few

American firms have foreign operations, since reporting would then threaten to undermine the

confidentiality promised survey respondents. In spite of these minor omissions, the BEA data

are unique in their coverage and accuracy, and therefore form the basis of the current analysis

and much of what is known anywhere about the operations of multinational firms. National

economic information is provided by the Penn World Tables, which compile national income

account data on an internationally comparable basis for a large number of countries.10

         Tax havens are low-tax foreign countries that offer advanced communication facilities,

promote themselves as offshore financial centers, and have histories of featuring legislation

promoting business or bank secrecy. Hines and Rice (1994, Appendix 1) describe the

identification of tax haven countries for the purpose of U.S. business investment in 1982, and the

intersection of this list and the tax haven countries listed in Diamond and Diamond (2002) is

used to identify tax havens. The populations of seven of these countries exceeded one million in

1982, and these are referred to as the “Big-7;” other tax haven countries are known as “Dots.” In



of experience within the OECD, and the remaining differences between what countries do and what they have
committed to do, the ultimate impact of the OECD initiative is still uncertain.
10
   The BEA data are available at http://bea.gov; the Penn World Tables are available at http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu. It
is possible that data omissions bias the interpretation of foreign investment and economic growth patterns, since
countries whose economies fare poorly are less likely than others to be included in either the BEA or Penn World
Table samples. The primary determinant of inclusion, however, is population, since larger countries are almost
certain to be included, and inclusion bias is apt to represent a major problem only in the unlikely event that tax
haven populations respond sharply to changes in local rates of foreign investment or GDP growth.


                                                                                                                  15
1982, the average tax rate among Big-7 countries was 15.3 percent, while the average tax rate in

the 21 Dots for which Hines and Rice report data was 5.7 percent.

       As the information in Table 1 indicates, American firms exhibit unusual activity levels

and income production in foreign tax havens. In 1999, the primary tax havens held 0.8 percent

of world population (not counting the United States), and their economies contributed 2.3

percent of total world product (again excluding that of the United States). The difference

between the 2.3 percent and 0.8 percent figures reflects the affluence of tax haven countries

compared to the non-U.S. world average. Of the property, plant and equipment held abroad by

American firms, 8.4 percent is located in these tax havens, considerably more than would be

predicted strictly on the basis of the sizes of their economies. The relative concentration of

American-owned physical capital in tax havens is, however, consistent with estimates of the

effect of tax rate differences on investment location.

       Employment abroad by American firms is likewise concentrated in foreign tax havens,

though not quite to the same extent as is ownership of physical capital. Two measures of foreign

employment are available from the BEA survey. The first is employee compensation, of which

affiliates located in major tax havens account for 6.1 percent of the total. Since wage rates differ

between foreign locations, and have the potential to influence this figure, it is useful to

supplement compensation information with estimates of the concentration of numbers of

employees. Table 1 indicates that 5.7 percent of foreign employment by American multinational

firms is located in major tax havens, which is comparable to the 6.1 percent figure for employee

compensation. Consequently, it appears that American firms employ greater numbers of workers

in tax havens than local economic conditions would otherwise suggest. Tax havens draw a

somewhat smaller share of foreign employment than they do of foreign capital, which is not




                                                                                                  16
surprising given the effect of low tax rates in encouraging firms to locate capital, and, in some

cases, to substitute capital for labor.

        The financial variables presented in Table 1 also reveal an impressive concentration of

financial activity in tax havens. American firms locate 15.7 percent of their gross foreign assets

in the major tax havens, a number that differs from the figure for property, plant and equipment

by including financial as well as physical assets. The major foreign tax havens account for 13.4

percent of total foreign sales, and a staggering 30 percent of total foreign income in 1999. Much

of reported tax haven income consists of financial flows from other foreign affiliates that parents

own indirectly through their tax haven affiliates. Clearly, American firms locate considerable

financial assets in foreign tax havens, and their reported profitability in tax havens greatly

exceeds any measure of their physical presence there. This pattern is consistent with the use of

tax haven operations to organize their foreign operations in a way that reduces tax obligations,

itself perhaps not surprising, though its magnitude revealing. It is worth emphasizing that the

high concentration of reported profits in tax havens need not indicate any failure on the part of

American firms to comply with international tax laws. Indeed, Table 1 reflects information that

is self-reported by American multinational firms and not used to calculate tax liabilities, so it is

less likely than are other types of reports to contain information that is misreported for tax

purposes.

        Table 1 provides country details for major tax havens, from which it is clear that tax

haven employment by American multinational firms is concentrated in Hong Kong, Ireland,

Panama, Singapore, and Switzerland. It is noteworthy that the aggregate figure is relatively

modest: American firms in these five locations together employ 401,900 workers. Property,




                                                                                                    17
plant and equipment is concentrated in these countries plus Bermuda, and firms report significant

net income in the same countries plus Bermuda and Luxembourg.11

         The bottom row of Table 1 presents corresponding aggregate information for American

tax haven operations in 1982. In some respects, little has changed: American firms in 1982

reported earning 27.1 percent of their foreign income in major tax havens. Physical operations

were somewhat less concentrated in tax havens in 1982, which then accounted for 4.8 percent of

offshore property, plant and equipment, 3.4 percent of employment compensation, and 3.7

percent of total employment. Tax haven affiliates held a higher fraction of financial assets in

1982, with 22.1 percent of the total. Most strikingly, however, the data indicate that the tax

haven operations of American firms exhibited patterns in 1982 that were similar to those in 1999.

         It would be valuable to have information on the tax haven activities of firms not owned

by Americans, but unfortunately, information comparable to that presented in Table 1 is

unavailable for multinationals from countries other than the United States. Since the United

States taxes the foreign incomes of American companies, permitting them to claim credits for

foreign income taxes, it follows that American firms should be less sensitive to foreign tax rate

differences than are multinational firms from countries, such as Germany and the Netherlands,

that largely exempt foreign income from taxation. Consequently, non-U.S. firms as a group are

likely to locate even greater fractions of their foreign investment and income production in tax

havens than are American firms.



4.       Economic developments in tax havens.



11
  There is considerable industry variation between countries, as reflected in capital/labor ratios that are close to one
for most countries listed in Table 1, but ten in the cases of the Bahamas and Bermuda, where finance and insurance
activities dominate.


                                                                                                                      18
        The enormous expansion of global business activity since the 1980s had the potential to

contribute significantly to the economies of tax havens, as the worldwide rise in foreign direct

investment increased demand for tax haven operations that facilitate tax avoidance. Figure one

plots annual ratios of total world outbound foreign direct investment to total world income, as

reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. As the figure indicates, the

economic significance of foreign direct investment increased rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s.

The tax haven countries were well positioned to benefit from this development, attracting, as

they do, disproportionate shares of aggregate FDI. Virtually all of the major tax havens in 2001

were also tax havens in 1980, so their economies are likely to exhibit rapid growth during this

period as FDI grows in importance.12

        The Republic of Ireland offers one of the most prominent examples of the performance of

tax haven economies. Ireland was for many years a low-income country by Western European

standards, but her economy expanded very rapidly at the same time that worldwide FDI grew,

and Ireland now features one of Europe’s highest living standards. Ireland features a very low

corporate tax rate (currently 12.5 percent) designed to attract foreign investment, and one that

appears to be successful, since close to half of Ireland’s manufacturing employment is in foreign-

owned firms. Honohan and Walsh (2002) argue that the outstanding recent performance of

Ireland’s economy reflects a combination of factors, including education and macroeconomic

policy reforms, demographic and labor market changes, and tax policies. While the economic

fortunes of individual countries are almost certainly attributable to combinations of factors, it is

nevertheless instructive to consider the experience of tax havens as a group, to see whether




12
 To the extent that multinational firms have become more aggressive tax planners over time, this development
would also contribute to the use of tax haven affiliates, and thereby to the economies of tax haven countries.


                                                                                                                 19
Ireland is typical of low-tax locations in exhibiting very rapid economic growth as FDI increased

around the world.



4.1      Economic growth in foreign tax havens.

         Table 2 presents economic growth rates for tax haven countries for which data are

available. The first column of Table 2 provides annual real per capita economic growth rates

over the 1982-1999 period, as calculated from the Penn World Tables, for 17 tax haven

countries. Some of these countries, including Ireland, Singapore, Luxembourg, and St. Kitts and

Nevis, sustained annual per capita real growth rates exceeding five percent a year, and the

average of the 17 countries was 3.3 percent. By contrast, the world as a whole had an average

annual per capita real growth rate of 1.4 percent.13

         The Penn World Tables devote considerable effort to compiling data that are

internationally comparable, the goal being to produce GDP statistics that accurately reflect living

standard differences between countries. This is an enormous undertaking, one that is fraught

with difficulties for any country, and infeasible for some smaller countries for which data are too

difficult to obtain. As a result, the country coverage of the Penn World Tables omits a number of

smaller tax havens. The second column of Table 2 presents comparable annual per capita real

economic growth rates calculated from GDP figures compiled by the World Bank, as reported in

its World Development Indicators. The World Bank GDP statistics are presented at international

prices, as measured by official exchange rates, but unfortunately not at purchasing power



13
  Average growth rates are unweighted averages. Weighted averages of tax haven growth rates would, by
necessity, reflect the performance of the three tax havens – Hong Kong, Ireland, and Switzerland – whose GDPs
greatly exceed those of the others. Penn World Table data limitations impose that some of the entries in the first and
third columns of Table 2 correspond to annual growth rates over periods other than 1982-1999. For the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bermuda, Cyprus, and Singapore, growth rates are calculated over 1982-1996; for Macao, 1986-1999; for
Malta, 1982-1998; and for Dominica, 1982-2000.


                                                                                                                   20
equivalents as the Penn World Table information is. The pattern of economic growth rates for

the 22 tax haven countries in the second column of Table 2 resembles that in the first, though the

difference between tax haven and non-haven growth rates is less stark, tax havens averaging

annual per capita GDP growth of 2.6 percent, and the world averaging 1.7 percent.

       There is a possible difficulty of interpreting official GDP statistics in countries that attract

significant foreign investment, and where reported company incomes may not correspond

exactly to earnings attributable to local productive factors. In principle, GDP represents

economic output produced by factors located within a country’s borders, but in practice, this may

be distorted by tax-motivated reallocation of reported incomes of the affiliates of foreign-owned

multinational corporations. An alternative is to evaluate economic performance by Gross

National Product (GNP), which is income earned by residents, and which, in principle, does not

include the reported profits of foreign-owned firms. Column three of Table 2 presents per capita

real annual GNP growth figures from the Penn World Tables, which again indicate that the tax

haven economies grew much more rapidly (3.0 percent a year) than the world as a whole (1.4

percent a year).

       The economies of tax haven countries differ in size, character, and affluence from those

of other countries. As a consequence, it is useful to estimate the determinants of economic

growth rates, including size and affluence as independent variables, in order to see if tax haven

growth rates remain anomalous after controlling for simple observables. Table 3 presents

estimated coefficients from regressions in which the dependent variable is the annual per capita

real GDP growth rate from 1982-1999 as calculated from the Penn World Tables. The

independent variables in the regression reported in the first column include the natural log of

population in 1982, the natural log of 1982 per capita GDP, and a dummy variable that takes the




                                                                                                    21
value one if a country is a tax haven, and zero otherwise. The Penn World Tables provide

sufficient data for this regression to be run on 119 countries.

         The regression results indicate that the economies of larger, and more affluent, countries

grew more rapidly than those of other countries during the 1982-1999 period. The 0.194

coefficient on the log of 1982 population indicates that doubling a country’s population is

associated with 0.194 percent a year faster per capita GDP growth, though this effect is not

statistically significant. The 0.470 coefficient on the log of per capita GDP indicates that

doubling a country’s affluence in 1982 increases its subsequent economic growth rate by 0.47

percent per year. And the 2.312 coefficient on the tax haven dummy variable implies that tax

haven economies grew 2.3 percent per year faster than would be predicted on the basis of their

size and wealth. This large tax haven effect is consistent with the differences reported in Table

2, and implies strongly that tax havens had unusual economic experiences in the 1980s and

1990s.

         Countries are not randomly selected to be tax havens; tax policies are choices that

governments make on the basis of economic and other considerations. As a result, any estimated

effect of being a tax haven reflects not only the impact of associated tax policies but also the

growth effects of any other economic, political, or social considerations that are correlated with

choosing to be a tax haven. Furthermore, countries that lower their tax rates to attract foreign

investment may well enact other policies that are difficult to measure, but nevertheless contribute

to foreign investment and therefore to economic growth, the omission of which in an estimating

equation could lead to overstating the growth effects of low tax rates. Since it is impossible to

control for these considerations directly, the most sensible procedure instead is to use available

independent variables to control for as much variation as these variables permit. Column two of




                                                                                                     22
Table 3 adds second and third powers of 1982 population and per capita income as independent

variables, in the hope of controlling at least for nonlinear effects of income and population

differences, and any political and social effects that are correlated with these nonlinearities. The

addition of these higher powers reduces the estimated effects of tax haven status on annual

economic growth to roughly 1.5 percent per year, though it remains statistically significant. This

does not rule out the possibility that correlated omitted variables account for much of the

estimated tax haven effects, though it is noteworthy that all of the tax haven countries in the

sample were already tax havens by 1982, so the estimated growth effects are those that coincide

not with major tax changes, but instead with changes in the international economic environment.

        Columns three and four of Table 3 report estimated coefficients from regressions that are

similar to those reported in columns one and two, except that annual per capital real GNP growth

is the dependent variable, and GNP replaces GDP as an independent variable. Population has a

larger effect on GNP in these regressions than it does in the GDP regressions reported in the first

two columns, and per capita income has a smaller effect on GNP than it does on GDP. The

estimated coefficients on the tax haven dummy variable are of similar magnitudes to those

reported in the first two columns: being a tax haven is associated with 2.75 percent a year faster

real per capita GNP growth in the regression reported in column three, and 1.93 percent a year

faster real per capita GNP growth in the regression reported in column four. Hence it appears

that the economic performance of tax havens between 1982 and 1999 cannot be attributed merely

to their sizes or initial levels of income.



4.2     Economic significance of foreign investors in tax havens.




                                                                                                  23
        The remarkable tax haven growth rates immediately raise the question of whether foreign

investment, even at significantly elevated levels, might plausibly account for all or much of the

differences between tax havens and other countries. Given the state of understanding of the

determinants of national economic growth this is an extremely difficult question to answer, but

as a first step it is helpful to consider evidence of the economic penetration of American

multinational firms in tax haven economies.

        Table 4 offers information on employment and income tax payments by American firms

in tax havens and other countries. The first panel of Table 4 presents ratios of employment by

American multinational firms to total employment by all employers, in tax haven countries, in

1982 and 1999. BEA reports employment by American firms, whereas total employment in

other countries can be inferred from the Penn World Tables. Ratios of employment by American

firms to total national employment are calculated separately by country, and Table 4 presents

simple group means of these ratios.14 As indicated in the first row of the table, American firms

in 1999 employed 2.35 percent of the labor force in tax haven countries, a significant fraction,

and one that exceeds their employment of 1.12 percent of the labor forces of countries other than

tax havens. Tax haven employment has grown significantly over time, since American firms

provided just 1.36 percent of the jobs in tax haven countries in 1982. Employee compensation is

rather less concentrated in tax havens, averaging one percent of tax haven GDP in 1999, possibly

reflecting employment that targets lower-wage workers.




14
  Table 4 includes information on all tax haven countries for which sufficient data are available: Barbados,
Bermuda, Hong Kong, Ireland, Luxembourg, Panama, Singapore, and Switzerland. It is noteworthy that Bermuda is
something of an outlier in this group, in the sense of significantly influencing average employment and income tax
ratios (though, interestingly, not the employee compensation/GDP ratio). If Bermuda were omitted from the sample,
then the average employment figure for tax havens in 1999 would have been 1.25 percent, and income taxes/GDP
for tax havens would have been 0.4 percent in 1982 and 0.8 percent in 1999. Inspection indicates that Bermuda is
the only country to exert such a strong effect on the group averages reported in Table 4.


                                                                                                               24
       Multinational firms contribute to local economies in ways beyond just employing local

workers. Firms pay significant income taxes, as reflected in Table 4, which reports that income

taxes paid by American firms to tax haven governments averaged three percent of local GDP in

1999. This contrasts with an average 0.6 percent ratio of income tax payments to GDP in

countries other than tax havens. Since the United States is responsible for only between one fifth

and one quarter of the world’s outbound foreign direct investment, and the U.S. tax system

discourages the use of tax havens more than do the tax systems of many other major capital-

exporting countries, it is likely that foreign investors as a group contribute significantly to

employment, investment, tax payments, and other activities that contribute to the economic

vitality of tax havens.



4.3    Government finance.

       An obvious potential cost of offering tax benefits to foreign and domestic investors is that

total tax collections might thereby be reduced to unacceptable levels. For countries that might

otherwise attract very little business activity, however, it is not clear whether, or to what extent,

lower tax rates are associated with reduced aggregate tax collections. In order to evaluate the

potential tradeoffs involved, it is necessary to determine the level of foreign investment, and

associated tax collections, that would have accompanied higher tax rates. This exercise is

complicated not only by the difficulty of estimating the effect of tax reductions on FDI and

taxable business income in tax havens, but also by the need to determine the effects of FDI

activities on multiple sources of tax revenue, including excise taxes, personal income taxes,

property taxes, value added and sales taxes, and others. In lieu of attempting such a calculation,




                                                                                                    25
this section instead considers the experience of tax haven governments to infer the extent to

which their public finances reflect limitations on tax revenue.

        The first column of Table 5 presents ratios of government product to GDP in tax haven

countries, as reported in the Penn World Tables for 1999.15 From the first two lines of the table

it is apparent that average tax haven governments contribute somewhat more to GDP than do the

governments of other countries, the average tax haven ratio of government to GDP being 25

percent, compared to 20 percent for the world as a whole. The governments of Big-7 tax havens,

listed at the top of the table, constitute relatively small fractions of their economies, whereas

governments represent much larger fractions of gross domestic product in the Dot tax havens

listed in the bottom panel of the table.

        The data presented in the first column of Table 5 are drawn from the Penn World Tables.

They are based on national income accounting concepts, so the government variable captures

central government contribution to GDP, which includes final purchases of goods and services,

but excludes other types of government expenditures, such as interest payments, transfer

payments, and the expenditures of subnational governments. As a result, this measure of

government activity reflects the desire and ability of governments to finance direct purchases,

but does not incorporate costs incurred in transfer-type activities. The benefit of using such a

national income-based measure of government size is that it is carefully constructed for

comparability across countries; furthermore, final purchases of goods and services should vary

with the costs that governments face in raising tax revenue. Alternative measures of government

tax collection and expenditure are available from the IMF Government Finance Statistics. These


15
  Data limitations prevent the entries in Table 5 from corresponding uniformly to the same years. In the first
column, the figures for the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bermuda, and Cyprus are for 1996; for Malta, 1998; and for
Dominica, 2000. In the second and third columns, the figures for Vanuatu are for 1990; for St. Lucia, 1991, and for
St. Kitts and Nevis, 1994.


                                                                                                                 26
data include transfer payments as government expenditures, but reflect national differences in

accounting conventions and procedures, and necessarily treat asymmetrically tax cuts and

government transfers that might go to the same recipients. While it is notoriously difficult to

compare government financial statistics across countries, it is nonetheless noteworthy that

Slemrod (2004) finds that the ratio of government expenditures (as measured by the IMF) to

GDP has no effect in cross-country regressions explaining statutory corporate tax rates.

       The second and third columns of Table 5 present IMF figures for ratios of government

spending to GDP, and tax revenue to GDP, in 1995, the last year for which the country coverage

is sufficient to include many of the tax havens. The IMF data indicate that tax haven

governments, as measured by fractions of GDP in 1995, are of comparable sizes to governments

in non-haven countries. Tax haven government spending averaged 30.3 percent of GDP, which

compares to 30.9 percent for the world as a whole; similarly, tax haven tax collections averaged

22.4 percent of GDP, as opposed to 22.3 percent for the world as a whole. Hence these simple

comparisons suggest that the public sectors of tax haven countries are not systematically larger

or smaller than those elsewhere.

       Since tax haven countries are smaller and more affluent than the world average, the fact

that their public sectors are of comparable sizes to the world average could itself be anomalous,

particularly if country size is negatively associated with size of the public sector. To evaluate

this possibility, Table 6 presents estimated coefficients from three sets of regressions, in which

the dependent variables are the measures of government size presented in Table 5, and the

independent variables are 1999 values of the same variables used in the regressions reported in

the first two columns of Table 3. The estimated –2.218 coefficient on log population in the first

column indicates that smaller countries indeed generally have larger government sectors, a




                                                                                                     27
doubling of population being associated with 2.2 percent larger government as a fraction of

GDP. The –4.489 coefficient on log per capita GDP in the same column implies that more

affluent countries have smaller governments, a doubling of income being associated with

roughly 4.5 percent smaller government sectors. The 4.745 estimated coefficient on the tax

haven dummy variable indicates that tax havens have government sectors that are almost five

percent larger, as a fraction of GDP, than other countries of similar size and affluence, though

this coefficient is not statistically significant.

        Column 2 of Table 6 reports estimated coefficients from a specification that adds

additional powers of population and income, in which the coefficient on the tax haven dummy

variable falls to 1.5 and remains insignificant. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 report estimated

coefficients from regressions in which the dependent variable is the ratio of government

spending to GDP as reported by the IMF. The -2.323 coefficient in column three implies that

smaller countries have larger governments, and the 4.446 coefficient in the same column

indicates that wealthier countries also have larger governments, both carrying the prediction that

tax havens should feature large government sectors. The -10.727 coefficient on the tax haven

dummy variable suggests that government spending in tax havens is 10.7 percent lower than

otherwise would be predicted on the basis of their small sizes and their affluence. Adding

additional powers of population and income, as in column 4, changes these results very little, and

the regressions reported in columns 5 and 6 carry very similar implications for the determinants

of tax revenue as a fraction of GDP, as reported by the IMF. The -8.986 coefficient reported in

column 5 implies that tax haven governments collect roughly nine percent less tax revenue as a

fraction of GDP than would be expected on the basis of their sizes and incomes.




                                                                                                   28
       The results reported in Table 6 offer differing interpretations of the sizes of the public

sectors of tax haven countries. In all of the regressions, smaller countries are predicted to have

larger government sectors, making the rough equality of the sizes of tax haven governments and

the governments of all countries somewhat anomalous. In the first two regressions, explaining

the contribution of central government to GDP, wealthier countries feature smaller government

contributions, an effect that, for tax havens, mitigates the impact of small size, and leaves tax

havens not significantly different from other countries. The regressions explaining government

spending and tax collections likewise predict that smaller countries have larger governments, but

additionally predict that wealthier countries have larger governments, a pattern that the tax

havens do not fit. It is noteworthy that, in addition to differences in their dependent variables,

the first two regressions reported in Table 6 differ from the final four in being run on a much

larger (124 observations) cross section of countries than that (68 observations) available using

the IMF data. These results suggest that there are dimensions of public sector activity in which

tax havens have smaller governments than do other, similarly situated, countries, even though the

mean level of government size in tax havens looks comparable to that for the world as a whole.



5.     Tax havens and the economies of high-tax countries.

       There is considerable controversy over the impact of tax havens on countries with higher

tax rates. To some, it is a matter of faith that the economic successes of tax havens come at the

expense of countries with high tax rates, while others believe that tax havens encourage

economic activity with positive spillovers, and thereby contribute to economic prosperity

elsewhere. These arguments are not customarily accompanied by appeal to reliable empirical

evidence, and since economic theory does not clearly indicate whether tax diversity contributes




                                                                                                     29
to economic welfare,16 it can be difficult to evaluate the impact of tax havens on economic

outcomes in other countries.

         There are several channels through which tax haven countries might influence the

economies of high-tax countries, including their effects on world prices and on tax policies

elsewhere. Perhaps the most obvious possible channel of influence is that tax havens might

divert investment that would otherwise have been located in high-tax jurisdictions.17

Alternatively, the existence of tax havens could encourage investment in other countries, if the

ability to relocate taxable income into tax havens improves the desirability of investing in high-

tax locations, if tax haven operations facilitate deferral of home-country taxation of income

earned elsewhere, or if tax haven affiliates provide valuable intermediate goods and services to

affiliates in high-tax countries. Hence any assessment of the impact of tax havens on investment

elsewhere requires an empirical evaluation.

         Desai, Foley and Hines (2004a) offer evidence of the extent to which tax haven activity

and economic activity outside of tax havens influence each other. American firms investing in

foreign countries whose economies subsequently grow rapidly exhibit higher growth rates of

foreign investment than do firms investing in foreign countries whose economies grow slowly.

Consequently, GDP growth rates can be used to predict differences between subsequent non-tax-

haven investment levels of firms whose original investments are located in different countries:

firms whose foreign investments are concentrated in countries that subsequently exhibit rapid

economic growth tend to show above-average rates of foreign asset accumulation. Desai, Foley,

16
   Wilson and Wildasin (2004) provide a recent review of theoretical analysis of the desirability of international tax
competition.
17
   It is noteworthy that the small sizes of tax haven economies imply that tax havens are unlikely to have large
effects on the economic performances of high-tax countries. Even if all of the 3.3 percent annual GDP growth of
tax haven countries represents activity that would otherwise have taken place in other countries, it follows that such
diversion reduces annual GDP growth rates elsewhere from 1.4 percent a year to 1.35 percent a year, less than a four



                                                                                                                   30
and Hines use the initial distribution of foreign investment to predict subsequent investment in

non-haven countries, matching these predicted changes with proclivities to establish and keep tax

haven affiliates. The results indicate that firms with growing opportunities outside of tax havens

are the most likely to demand tax haven operations: a one percent greater likelihood of

establishing a tax haven affiliate is associated with 0.5 to 0.7 percent greater sales and

investment growth by non-haven affiliates. Since complementarity is a symmetric relationship,

it follows that the availability of opportunities to establish tax haven operations contributes to

economic activity outside of tax havens.

        The estimated complementary relationship between investment in tax havens and

investment in nearby high-tax countries does not necessarily carry with it the implication that

high-tax countries benefit from tax havens. Tax avoidance associated with the use of tax haven

affiliates has the potential to erode tax bases in high-tax countries, creating revenue shortfalls

that must be remedied either by raising tax rates or by reducing government spending. The use

of foreign tax havens by American firms has an ambiguous effect on U.S. tax collections, since

reallocating foreign income from high-tax to low-tax foreign jurisdictions generally increases

U.S. tax obligations by reducing foreign tax payments for which foreign tax credits can be

claimed.18 To the extent that American firms use tax haven operations to reduce levels of

taxable income in the United States, however, U.S. tax collections will fall. One possibility is

that countries would prefer to subject mobile international companies to lower tax rates than they

do other firms, but are prevented from doing so by political considerations or the practical

difficulty of distinguishing multinational from domestic firms. In such a setting, countries could

benefit from permitting multinational firms to obtain tax reductions by using affiliates in tax


percent decline. Furthermore, there is no presumption that tax havens divert economic activity to such a degree, or
indeed, necessarily divert it at all.


                                                                                                                 31
havens, thereby implicitly subjecting these mobile firms to lower tax burdens than other

taxpayers.



6.         Conclusion.

           The available evidence indicates that tax haven countries have flourished in the years

since 1982. Tax havens attract greater foreign investment than do other countries of similar sizes

and income levels, and, partly as a result, their economies have grown much more rapidly than

have the economies of countries with higher tax rates. The favorable tax treatment offered to

foreign investors does not appear to have greatly impaired government finances, since the public

sectors of tax haven countries are not noticeably smaller than the public sectors of other

countries, though possibly smaller than those of similarly situated countries.

           The economic successes of tax haven countries are reflected in the persistence of their

policies: of the 41 tax havens identified by Hines and Rice (1994) for 1982, all remain on

Diamond and Diamond’s (2002) list of tax havens for 2002. The robust performance of tax

haven economies suggests that they are likely to continue offering favorable tax terms to foreign

investors. Such tax policies carry mixed implications for other governments, since while tax

havens may erode the tax bases of high tax countries, they also appear to stimulate greater

investment activity, and permit governments to tax more mobile international capital less heavily

than purely domestic capital. Concerned governments of high tax countries may not even be

able to evaluate the net effects of nearby tax havens, given the complexity of these

considerations. As a result, the international community is unlikely to summon the collective

will necessary to persuade or force tax havens to abandon their policies, and tax havens will

continue to play important roles in world tax affairs.

18
     See Hines and Rice (1994) for an analysis of this effect.

                                                                                                     32
References



Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, Taxpayer responses to competitive tax policies and tax
policy responses to competitive taxpayers: Recent evidence, Tax Notes International, 28 June
2004, 34 (13), 1349-1362.

Altshuler, Rosanne, Harry Grubert, and T. Scott Newlon, Has U.S. investment abroad become
more sensitive to tax rates?, in James R. Hines Jr., ed. International taxation and multinational
activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 9-32.

Altshuler, Rosanne, T. Scott Newlon and William C. Randolph, Do repatriation taxes matter?
Evidence from the tax returns of U.S. multinationals,” in Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr.,
and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The effects of taxation on multinational corporations (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1995), 253-272.

Boskin, Michael and William G. Gale, New results on the effects of tax policy on the
international location of investment, in Martin Feldstein, ed. The effects of taxation on capital
accumulation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 201-219.

Clausing, Kimberly A., The impact of transfer pricing on intrafirm trade, in James R. Hines Jr.,
ed. International taxation and multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2001), 173-194.

Collins, Julie H., Deen Kemsley, and Mark Lang, Cross-jurisdictional income shifting and
earnings valuation, Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1998, 36 (2), 209-229.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Repatriation taxes and dividend
distortions, National Tax Journal, September 2001, 54 (4), 829-851.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Chains of ownership, tax competition,
and the location decisions of multinational firms, in Heinz Herrmann and Robert Lipsey, eds.
Foreign direct investment in the real and financial sector of industrial countries (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 2003), 61-98.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Economic effects of regional tax havens,
NBER Working Paper No. 10806, September 2004a.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., A multinational perspective on capital
structure choice and internal capital markets, Journal of Finance, forthcoming 2004b.

Diamond, Peter A. and James Mirrlees, Optimal taxation and public production, I: Production
efficiency; II: Tax rules, American Economic Review, March and June 1971, 61 (1, 2), 8-27, 261-
278.




                                                                                                    33
Diamond, Walter H. and Dorothy B. Diamond, Tax havens of the world (Newark, NJ: Matthew
Bender Books, 2002).

Gordon, Roger H., Taxation of investment and savings in a world economy, American Economic
Review, December 1986, 76 (5), 1086-1102.

Gordon, Roger H. and James R. Hines Jr., International taxation, in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein, eds. Handbook of public economics, volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2002),
1395-1995.

Grubert, Harry, Taxes and the division of foreign operating income among royalties, interest,
dividends and retained earnings, Journal of Public Economics, May 1998, 68 (2), 269-290.

Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, Taxes, tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational corporate
decision making, Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1991, 73 (2), 285-293.

Harris, David, Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod, and Bernard Yeung, Income shifting in U.S.
multinational corporations, in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard and Joel Slemrod, eds.
Studies in international taxation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 277-302.

Hartman, David G., Tax policy and foreign direct investment in the United States, National Tax
Journal, December 1984, 37 (4), 475-487.

Hines, James R., Jr., Credit and deferral as international investment incentives, Journal of Public
Economics, October 1994, 55 (2), 323-347.

Hines, James R., Jr., Taxes, technology transfer, and the R&D activities of multinational firms,
in Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, eds. The effects of taxation on
multinational corporations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 225-248.

Hines, James R., Jr., Altered states: Taxes and the location of foreign direct investment in
America, American Economic Review, December 1996, 86 (5), 1076-1094.

Hines, James R., Jr., Tax policy and the activities of multinational corporations, in Alan J.
Auerbach, ed. Fiscal policy: Lessons from economic research (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1997), 401-445.

Hines, James R., Jr., Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation, National Tax
Journal, June 1999, 52 (2), 305-322.

Hines, James R., Jr., “Tax sparing” and direct investment in developing countries, in James R.
Hines Jr., ed. International taxation and multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2001), 39-66.




                                                                                                34
Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard, Coming home to America: Dividend repatriations by
U.S. multiationals, in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds. Taxation in the global economy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 161-200.

Hines, James R., Jr., and Eric M. Rice, Fiscal paradise: Foreign tax havens and American
business, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1994, 109 (1), 149-182.

Honohan, Patrick and Brendan Walsh, Catching up with the leaders: The Irish hare, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2002, 1, 1-77.

Klassen, Kenneth, Mark Lang, and Mark Wolfson, Geographic income shifting by multinational
corporations in response to tax rate changes, Journal of Accounting Research, 1993, 31
(Supplement), 141-173.

Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), Harmful tax competition:
An emerging global issue (Paris: OECD, 1998).

Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), The OECD’s project on
harmful tax practices: The 2004 progress report (Paris: OECD, 2004).

Slemrod, Joel, Tax effects on foreign direct investment in the United States: Evidence from a
cross-country comparison, in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds. Taxation in the global economy
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 79-117.

Slemrod, Joel, Are corporate tax rates, or countries, converging? Journal of Public Economics,
June 2004, 88 (6), 1169-1186.

Swenson, Deborah L., The impact of U.S. tax reform on foreign direct investment in the United
States, Journal of Public Economics, June 1994, 54 (2), 243-266.

Swenson, Deborah L., Tax reforms and evidence of transfer pricing, National Tax Journal,
March 2001, 54 (1), 7-25.

Sullivan, Martin A., U.S. multinationals move more profits to tax havens, Tax Notes, February 9,
2004, 690-693.

Wilson, John D. and David E. Wildasin, Capital tax competition: Bane or boon? Journal of
Public Economics, June 2004, 88 (6), 1065-1091.

Young, Kan H., The effects of taxes and rates of return on foreign direct investment in the
United States, National Tax Journal, March 1988, 41 (1), 109-121.




                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                                        World Foreign Direct Investment as a Percent of World Product,
                                                                                                  1970-2001
        FDI/GDP
        (percent)
         4.5


          4


         3.5


          3


         2.5


          2


         1.5


          1


         0.5


          0
               19 7 0
                        19 7 1
                                 19 7 2
                                          19 7 3
                                                   19 7 4
                                                            19 7 5
                                                                     19 7 6
                                                                              19 7 7
                                                                                       19 7 8
                                                                                                19 7 9
                                                                                                         19 8 0
                                                                                                                  19 8 1
                                                                                                                           19 8 2
                                                                                                                                    19 8 3
                                                                                                                                             19 8 4
                                                                                                                                                      19 8 5
                                                                                                                                                               19 8 6
                                                                                                                                                                        19 8 7
                                                                                                                                                                                 19 8 8
                                                                                                                                                                                          19 8 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                   19 9 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            19 9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19 9 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19 9 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19 9 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19 9 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19 9 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19 9 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19 9 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19 9 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20 0 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  year



Note: the figure depicts annual ratios (measured in percent) of total world foreign direct investment to the sum of
GDP for all countries.

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               36
                                           Table 1: Tax Havens in the World Economy (1999)

                                                                           U.S. Multinational Share of

                                                         Net Property,
                                                           plant and                                      Compensation   Thousands of
                    Population    GDP     Total Assets    equipment          Sales           Net Income   of employees    Employees


All Tax Havens        0.8%       2.3%        15.7%           8.4%            13.4%             30.0%          6.1%          5.7%


Selected Big-7:

Hong-Kong            0.136%      0.575%     1.849%          1.610%          2.195%            2.714%         1.464%        1.257%
Ireland              0.076%      0.311%     2.253%          1.436%          2.661%            7.567%         1.134%        1.110%
Panama               0.057%      0.058%     1.029%          0.871%          0.224%            2.265%           NA          0.483%
Singapore            0.080%      0.342%     1.893%          1.845%          3.672%            2.549%         1.433%        1.550%
Switzerland          0.145%      0.638%     3.114%          0.919%          3.307%            6.774%         1.703%        0.775%

Selected Dots:

Antigua & Barbuda    0.001%      0.004%     0.003%          0.003%          0.009%            0.002%         0.003%        0.003%
Bahamas              0.006%      0.016%     0.174%          0.327%          0.078%            0.489%         0.031%        0.032%
Bermuda              0.001%      0.004%     3.932%          0.976%          0.953%            5.197%           NA          0.097%
Luxembourg           0.009%      0.063%     1.340%          0.124%          0.206%            2.388%         0.192%        0.122%


All Havens, 1982      0.7%       2.1%        22.1%           4.8%            11.9%             27.1%          3.4%          3.7%




Note: Column one of the table presents 1999 ratios of population to total non-U.S. population, and column two
presents 1999 ratios of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to total non-U.S. GDP in 1999; both are drawn from the
Penn World Tables. Columns 3-8 of the table present information on the 1999 foreign investment activity of
American multinational firms as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis; the table entries are ratios of
national totals to non-U.S. world totals. 1982 values are reported in the bottom row of the table. Total 1999 values
for tax havens reported in the first row of the table, and 1982 values reported in the last row of the table, include
information for Andorra, Anguilla, Antigua, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Cyprus, Dominica,
Gibraltar, Grenada, Hong Kong, Ireland, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Macau, Malta, the
Netherlands Antilles, Panama, Singapore, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Switzerland, the U.K. Caribbean Islands,
and Vanuatu.




                                                                                                                                    37
                         Table 2: Annual per capita real income growth rates, 1982-1999

                                                     GDP                                             GNP
                             Penn World Table          World Development Indicators             Penn World Table

World Total                         1.4%                               1.7%                            1.4%

All Tax Havens                      3.3%                               2.6%                            3.0%

Big-7

Hong Kong                           3.5%                               3.4%                            3.7%
Ireland                             5.1%                               5.6%                            4.4%
Lebanon                              na                                 na                              na
Liberia                              na                                 na                              na
Panama                              0.1%                               0.5%                            0.1%
Singapore                           5.2%                               4.4%                            6.0%
Switzerland                         1.0%                               0.6%                            1.0%

Dots

Andorra                              na                                  na                              na
Antigua & Barbuda                  3.7%                                 4.7%                           3.5%
Bahamas                              na                                 0.5%                             na
Bahrain                              na                                 1.4%                             na
Barbados                           3.0%                                 1.6%                           2.8%
Belize                             1.8%                                 2.5%                           1.6%
Bermuda                              na                                  na                              na
Cayman Islands                       na                                  na                              na
Cote d'Ivoire                        na                                -1.6%                             na
Cyprus                             4.8%                                 4.1%                           4.7%
Dominica                           2.9%                                 3.9%                           2.3%
Gibraltar                            na                                  na                              na
Grenada                            4.0%                                  na                            3.5%
Jordan                             -0.4%                               -0.8%                           -0.7%
Kiribati                             na                                  na                              na
Liechtenstein                        na                                  na                              na
Luxembourg                         5.1%                                 6.0%                           3.3%
Macao                              2.3%                                 2.0%                           2.3%
Malta                                na                                 4.6%                             na
Mauritania                           na                                -0.1%                             na
Nauru                                na                                  na                              na
Netherland Antilles                  na                                  na                              na
St. Kitts & Nevis                  6.1%                                 6.4%                           5.4%
St. Lucia                          4.5%                                 4.8%                           4.2%
St. Vincent                        3.2%                                 3.8%                           3.0%
Vanuatu                              na                                -1.1%                             na



Note: Entries are annual per capita real national income growth rates from 1982-1999. The first two columns
present growth rates of Gross Domestic Product, and the third column presents growth rates of Gross National
Product. The first line presents unweighted averages for all countries, and the second line presents unweighted
averages for tax havens. “na” indicates that data are not available.




                                                                                                                  38
T a b le 3 : D e te rm in a n ts o f G D P a n d G N P g ro w th ra te s .

     D e p e n d e n t v a ria b le : A n n u a l p e r c a p ita re a l g ro w th ra te , 1 9 8 2 -1 9 9 9
                                                        GDP                                 GNP

C o n s ta n t                                 -4 .4 8 2      1 2 8 .5 2 5           -2 .3 2 8      -2 5 .7 6 6
                                              (1 .2 0 9 )     (8 8 .7 9 5 )         (1 .0 5 9 )    (1 4 .6 0 3 )
L n (P o p u la tio n 1 9 8 2 )                0 .1 9 4         -0 .1 1 3            0 .3 0 8        -1 .5 3 7
                                              (0 .1 1 3 )      (2 .0 6 9 )          (0 .1 0 5 )     (2 .1 1 3 )
                                  2
L n (P o p u la tio n 1 9 8 2 )                                 -0 .1 0 4                             0 .1 1 2
                                                               (0 .2 4 5 )                          (0 .2 5 4 )
                                  3
L n (P o p u la tio n 1 9 8 2 )                                  0 .0 0 9                                0
                                                               (0 .0 0 9 )                           (0 .0 1 )
L n (P e r c a p ita G D P 1 9 8 2 )            0 .4 7         -4 7 .8 6 2
                                              (0 .1 3 3 )     (3 3 .2 5 1 )
                                       2
L n (P e r c a p ita G D P 1 9 8 2 )                             5 .9 7 5
                                                               (4 .1 0 2 )
                                       3
L n (P e r c a p ita G D P 1 9 8 2 )                            -0 .2 4 3
                                                               (0 .1 6 7 )
L n (P e r c a p ita G N P 1 9 8 2 )                                                 0 .0 5 7          9 .7 4
                                                                                    (0 .0 6 5 )     (4 .0 5 8 )
                                       2
L n (P e r c a p ita G N P 1 9 8 2 )                                                                 -0 .9 7 4
                                                                                                    (0 .3 9 5 )
                                       3
L n (P e r c a p ita G N P 1 9 8 2 )                                                                  0 .0 3 2
                                                                                                    (0 .0 1 2 )
T ax H aven D um m y                           2 .3 1 2         1 .5 0 7             2 .7 5 6        1 .9 2 9
                                              (0 .6 4 2 )      (0 .5 8 7 )          (0 .6 4 5 )     (0 .6 0 8 )

N u m b e r o f O b s e rv a tio n s             119             119                  114              114

R -s q u a re d                                 0 .2 4           0 .3 8                0 .2           0 .3 2


Note: The table presents regressions in which the dependent variable is average annual per capita real income
growth rates from 1982-1999, and each country represents a single observation. Income is measured by Gross
Domestic Product in the regressions reported in columns one and two, and is measured by Gross National Product in
the regressions reported in columns three and four. “Ln(Population 1982)” is the natural log of a country’s
population in 1982; “Ln(Per capita GDP 1982)” is the natural log of per capita Gross Domestic Product in 1982, and
“Ln(Per capita GNP 1982)” is the natural log of per capita Gross National Product in 1982. The “Tax Haven
Dummy” takes the value one if a country is a tax haven (listed in Table 2), and zero otherwise. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                  39
Table 4: American multinationals and tax haven economies




           American Multinational Employment / Total Employment

           Year                                                               1982                     1999

           Tax havens                                                        1.36%                    2.35%
           World                                                             0.80%                    1.12%


           American Employee Compensation/GDP

           Year                                                               1982                     1999

           Tax havens                                                        0.8%                      1.0%
           World                                                             0.64%                    0.75%


           Income Tax/GDP

           Year                                                               1982                     1999

           Tax havens                                                        1.00%                    3.00%
           World                                                             0.4%                      0.6%




Note: The top panel presents ratios of employment by American multinational firms to total national employment in
1982 and 1999. The middle panel presents ratios of employee compensation in American firms to Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), and the bottom panel presents ratios of income tax payments by American firms to GDP. The ratios
are calculated separately for each country; the first line in each panel presents unweighted averages for tax havens,
and the second line presents unweighted averages for all countries.




                                                                                                                  40
                                 Table 5: Government sizes in tax haven countries

                         Government Product/GDP          Government spending/GDP                Tax Revenue/GDP

                         Penn World Table (1999)                  IMF (1995)                        IMF (1995)

World Total                         19.74                            30.94                             22.28

All Tax Havens                      25.35                            30.34                             22.39

Big-7

Hong-Kong                            5.80                             na                                na
Ireland                              4.39                            38.06                             32.43
Lebanon                             30.81                            35.18                             11.65
Liberia                               na                              na                                na
Panama                              17.02                            24.71                             17.19
Singapore                            8.28                            15.93                             16.26
Switzerland                         10.04                            26.63                             21.57

Dots

Andorra                               na                              na                                 na
Antigua & Barbuda                   59.13                             na                                 na
Bahamas                             17.46                            19.03                             17.18
Bahrain                             20.57                            28.80                              8.16
Barbados                             9.06                             na                                 na
Belize                              28.73                             na                                 na
Bermuda                             16.13                             na                                 na
Cayman Island                         na                              na                                 na
Cyprus                              22.35                            34.28                             26.83
Dominica                            52.91                             na                                 na
Gibraltar                             na                              na                                 na
Grenada                             23.20                             na                                 na
Jordan                              48.63                             na                                 na
Kiribati                              na                              na                                 na
Liechtenstein                         na                              na                                 na
Luxembourg                           4.04                            41.50                             41.71
Macao                               19.73                             na                                 na
Malta                               24.35                            39.07                             28.81
Nauru                                 na                              na                                 na
Netherland Antilles                   na                              na                                 na
St. Kitts & Nevis                   60.12                            29.31                             23.41
St. Lucia                           19.67                            24.05                             23.62
St. Vincent                         55.25                             na                                 na
Vanuatu                               na                             37.84                             22.29

Note: Entries are ratios of government activity to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The first column presents ratios
of the national income account concept of government final product to GDP, as reported by the Penn World Tables
for 1999. The second column presents ratios of total government spending to GDP, as reported by the IMF
Government Finance Statistics for 1995. The third column presents ratios of government tax revenue to GDP, as
reported by the IMF Government Finance Statistics for 1995. The first line presents unweighted averages of these
ratios for all countries, and the second line presents unweighted averages for tax havens. “na” indicates that data are
not available.




                                                                                                                    41
                                Table 6: Determinants of government size

Dependent variable                       G/GDP                         G/GDP               Tax Revenue/GDP
(Source)                                 (PWT)                          (IMF)                    (IMF)

Constant                           76.854 227.805               13.522 -87.277              -6.758 -318.332
                                   (8.710) (354.047)           (14.941) (556.06)          (13.924) (524.716)
Ln(Population 1999)                 -2.218 -20.562               -2.323    0.096            -1.687    -4.154
                                   (0.696) (14.457)             (0.780) (13.782)           (0.608)    (10.7)
                      2
Ln(Population 1999)                           1.483                        -0.033                      0.432
                                              (1.59)                      (1.659)                    (1.334)
                      3
Ln(Population 1999)                          -0.031                        -0.008                     -0.021
                                             (0.056)                      (0.063)                    (0.051)
Ln(Per capita GDP 1999)             -4.489 -52.467                4.446   50.716             5.168 133.376
                                   (0.729) (128.452)            (1.232) (201.604)          (1.126) (190.916)
                            2
Ln(Per capita GDP 1999)                       7.766                        -7.132                    -16.883
                                            (15.337)                     (23.965)                   (22.807)
                            3
Ln(Per capita GDP 1999)                      -0.385                         0.339                      0.722
                                             (0.604)                      (0.938)                    (0.897)
Tax Haven Dummy                      4.745    1.515             -10.727 -10.045             -8.986    -8.677
                                   (3.631) (3.514)              (3.815) (4.534)            (2.930) (3.223)

Number of Observations               124         124              68            68            68          68

R-squared                           0.33         0.49            0.27        0.31            0.35        0.39


Note: The table presents regressions in which the dependent variable is the ratio of government activity to Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) in 1999, and each country represents a single observation. The dependent variable in
columns 1-2 is the ratio of the national income account concept of government final product to GDP, as reported by
the Penn World Tables. The dependent variable in columns 3-4 is the ratio of total government spending to GDP, as
reported by the IMF Government Finance Statistics. The dependent variable in columns 5-6 is the ratio of
government tax revenue to GDP, as reported by the IMF Government Finance Statistics. “Ln(Population 1999)” is
the natural log of a country’s population in 1999; “Ln(Per capita GDP 1999)” is the natural log of per capita Gross
Domestic Product in 1999. The “Tax Haven Dummy” takes the value one if a country is a tax haven (listed in Table
2), and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                42
