NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATION OF FOUR TAX REFORMS IN THE UNITED STATES:
LABOR SUPPLY AND WELFARE EFFECTS FOR SINGLE MOTHERS
Nada Eissa
Henrik Jacobsen Kleven
Claus Thustrup Kreiner
Working Paper 10935
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10935
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

Comments by Jonas Agell, Martin Browning, Len Burman, Billy Jack, Leora Friedberg, Isabelle RobertBobée, Peter Birch Sørensen, the NBER Public Economics group, the Tax Analysis group of the CBO, and
the Canadian Public Economics Group (CPEG) are gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Don
Fullerton and Emmanuel Saez for helpful discussions on this topic. The activities of EPRU (Economic Policy
Research Unit) are supported by a grant from The Danish National Research Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Nada Eissa, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, and Claus Thustrup Kreiner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluation of Four Tax Reforms in the United States: Labor Supply and Welfare Effects for
Single Mothers
Nada Eissa, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, and Claus Thustrup Kreiner
NBER Working Paper No. 10935
November 2004
JEL No. H2, D6, J2
ABSTRACT
A large literature evaluating the welfare effects of taxation has examined the role of the labor supply
elasticity, and has shown that the estimated welfare effects are highly sensitive to its size. A common
feature of this literature is its exclusive focus on hours worked and the associated marginal tax rate.
An emerging consensus among public finance and labor economists, however, is that labor supply
is more responsive along the extensive margin (participation) than along the intensive margin (hours
worked). To understand the implications of the participation decision for the welfare analysis of tax
reform, this paper embeds the extensive margin in an explicit welfare theoretic framework. It is
shown that the participation effect on welfare is created by a different tax wedge than the marginaltax wedge relevant for hours of work. This difference is due to non-linearities and discontinuities
in tax-transfer schemes, features that are particularly important for the welfare evaluation of tax
reforms affecting the bottom of the income distribution. We apply our framework to examine the
labor supply and welfare effects for single mothers in the United States following four tax acts
passed in 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2001. Our simulations show that each of the four tax acts reduced
the tax burden on low-income single mothers, and created substantial welfare gains. We note three
features of the welfare effects. First, we find that welfare gains are almost exclusively concentrated
along the extensive margin of labor supply. Second, welfare effects along the extensive margin tend
to dominate those along the intensive margin, even when the two labor supply elasticities are of
similar size. This occurs because the welfare effect on each margin is created by a different tax
wedge. Finally, ignoring the composition of the labor supply elasticity may reverse the sign of the
welfare effect. In the welfare evaluation of tax reform, we conclude that the composition of the total
labor supply elasticity is as important as its size.
Nada Eissa
Georgetown University
The Carn Barn, #418
Washington, DC 20007
and NBER
noe@georgetown.edu

Henrik Jacobsen Kleven
University of Copenhagen
henrik.kleven@econ.ku.dk
Claus Thustrup Kreiner
University of Copenhagen
ctk@econ.ku.dk

1

Introduction

The last two decades represent an unusually active period in the modern history of the United
States tax system. A series of tax acts — passed in 1981, 1986, 1990, 1993, 2001 and 2003 — has
dramatically changed the federal income tax code. These tax acts diﬀered substantially in their
scope and coverage, but all had important eﬀects on the tax liabilities and incentives faced by
taxpayers. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) represented the most fundamental change
in the income tax system in nearly 40 years, and changed not only the rate schedule but also
the basic definition of the tax base. By design, it had its largest eﬀect on the highest income
taxpayers, but TRA86 also included substantial benefits for lower-income taxpayers through
lower marginal rates, increased personal exemptions and standard deduction. The Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1993, on the other hand, raised tax rates at the top of
the income distribution and included even more significant benefits for lower income families
by way of unprecedented expansions in tax-based transfers, but left untouched other elements
of the tax code.
The primary eﬀect of these tax changes for lower-income taxpayers has been to reduce tax
liabilities. While lower tax burdens are the result of a combination of provisions, a central
reason is the expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). A relatively modest program
until 1986, the EITC has since evolved into the single largest cash transfer program for lowerincome families at the federal level. In fact, the EITC now implies negative tax liabilities on
labor income (including all federal, state, and social security taxes) for almost two-thirds of the
population of single mothers.
This paper evaluates the welfare eﬀects on single mothers from the tax acts passed in 1986,
1990, 1993, and 2001. We take note of recent empirical evidence that suggests strong labor
force participation responses to the expansions of the EITC by female household heads. Of
particular interest is the observation that these participation responses have not been matched
on the hours-worked margin, even though incentives were substantial (Eissa and Liebman,
1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). These empirical results are consistent with evidence from
the earlier Negative Income Tax Experiments, where participation responses were found to be
slightly larger than hours-worked responses for both single female heads and married women
(Robins, 1985). The new findings are also consistent with indirect evidence showing larger

1

estimated elasticities for all than for working married women (Mroz 1987, Triest 1990).
Recent work on optimal income taxation has shown that the policy recommendations change
once participation responses are explicitly introduced (Saez, 2002). More precisely, it may be
optimal to impose negative marginal tax rates at the bottom of the earnings distribution, similar
to an EITC. By contrast, an EITC would be ineﬃcient in a standard model with only intensive
responses. These results on optimal taxation indicate that a correct modelling of labor supply
behavior will also be important for tax reform analysis.
Our paper examines the impact of participation responses on the welfare evaluation of tax
reforms. We set up a welfare theoretic framework accounting for labor supply responses along
both the extensive (participation) and intensive (hours worked) margins. We model labor supply
in a manner consistent with the empirical distribution of hours worked showing very few workers
at low annual or weekly hours of work. To generate labor supply responses consistent with such
a distribution, we drop the standard convex framework which imply that small increases in
after-tax wages induce entry at infinitesimal hours of work. Our framework allows for discrete
labor market entry by way of non-convexities in preferences and budget sets created by costs
of work (as in Cogan, 1981; Heim and Meyer, 2004). We show that such non-convexities allow
first-order welfare eﬀects along the extensive margin. By contrast, with convex preferences and
budget sets, small tax changes entail no first-order welfare eﬀects along the extensive margin.
Our theoretical framework identifies parameters that are important for evaluating the welfare
eﬀects of tax reform. More precisely, welfare eﬀects are shown to depend on labor supply
elasticities along the intensive and the extensive margins; on the initial tax-benefit position of
each individual; and on the reform-induced changes in tax rates. The distinction between the
two margins of labor supply is crucial, because they imply distinctly diﬀerent tax wedges. As in
traditional analysis, the welfare eﬀect on the intensive margin is related to the eﬀective marginal
tax rate on labor income (including the marginal phase-out rate applied to any benefits). On
the other hand, the eﬀect on the extensive margin is related to the eﬀective average tax rate
on labor income (including the average reduction rate on benefits). Our results show that
conflating these two tax wedges in the welfare analysis can be fundamentally misleading. The
reason is simple and intuitive. Features such as the EITC, TANF and Medicaid create significant
non-linearities and discontinuities in the tax-transfer schedules and in turn lead to substantially
diﬀerent tax rates on participation than on hours worked, both in levels and in changes over
2

time.
Our simulations account for all relevant changes to the federal income tax code introduced
by the four tax acts. We therefore analyze more than just the EITC, although it does turn out to
be the most important component for the population of interest. The tax simulations are based
on Current Population Survey (CPS) data for the baseline years of each of the four reforms
and NBER’s TAXSIM model. Because of the central role of the public assistance system, we
construct a benefit calculator that incorporates cash assistance as well as Food Stamps and
Medicaid. We combine tax data from the NBER’s TAXSIM model with our benefits data to
characterize as precisely as possible the extensive and intensive tax wedges for each individual
in the sample.
Based on a broad range of realistic labor supply elasticities, we find that all four tax reforms
created substantial welfare gains for the population of single mothers. The eﬀects are largest
for the 1986 reform, both in terms of the total welfare gain as well as the gain per dollar spent.
For all four reforms, we show that most of the welfare gains are generated along the extensive
labor supply margin. For both the 1990 and the 1993 tax acts, these gains dominate welfare
losses created by hours-of-work responses.
Consistent with empirical evidence, most scenarios assume that the participation elasticity
is larger than the hours-of-work elasticity. However, this assumption does not drive our finding
that the extensive responses account for most of the welfare gains. Even with identical elasticities, the welfare eﬀects created along the extensive margin tend to dominate, especially for
the 1990 and 1993 reforms. This occurs because non-linearities and discontinuities in the tax
schedule create diﬀerent distortions along the participation and hours margins, and because the
tax acts had a stronger eﬀect on the average tax rate (for example, -12.8 percent in 1993) than
the marginal tax rate (-3.6 percent). These features of the tax schedule render the composition
of the total labor supply elasticity a crucial element for the welfare evaluation of tax reform.
In fact, we find that conflating the participation and hours elasticities may lead to the wrong
sign on the welfare eﬀect. The composition of the labor supply elasticity may then be more
important than its size.
Our paper contributes to the large numerical literature on tax reform and the welfare costs
of taxation, including those based on Computable General Equilibrium models (Ballard et. al.,
1985; Ballard, 1988), micro-simulation (Browning and Johnson, 1984; Triest 1994) as well as
3

simple deadweight-loss calculations (Browning, 1987, 1995). A common feature of this literature
is the assumption of a standard convex labor supply model, ruling out (discrete) participation
responses. In addition to a more realistic model of labor supply behavior, we deviate from this
literature by simulating the eﬀects of actual rather than hypothetical reforms.
The organization of the paper is as follows. The next section describes some of the major
changes in tax laws during the past two decades and reviews the empirical labor supply literature studying the impact of tax reforms. Section 3 presents a welfare theoretic framework
that distinguishes explicitly between the intensive and extensive margins of labor supply response. Section 4 applies the theory to data from the Current Population Survey, and evaluates
the welfare implications from the changes in the tax treatment of single mothers. Section 5
concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Two Decades of US Tax Reform

A worker filing a head of household tax return in 2004 would face a federal income tax schedule
with six brackets, with rates ranging from 10 to 35 percent. These rates are applied to taxable
income, the diﬀerence between gross income and deductions and exemptions. Her earnings
would therefore be shielded from taxes by the standard deduction ($7,150) and by the personal
exemption ($3,100 per person). If the taxpayer has two children, she would pay 10 percent in
federal income taxes on earnings above $16,450. She would face either no state income tax (in
Florida or Texas) or as much as a 5 percent state income tax (in Massachusetts or Oregon).
Additionally, this taxpayer would also have paid payroll taxes of 7.65 percent on her first dollar
of earnings.
A head-of-household tax filer could also be eligible for the earned income tax credit (EITC).
To be eligible, her Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) must fall below some limit ($33,692 if she has
more than one child). The size of the credit depends on the amount of earned income and the
number of qualifying children who meet certain age, relationship and residency tests. Children
must be under age 19 — or 24 if a full-time student — or permanently disabled and must reside
with the taxpayer for more than half the year. Three regions in the credit schedule determine
the size of the credit. The initial phase-in region transfers an amount equal to the subsidy

4

rate (40 percent) times earnings. Over a range of earned income, she continues to receive the
maximum credit ($4,204), after which the credit is phased out at a set rate (21 percent). The
credit is refundable, so this taxpayer would receive the full amount of the credit if she had no
federal tax liability.
Twenty years earlier, this taxpayer would have faced a very diﬀerent tax scheme, with a much
smaller EITC and 15 brackets — ranging from zero to 50 percent. A series of tax acts passed in
the United States since the 1980’s substantially changed the federal income tax structure and
federal income tax liabilities. The 1986, 1990, 1993 and 2001 tax acts resulted in substantial
changes to the tax liabilities of single women with children. With both the Tax Reform Act
of 1986 and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1993, tax liabilities were
changed primarily through expansions of the EITC — a refundable tax credit for low-income
households with children. The 2001 tax act, on the other hand, did not aﬀect the credit for
single parents, but rather reduced the rates on the lowest income tax bracket and increased the
size of tax credits. To outline the major features of the tax changes, Table 1 presents federal
income tax parameters from 1984 to 2002. The table highlights the continuous and dramatic
changes to the federal income tax schedule over the period. Tax liabilities are altered both
because of changes to the rate schedule and to basic deductions and exemptions. Tax liabilities
are also altered by tax credits. In that vein, the table also highlights the central role of the
Earned Income Tax Credit in altering tax liability as well as the shape of the tax schedule for
our population of interest, female household heads.
The 1986 expansion of the EITC, passed as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86),
increased the subsidy rate for the phase-in of the credit from 11 percent to 14 percent and
increased the maximum income to which the subsidy rate was applied from $5,000 to $6,080.
This resulted in an increase in the maximum credit from $550 to $851. The phase-out rate was
reduced from 12.2 percent to 10 percent. The higher maximum credit and the lower phaseout rate combined to increase the upper limit in the phase-out region from $11,000 in 1986 to
$18,576 by 1988.
The impact of the EITC expansion on the tax liability of eligible taxpayers was reinforced by
other elements of TRA86. TRA86 increased the standard deduction for a taxpayer filing as head
of household from $2480 in 1986 (included in the zero bracket) to $4400 in 1988. TRA86 further
reduced the tax liability of taxpayers with children by increasing the deduction per dependent
5

exemption from $1080 in 1986 to $1950 in 1988. Finally, the tax schedules were changed.
The tax schedule changes were particularly beneficial to head of household filers because the
increased standard deduction and exemption amounts meant that in 1988 the typical head-ofhousehold did not jump from the 15 to the 28 percent tax bracket until her AGI exceeded
$33,565.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA90) further expanded the EITC
for all eligible families, and introduced a diﬀerent EITC schedule for families with two or more
children. The phase-in rate of the EITC was increased from 14 percent to 18.5 for taxpayers
with one-child and 19.5 percent for taxpayers with more children. OBRA90 also increased the
maximum benefit, phased in over three years.
The largest single expansion of the EITC was contained in the budget reconciliation act of
1993 (OBRA93). OBRA93 further increased the additional maximum benefit for taxpayers with
two or more children to $1,400 by 1996 ($3,556 versus $2,152 in 1996), doubled the subsidy rate
for the lowest-income recipients from 19.5 to 40 percent for larger families (18.5 to 34 percent
for families with one child). These changes combined to dramatically expand eligibility for the
EITC, such that by 1996 a couple with two children would still be eligible at incomes of almost
$30,000. Other than the expansions to the EITC there was little in the way of changes to the
federal income tax for lower-income individuals in OBRA93.
In June 2001, Congress passed the largest and most unusual tax cut in 20 years, the Economic
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA). EGTRRA cut taxes by an
estimated $1.3 trillion dollars by 2010 and then sunsets, returning rates to their pre-EGTRRA
levels (an event few expect to happen). Because female household heads typically have income
in the lower end of the distribution, they benefit primarily from three provisions: reduction in
the lowest income tax bracket from 15 to 10 percent, revisions to the Child Tax Credit, and
to the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit. The Child Tax Credit was increased from $500
to $1,000, and made refundable. The Dependent Care Tax Credit was increased from $2,400
to $3,000 starting in 2003. These features are likely to have similar eﬀects on tax rates and
liabilities for eligible taxpayers.
On the whole, the last two decades have been especially active for the tax system in the
United States. As a consequence, this period has proven especially useful for understanding
better labor supply behavior. We briefly review the empirical evidence on labor supply in the
6

next section, and then present our framework for evaluating the welfare eﬀects of these reforms.

2.2

Empirical Evidence on Labor Supply and Tax Reforms

The labor market participation of single mothers has changed significantly in recent years.
Figure I presents the employment population rate for single mothers in the United States. The
increase in the participation rates during a time coincident with reductions of tax liabilities is
striking and diﬃcult to dismiss. To focus the discussion, we review evidence that has attempted
to explain this massive increase in the labor market participation of single mothers. The evidence
on the labor supply responsiveness of female household heads to the tax reforms in the United
States has used both quasi-experimental methods (Eissa and Liebman —EL— 1996, Eissa and
Hoynes —EH— 2004, Hotz, Mullin and Scholz —HMS— 2002) as well more structural methods
(Dickert, Houser and Scholz —DHS— 1995 and Meyer and Rosenbaum —MR— 2001). What is
notable about this work is that the findings are consistent across the diﬀerent methods and
diﬀerent reforms evaluated.
The first set of results come from studies that use quasi-experimental methods to examine
the labor supply eﬀects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on female heads (EL), the 1993 EITC
expansion on married women (EH) and the EITC expansions in the 1990’s on welfare recipients
in California (HMS).1 EL compare the change in labor force participation and hours worked
by single mothers to that of single women without children, and find a sizeable labor force
participation response of 2.8 percentage points (out of a base of 74.2). Their data (the Current
Population Survey) also show no discernible hours of work response. It is interesting to note that
EH also find important participation eﬀects when examining the response of married women.
Exploiting the fact that states began implementing demonstration projects that altered the
work incentive of welfare eligible families, HMS evaluate labor supply responses of larger welfare
families to the marginal second child credit. Using administrative data on welfare recipients in
four California counties, they find a dramatic increase in the employment rate of larger families
-of 6 to 8 percentage points- relative to families with one child. These findings imply a range of
labor force participation elasticities with respect to the net income of working parents, with 1.7
at the high end. Overall the evidence based on the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences model is consistent
and suggests fairly strong participation eﬀects, especially for female household heads.
1

More detailed information on eligibility and benefits are provided in Hotz and Scholz (2003).

7

A second set of studies exploits individual-level variation in after-tax wages and incomes to
estimate the eﬀect of EITC expansions on labor force participation. DHS use cross-sectional
data from the 1990 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and estimate a joint
program and labor force participation model, identified by variations in the returns to part-time
(or full-time) employment in diﬀerent states. They estimate a labor force participation elasticity
of 0.35. Because these results are based on cross-sectional data, one concern is the potential
bias from correlations between unobserved state characteristics and labor supply incentives. MR
address this concern by using state-time variation in labor supply incentives. They carefully
model the complete set of welfare and tax systems at the federal and state level, and estimate
a discrete participation model based on comparisons of utility in and out of the labor force.
Using data from the 1985 to 1997 CPS, they find that the EITC accounts for about 60 percent
of the increase in the employment of single mothers over the period. Their implied labor force
participation elasticities are within the bounds of other studies, and reasonably large (about
0.7).
We should note that two other pieces of empirical evidence suggest that recent findings
regarding the participation responses to tax reforms should not be surprising. This evidence
comes from the Negatives Income Tax (NIT) Experiments in the late 1970’s, and from the
empirical labor supply literature. The randomized experiments, oﬀering diﬀerent guarantee
and tax rates, suggested stronger employment eﬀects than hours of work eﬀects (see the reviews
by Moﬃtt and Kehrer, 1981 and Robins, 1985). A careful review of the empirical literature
suggests as well that participation is more sensitive to taxes than is hours worked (Triest, 1990;
Mroz, 1987). Both papers show that excluding non-workers from the regressions generates
much smaller labor supply elasticities than do regressions where non-workers are included, the
suggestion being that it is the participation margin that is sensitive to the net-of-tax wage.2
Overall, the empirical evidence strongly suggests that the labor market entry decision is
sensitive to taxes, and in fact much more sensitive than are hours worked. For single mothers,
the empirical studies have found extensive margin responses to tax reforms which correspond
to participation elasticities in the range from 0.35 to 1.7. Almost none of these studies find any
significant hours of work eﬀects.
2

For other countries such as Canada, the United Kingdom, and France, there also exist experimental evidence
on strong participation responses for single mothers (see Card and Robins, 1998; Blundell, 2001; Piketty, 1998).

8

3

A Framework to Evaluate Tax Reform

3.1

Welfare Analysis with Extensive Labor Supply Responses

Following Harberger (1964), several studies have attempted to measure the distortions to the
labor-leisure choice induced by labor income taxes (e.g. Ballard et al., 1985; Ballard, 1988;
Triest, 1994; Browning, 1995). A common feature of these papers is the assumption that
preferences and budget sets are convex. This assumption is problematic for two reasons. While
a convex model features labor supply adjustments along both the intensive and the extensive
margins, these adjustments occur in a continuous manner. Therefore, any individual entering
the labor market following a small tax change will always choose to work an infinitesimal number
of hours. The empirical distribution of hours worked, however, generally shows very few workers
at low annual or weekly hours worked (see Figure II).
Second, the convex framework cannot provide a reasonable approximation for welfare analysis. To see the point, consider a standard labor supply model where individuals have identical
preferences but heterogeneous productivities distributed continuously on an interval (such as
Mirrlees, 1971). With a common reservation wage, individual productivity determines labor
force participation. A tax reform that reduces the taxes of low-income individuals (i.e., around
the reservation wage) would raise the number of workers by a small amount. In the convex
model, these new entrants would work only a few hours. More precisely, a marginal change in
the tax system would induce an infinitesimal number of individuals to join the labor market,
at infinitesimal hours of work. By implication, the eﬀect on tax revenue of these behavioral
responses is second order. Since the welfare eﬀect of tax reform is determined exactly by the
behavioral eﬀects on tax revenue (e.g., Immervoll et al., 2004), adjustments in labor supply
along the extensive margin create no first-order welfare eﬀects. Thus, because it models entryand-exit behavior incorrectly, the convex framework cannot provide a reasonable approximation
of the welfare eﬀects of tax reform.
To summarize then, the evaluation of tax reforms aﬀecting entry and exit decisions requires
a framework that explicitly distinguishes between the two margins of labor supply. In addition,
some form of non-convexity is required to obtain both a realistic description of participation
responses and the correct welfare eﬀects. The next section sets up a framework along these
lines.

9

3.2

The Model of Labor Supply Behavior

The most common explanation for discrete behavior along the extensive margin is the presence
of non-convexities in preferences or budget sets due to fixed work costs (Cogan, 1981) or concave work cost functions (Heim and Meyer, 2004). These work costs may be monetary costs
(child care, transportation, clothing, etc.) or they could come in the form of time losses (e.g.,
commuting time and the time used preparing for and recovering from work). Just as important
perhaps are emotional costs due to stress and additional responsibilities associated with work.
These work costs may be
fixed or they may depend in complex ways on working hours. But in general they tend to
create economies of scale in the work decision, implying that very low working hours become
non-optimal for the individual. We adopt a framework incorporating fixed work costs, denoted
by q, which capture essential elements some of the factors mentioned above.3
For the fixed work costs, we adopt a stochastic formulation where each individual i draws
a fixed cost qi from a distribution Pi (qi ) with density pi (qi ). As we shall see, this formulation
implies that each individual in the population has a probability of labor market participation,
which may be interpreted as an individual participation rate. The formulation is consistent with
the empirical part of the paper, where we estimate the individual participation probabilities
from a probit regression. The main advantage of the stochastic formulation is that it generates
a smooth participation response at the individual level, where small changes in wages or taxes
create small changes in the probability of participation. Hence we may capture the sensitivity
of entry-exit behavior by setting elasticity parameters for each individual. Although the participation response is smooth in this way, it is also discrete in the sense that — conditional on
entry — the individual never chooses very low hours of work. This aspect of the model is very
important as pointed out in the previous section.
Individuals choose labor supply behavior after the realization of their fixed cost of working.
The labor earnings of individual i is given by wi h, where wi is the individual productivity level
while h denotes working hours. The tax system is described by a function T (wi h, θ), where
θ is an abstract parameter which we will use to capture policy reform. The tax function is
a net payment to the public sector, embodying taxes as well as transfers. For our purpose,
3

We incorporate as well non-convexities in the budget set due to the design of the tax-transfer system. These
are mostly due to phase-outs and discontinuities in transfer programs.

10

it is important that the specification of the tax/transfer system retains suﬃcient flexibility
for the empirical application. In particular, we allow for non-linearities and the possibility
of discontinuities. Attention is restricted, however, to the case of piecewise linearity where
individuals face marginal tax rates which are locally constant. This type of tax specification
has also been used by Dahlby (1998) and Immervoll et al. (2004).
Individual utility is specified in the following way
ui (c, h) = vi (c, h) − qi · 1 (h > 0) ,

(1)

where c is consumption, vi (.) is a well-behaved utility function, and 1(.) denotes the indicator
function. In contrast to some recent studies incorporating discrete participation behavior (Saez,
2002; Immervoll et al., 2004), our formulation accounts for the presence of income eﬀects. The
fixed work cost is incurred only at positive hours of work (h > 0), and it is assumed to be
additively separable in utility. As we shall see below, the separability assumption simplifies the
analysis considerably, since it implies that the decision about hours of work becomes independent
of the fixed cost. More specifically, while the fixed cost will aﬀect the choice to participate in
the labor market, it will not aﬀect the choice of working hours conditional on participation. For
the welfare analysis of tax reform, which depends on labor supply elasticities, the substantive
assumption we are making is that intensive labor supply elasticities do not depend on fixed
costs. The elasticities may vary across individuals (due to heterogeneity of preferences and
wage rates) but they will not vary with the realization of the fixed work cost for each individual.
For the purpose of the simulation exercise, this assumption does not seem strong. One should
bear in mind that fixed costs are very diﬃcult to observe, implying that empirical evidence
on the correlation between these costs and labor supply elasticities cannot easily be obtained.
Hence we would not be able to make much use of the additional heterogeneity implied by the
non-separability of fixed costs.4
The budget constraint is given by
c ≤ wi h − T (wi h, θ) .

(2)

The household maximizes (1) subject to (2). The maximization may be solved in two stages.
First, we solve for the optimal hours of work conditional on labor force participation and,
4

The assumption of additive separability of fixed costs is stronger than we need. A specification with weak
separability, where utility is given by vi (f (c, h) , qi · 1 (h > 0)), would leave the analysis unchanged.

11

second, we consider the choice to enter the labor market at the optimal working hours. Given
participation, h > 0, the optimum is characterized by the standard first-order condition
(1 − mi ) wi

∂vi (ci , hi )
∂vi (ci , hi )
=−
,
∂c
∂h

(3)

where ci and hi denote consumption and hours of work at the optimum, while mi ≡ ∂T (wi hi , θ) /∂ (wi hi )
is the marginal tax rate on earnings. Since the T -function embodies transfers, the marginal tax
rate includes the marginal claw-back on any benefits that the individual is receiving. The above
expression confirms that the optimal solutions do not depend on the fixed cost qi , and therefore
the utility level (exclusive of fixed costs) vi = vi (ci , hi ) = ui + qi will also not depend on the
fixed cost. This becomes useful later on.
In the second stage, we solve for labor force participation. For the individual to enter the
labor market, the utility from participation must be greater than or equal to the utility from
non-participation. This constraint implies a cut-oﬀ for the fixed cost given by
¢
¡
q̄i = vi (ci , hi ) − vi c0 , 0 ,

(4)

where c0 ≡ −T (0, θ) denotes consumption for those who are not working. Individuals with a
fixed cost below the threshold-value q̄i decide to enter the labor market at hi hours, while those
with a fixed cost above the threshold choose to stay outside the labor force. The threshold
value determining the entry-exit choice reflects in part the diﬀerence between consumption for
participants and consumption for non-participants. It is useful to write the consumption for
participants in the following way
ci = wi hi − T (wi hi , θ) = c0 + (1 − ai ) wi hi ,

(5)

where ai ≡ [T (wi hi , z) − T (0, z)] / (wi hi ) defines a tax rate on labor force participation. This
tax rate is an eﬀective average tax rate, including the benefit reduction from entry in proportion
to earnings (i.e., the average claw-back rate). For a policy reform aﬀecting only taxes and
benefits for workers (such as an EITC), c0 is constant and labor force participation is aﬀected
only through the change in the participation tax rate ai . Changes in the marginal tax rate
mi will aﬀect optimal working hours hi , but these changes in hi is of no consequence for the
participation response due to the envelope theorem.
The welfare analysis of tax reform should be based on the dual rather than the primary
approach to the individual’s problem. In the dual approach, we minimize expenditures to
12

obtain a given utility level. This problem is more involved than usual due to the non-convexity
created by fixed work costs. The problem may be written in the following way
min {c − wi h + T (wi h, θ)} st. vi (c, h) − qi · 1 (h > 0) ≥ ui ,
c,h

(6)

where ui is a fixed utility level. In the following, we let ui denote the equilibrium utility
level obtained from the primary problem. This implies that the solutions to the expenditure
minimization problem (the compensated values of c and h) will be consistent with the solutions
to the utility maximization problem (the uncompensated values of c and h).
Again, we may solve the problem in two stages. Conditional on participation, the problem
simplifies to
min {c − wi h + T (wi h, θ)} st. vi (c, h) ≥ ui + qi ,
c,h

(7)

where qi is now written on the right-hand side, since it is exogenous at this stage. The solution
´
³
to this problem c̃i , h̃i is characterized by the first-order conditions
(1 − mi ) wi

³
´
∂vi c̃i , h̃i
∂c

=−

³
´
∂vi c̃i , h̃i
∂h

³
´
and vi c̃i , h̃i = ui + qi .

(8)

From these equations, we obtain a function for compensated hours of work given by h̃i =
h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , ui + qi ), and a function for compensated consumption, c̃i = c̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , ui + qi ).
By inserting these functions in eq. (7), we obtain the expenditure function conditional on participation

³
´
Eip (θ, ui + qi ) = c̃i (·) − wi h̃i (·) + T wi h̃i (·) , θ .

(9)

We write Eip (·) as a function of θ to reflect that expenditures are evaluated at the current
tax-benefit system. Notice that the θ-parameter enters directly (in the tax function) as well
as indirectly, because the compensated variables are functions of the marginal tax rate. We
suppress the wage rate wi as a function argument in the expenditure function, because it is
exogenous in the model. Notice finally that the expenditure function Eip (·) is increasing in the
fixed cost qi .
If the individual does not enter the labor market, the dual problem is to minimize c+T (0, θ)
with respect to c and subject to vi (c, 0) ≥ ui . The first-order condition is given simply by
¢
¡
vi c̃0i , 0 = ui ,
13

(10)

which defines a function c̃0i = c̃0i (ui ). Hence the expenditure function conditional on not working
is given by
Ein (θ, ui ) = c̃0i (ui ) + T (0, θ) .

(11)

At the given utility level, labor market participation is optimal if Eip (θ, ui + qi ) ≤ Ein (θ, ui )
whereas non-participation is optimal if the opposite holds. Accordingly, we may characterize
the expenditure function in the following way
Ei (θ, ui , qi ) = min [Eip (θ, ui + qi ) , Ein (θ, ui )] .

(12)

The comparison of expenditures at participation versus non-participation depends on the size
of the work costs qi . The higher the cost, the higher the value of Eip (·), and the less likely
it becomes that the individual would want to participate. We may define a threshold value,
denoted by q̃i , where expenditures in the two states are equal, i.e. Eip (θ, ui + q̃i ) = Ein (θ, ui ).
From eqs (9) and (11), this condition implies
c̃i = c̃0i + (1 − ai ) wi h̃i ,

(13)

where ai is the participation tax rate defined previously.
The participation decision in the dual approach should be consistent with the decision in
primary approach in the sense that the solutions are the same at the actual utility level ui . To
see that this is indeed the case, notice that the first-order conditions (8) and (10) evaluated at
q̃i implies

³
´
¡
¢
q̃i = vi c̃i , h̃i − vi c̃0i , 0 .

(14)

Given the optimal hours of work h̃i and consumption for non-participants c̃0i = c̃0i (ui ), eqs (13)
and (14) solve for the compensated threshold value q̃i and compensated consumption c̃i . It is
immediately clear that these equations are consistent with (4) and (5) in the primary approach.
Having described the individual’s optimization, we are ready to write down aggregate (compensated) labor supply L. Each individual works h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , ui + qi ) hours if his realized
fixed cost qi is less than or equal to q̃i . Otherwise he stays out of the labor market. As the
probability distribution function for the fixed cost is denoted pi (qi ), we obtain
L=

N Z
X
i=1

0

q̃i

h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , ui + qi ) pi (qi ) dqi ,
14

(15)

where N is the total number of individuals. At this point, we may use the separability of
fixed costs to simplify the expression. As explained previously, the separability implies that
the equilibrium utility level exclusive of fixed costs, i.e. vi = ui + qi , is independent of the
realization of the fixed cost. An increase in the cost leads to an oﬀsetting decline in ui . Hence
working hours may be moved outside the integral in the above expression such that we get
L=

N
X
i=1

where Pi (q̃i ) =

R q̃i
0

Pi (q̃i ) h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , vi ) ,

(16)

pi (q) dq is the individual probability of participation, which may be inter-

preted as an individual participation rate. The above expression emphasizes the joint role of
the intensive and extensive margins in determining aggregate labor supply behavior, and it
shows that the two margins are related to diﬀerent tax/transfer parameters. While the choice
of working hours depends on the eﬀective marginal tax rate mi , the participation rate is determined by the cut-oﬀ fixed cost q̃i which is related to the eﬀective average rate of taxation ai
(the participation tax rate).
From eq. (16), the eﬀect of tax reform on labor supply may be decomposed into its eﬀect
on hours of work for those who are working and its eﬀect on labor force participation. As a
measure of the sensitivity along the intensive margin, we define the compensated hours-of-work
elasticity with respect to the marginal net-of-tax wage
εi ≡

(1 − mi ) wi
∂ h̃i
.
∂ [(1 − mi ) wi ]
h̃i

(17)

The sensitivity along the extensive margin is captured by a participation elasticity, defined
as the percentage change in the participation rate Pi created by a one percentage change in the
average net-of-tax wage, i.e.
ηi ≡

(1 − ai ) wi
dPi (q̃i )
.
d [(1 − ai ) wi ] Pi (q̃i )

(18)

Notice that each elasticity is defined with respect to the net-of-tax price which is relevant for the
margin in question. For the purpose of empirical application, one should bear in mind that both
elasticities are compensated. However, this matters mostly for the hours-of-work elasticity. In
fact, for the participation elasticity, one can show that the compensated elasticity η i is identical
to the uncompensated elasticity as long as we are considering a change in wages or taxes for
workers only (such that T (0, θ) is constant). As shown in Appendix A, the reason for this result
15

is that the derivative of the cut-oﬀ q̃i (obtained from eqs 13 and 14) is the same as the derivative
of q̄i (obtained from eqs 4 and 5) when non-participants are unaﬀected. These derivatives are
identical because out-of-work consumption (c̃0i and c0 , respectively) is constant in both cases,
and due to the fact that changes in optimal hours of work (h̃i and hi , respectively) envelope
out in the participation decision. This insight is important, since it implies that participation
elasticities estimated from tax-benefit reform aﬀecting only workers (say the EITC) can be
interpreted as compensated elasticities and may be used as an input in the welfare analysis.

3.3

The Welfare Analysis of Tax Reform

To study the relationship between tax reform and eﬃciency, we start by defining the excess
burden of taxation on a single individual. Several diﬀerent measures involving consumers’
surplus or Hicksian variations have been proposed in the literature (cf. Auerbach and Rosen,
1980, and Auerbach, 1985). We adopt a measure based on the equivalent variation, defining the
excess burden as the amount — in excess of government revenue — that the individual would be
willing to pay to get rid of all taxes and transfers. In other words, how much additional revenue
could be collected, with no loss in utility for the individual, if the distortionary tax were to
be replaced by a lump sum tax. Hence, the excess burden on individual i from a tax-benefit
system θ is given by
EBi (θ, ui , qi ) = Ei (θ, ui , qi ) − Ei (0, ui , qi ) − R (θ, ui , qi ) ,

(19)

where Ei (θ, ui , qi ) denote expenditures at the existing tax-benefit system, Ei (0, ui , qi ) denote
expenditures in the absence of taxes and transfers, while ui has been defined above as the post³
´
tax level of utility. The net tax payment of individual i, R (θ, ui , qi ), is equal to T wi h̃i (·) , θ
conditional on working (qi ≤ q̃i ) and T (0, θ) conditional on not working (qi > q̃i ).

The aggregate excess burden is defined as the sum of the individual excess burdens (Auerbach, 1985), i.e.,
N Z
X

∞

EB =

i=1 0

[Ei (θ, ui , qi ) − Ei (0, ui , qi ) − R (θ, ui , qi )] dPi (qi ) .

(20)

Because of heterogeneity in wages, tax rates, tastes, and fixed costs, individual excess burdens
of taxation vary across the population. Thus, the aggregate excess burden measure compares

16

the revenue from individual lump sum taxes, keeping each individual at her post-tax level of
utility, to the actual revenue collected by the distortionary tax system.5
By using eq. (12) and the definition of R (θ, ui , qi ), we may rewrite the aggregate excess
burden to
EB =

N ∙Z
X
i=1

+

Z∞

0

q̃i

³
³
´´
Eip (θ, ui + qi ) − T wi h̃i (·) , θ dPi (qi )

(Ein (θ, ui ) − T (0, θ)) dPi (qi ) −

Z∞
0

q̃i

⎤

⎥
Ei (0, ui , qi ) dPi (qi )⎦ .

(21)

To derive the consequences of a tax reform, we consider the eﬀect on EB of a marginal change
in the θ-parameter. Because of the envelope theorem, any changes in behavior induced by the
reform does not aﬀect the expenditure functions. Thus, from eqs (9) and (11), the changes in
expenditures are given simply by the mechanical changes in taxes and benefits, ∂Ei (.) /∂θ =
∂T (.) /∂θ. Using this relationship, we may diﬀerentiate eq. (21) to obtain
"
#
N
X
dh̃i
dPi (q̃i )
dEB
=−
Pi (q̃i ) + ai wi h̃i
mi wi
,
dθ
dθ
dθ

(22)

i=1

where we have also used the definition of the participation tax rate ai and the fact that

Eip (θ, ui + qi ) = Ein (θ, ui ) at the threshold level q̃i . This equation shows that the marginal
deadweight burden of tax reform is given by the eﬀect on government revenue from behavioral
responses. The expression reflects that the behavioral revenue eﬀect is related to the two different margins of labor supply response. The first term captures the revenue eﬀect from the
change in the optimal hours of work for those who are working. The second term gives the eﬀect
on revenue brought about by the tax-induced change in labor force participation. While the
second eﬀect on eﬃciency is related to the tax rate on labor force participation ai , the eﬃciency
eﬀect from changed working hours depends on the tax burden on the last dollar earned mi .6
The equality of the welfare eﬀect with the behavioral eﬀect on government revenue reflects
a general insight from models with no externalities besides those created by taxes and transfers.
5

With heterogeneous agents, aggregation problems can arise (see Auerbach 1985). In particular, any measure
of aggregate excess burden will depend on the initial distribution of income. To generate a distribution-neutral
measure of excess burden, one would have to impose strict conditions on preferences-such as no income eﬀects
[quasilinear utility] or constant income eﬀects [Gorman Polar form].
6
Using expression (22), we can confirm that the welfare eﬀects from extensive reponses disappear in a convex
framework (see Section 3.1). ³The reason
is that new labor- market workers enter at infinitesimal hours, h̃i ≈ 0,
´
with the consequence that T wi h̃i , θ − T (0, θ) = ai wi h̃i ≈ 0 for these individuals. The revenue eﬀect created
by such participation responses (the second term in eq. 22) equals zero to a first order.

17

In the present context, one should bear in mind that the model features no imperfections in
the labor market. Thus, since non-employment is voluntary, the marginal entrant is indiﬀerent
between working and not working. If a small tax reform induces additional entry, the new
entrants obtain no first-order utility gains, but they create a positive externality on everybody
else through the government budget. Likewise, the hours-of-work responses for those who
are employed create no direct utility gains, but they give rise to an externality through the
government budget.
The eﬀect of the reform on working hours may be obtained from the compensated labor
supply function, h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , vi ). The participation response depends on the change in the
threshold value q̃i , which may be derived from total diﬀerentiation of eqs (13) and (14). By
inserting the derivatives in (22) and using the elasticity definitions (17) and (18), the marginal
excess burden in proportion to aggregate income may be written as (see Appendix B)
¸
N ∙
X
mi ∂mi
ai ∂ai
· εi +
· η i si ,
=
PN
1 − mi ∂θ
1 − ai ∂θ
i=1 wi h̃i Pi (q̃i )
i=1
dEB/dθ

(23)

³P
´
N
w
P
(q̃
)
is the (expected) wage share of individual i, and
h̃
where si ≡ wi h̃i Pi (q̃i ) /
i
i
i
i
i=1
¸ ³
∙
´
∂T (wi h̃i ,θ)
∂T (0,θ)
is the impact on the eﬀective average tax rate
/
w
−
h̃
where ∂ai /∂θ ≡
i
i
∂θ
∂θ

(the participation tax) from the reform. The first term in the bracketed expression looks

familiar, since it reflects a classic Harberger-style formula for the marginal deadweight burden
of taxation. It shows that the welfare loss created on the intensive margin depends on the
level of the marginal tax rate, the change in the marginal tax rate due to the reform, and the
elasticity of hours of work. The second component in the expression reflects the deadweight loss
due to changed labor supply behavior along the extensive margin. This eﬀect is related to the
level of the participation tax rate, the change in the participation tax as well as the sensitivity
of entry-exit behavior as measured by the participation elasticity. Hence, the welfare eﬀects
created on the two margins of response may be expressed in similar ways, except that they
are related to diﬀerent tax and elasticity parameters. Finally, since the individual eﬀects are
weighted by individual earnings shares, the initial income distribution matters for the marginal
excess burden of the reform.
A priori one might have wondered whether the standard convex framework could be saved
by a reinterpretation of the labor supply elasticity. Following this interpretation, one would
18

introduce extensive responses into the framework simply by using estimates of the total labor
supply elasticity including both margins of response. The above analysis demonstrates that, in
general, this approach is not correct, since labor force participation is related to a diﬀerent tax
wedge than are working hours. The analysis also shows that the size of the error made by the
conventional model depends on the degree to which the observed variation in aggregate labor
supply is concentrated on the extensive margin.
Having said that, it should be noted that there is one special case for which a reinterpretation
of the conventional model is valid. This is the case of a linear Negative Income Tax (NIT),
which grants a lump sum transfer B to all individuals in the economy (participants and nonparticipants) and then imposes a constant marginal tax rate on labor income, mi = m ∀i. In
³
´
this case, the tax burden on labor market entry for individual i becomes T wi h̃i , θ −T (0, θ) =

mwi h̃i , which implies a participation tax rate ai = m. Moreover, if the tax reform is simply a
change of tax/transfer parameters within the framework of the NIT, we would have

∂ai
∂θ

=

∂m
∂θ .

Inserting in eq. (23), we get
PN

dEB/dθ

i=1 wi h̃i Pi (q̃i )

where ε ≡

PN

i=1 εi si

and η ≡

PN

i=1 η i si

=

m ∂m
· (ε + η) ,
1 − m ∂θ

(24)

are weighted averages of individual elasticities. This

corresponds to a standard Harberger-type formula, with the intensive and extensive elasticities
being lumped in a total labor supply elasticity ε + η.7
Although the above special case is interesting, its practical applicability is limited. It requires
that the entire tax and welfare system is a linear NIT, which is never satisfied in reality. For
example, it does not apply to situations with gradual phase-out of benefits (as with cash benefits
and food stamps in the US) and/or if there are discontinuities in benefits (as with medicaid).
Nor will it apply if the income tax system involves in-work benefits like the EITC and/or
increasing marginal rate structures. Our empirical application will account for all these factors
in the simulation of tax wedges on the two margins.
7

In this special case, it does not cause problems that the intensive and extensive elasticities were defined with
respect to diﬀerent prices (marginal and average net-of-tax wages, respectively). With an NIT, the average and
marginal net wages are identical, i.e. (1 − mi ) wi = (1 − ai ) wi for ∀i.

19

4

Evaluating Tax Reforms: The Case of Single Mothers

4.1

Simulation Methodology

In this section, we apply the theoretical framework to evaluate the welfare eﬀects of four federal
tax reforms in the United States passed in 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2001. We focus on the case
of single mothers, because they experienced substantial tax changes and because empirical
evidence suggests strong participation responses. For each observation, we simulate the eﬀects
of actual changes in federal taxes due to the tax change. In this sense, our methodology diﬀers
from most numerical studies of tax reform which consider simple hypothetical reforms.8
Our simulation procedure consists of the following steps. First, we estimate participation
probabilities and earnings for each individual in a baseline year (usually the year prior to the
tax change). For nonparticipants, the imputation of earnings is necessary to calculate labor
income and tax liability if they choose to enter following a reform. To be consistent, we also
use imputed earnings for workers. The imputation of earnings is based on a simple earnings
regression, where we control for self-selection into the labor force using a propensity score
correction. The regression equation is specified as:
log(yi ) = Xi α + P̂i β + ν i ,
where y is earned income (for the sample of workers), and X represents demographic characteristics, including age, education, age-education interactions, race, and state of residence. To
control for self-selection, we include the predicted probability of labor force participation P̂i as
a regressor in the earnings equation. This probability is estimated from a first-stage probit:
P (lfpi = 1) = Φ(Zi γ),
where lf p is labor force participation and Z includes all demographic characteristics and the
number of children. Hence the selection term is identified by the number of children.9
8

Papers considering hypothetical tax reforms include Browning and Johnson (1984), Ballard (1988), Triest
(1994), Browning (1995), Liebman (2002), and Immervoll et al. (2004). A recent paper by Preston and Walker
(1999), on the other hand, does consider actual policy reform. However, this is not a tax but a policy reform
in the United Kingdom aﬀecting the child support payments of absent fathers. Interestingly, their empirical
analysis allows for discrete participation responses.
9
A more appropriate approach may be to identify the selection eﬀect using young children (under the age of
6). When we estimate such models, we generate very similar predicted earnings distributions and essesntially
identical welfare eﬀects.

20

We then use predicted earnings to simulate individual marginal and average tax rates, as
well as changes in federal tax rates implied by the reforms. Section 4.3 describes this imputation
in detail.
To simulate welfare benefits, we create a benefit calculator that includes the major programs
of the welfare system (cash assistance, food stamps, and medicaid).

Our benefit calculator

accounts for the main features of these programs, including the income-dependent reduction
rates, state, and number of dependent children.
Using simulated tax and benefit rates, we calculate eﬀective marginal and average tax rates
for each individual (both baseline levels and reform-induced changes).

Finally, we compute

welfare eﬀects based on assumed elasticities and the formulae derived in Section 3.
Since the results from Section 3 were based on a small reform methodology, the computed
welfare eﬀects represent first-order approximations to the true eﬀects. For each reform, we
evaluate the entire labor supply response at the pre-reform tax wedge. Since the reforms
under consideration reduced tax wedges, this method may overstate the size of the welfare
eﬀects somewhat.10 While the four tax reforms under consideration were substantial, it seems
unlikely that second-order eﬀects would significantly change our simulation results. Indeed,
even for TRA86, the total tax burden was reduced by less than 8 percent of wage income for
the population of single mothers.
The big advantage of the small reform methodology is its simplicity and transparency. To
evaluate the reforms, we need only to estimate earnings and tax rates and to set elasticities
based on the empirical literature. In particular, we do not need to specify utility functions or
estimate (or calibrate) utility parameters. Our approach is therefore very nonstructural.

4.2

Data and Regression Results

The data for the simulations come from the 1986, 1991, 1994 and 2001 March Current Population (CPS) Surveys. The March CPS is an annual demographic file of nearly 60,000 households,
with information on labor market and income outcomes for the previous year. Therefore, the
data we use are for tax years 1985, 1990, 1993 and 2000.
The CPS reports income and demographic information on households, families and individ10
Of course, since we compute the welfare eﬀects of each of the four reforms separately (changing the baseline
each time), all second-order eﬀects across reforms are accounted for. These second-order eﬀects are presumably
more important than second-order eﬀects within reforms.

21

uals. We note this fact because families and households may be diﬀerent from the relevant unit
of observation for our exercise - the tax-filing unit - if there are subfamilies (children and/or
grandchildren). We base our tax-filing units on CPS families, and allocate subfamilies (both
related and unrelated) to separate tax-filing units from the primary family. We consider any
member of the tax-filing unit who is under the age of 19 (or less than 24 and a full-time student) to be a dependent child for tax purposes. We also assume that any taxpayer with a child
meeting the age criteria also meets both the dependent child and EITC child requirements.
The sample includes unmarried females (widowed, divorced, and never-married) who are
between 18 and 49 years old and have children. It does not include older women, primarily to
avoid complications related to modeling retirement decisions. Nor does it include any female
who was ill or disabled, in the military, or reported herself retired during the previous year.
Finally, we exclude observations with negative earned income (due to negative self-employment
income), negative unearned income, or with positive earned income but zero hours of work.
The resulting sample sizes are in the range of 4,000 to 5,000 individuals across the years.
Summary statistics of the characteristics of the data (shown in Table A1) suggest that the
typical unmarried mother looks only slightly diﬀerent from 1985 to 2000. While she is between
32 and 33.5 years old, she is clearly aging over the 15-year period, and has fewer children by the
end of the period. With high school education, her earnings amount to $7,922 in 1985 ($12,674
in 2000 dollars). Over time, she has slightly more education and a much higher earnings, due
primarily to more hours worked.
Table A2 presents results for the first-stage probits and the earnings regressions. The results
are very consistent for 1985, 1990 and 1993, and show that the propensity score adjustment
for selection into the labor market is significant in the earnings regressions. The propensity
score correction for selection into the labor force is quite a bit weaker in 2000, however. One
reasonable explanation of this finding could be the success of welfare reform in encouraging
mothers into the labor force. Nonetheless, we find that the distribution of predicted relative to
actual earnings looks similar for all years.

4.3

Tax and Benefit Calculations

This section describes our method of calculating tax and benefit parameters. To start, we
note that the appropriate measure of the tax wedge encompasses the entire eﬀect of behavioral
22

responses on revenue, and therefore must include all taxes and transfer (benefits). Our computations of individual eﬀective tax rates include federal, state and payroll taxes, as well as
cash assistance, food stamps and medicaid. Individual tax rates are computed using predicted
earnings, CPS-measures of non-labor income (including social insurance benefits and unemployment insurance benefits) and demographic characteristics such as number of children and state
of residence. Because the CPS does not ask about itemized deductions, we make the reasonable
assumption that all female heads take the standard deduction.
The tax parameters for the sample of female heads are calculated using the Tax Simulation
Model (TAXSIM) of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)11 . To compute prereform marginal and average tax rates on labor income,12 we use estimated earnings ( ŷi ) and
other CPS-data relevant for tax liability (Ii ) . TAXSIM calculates marginal tax rates as the tax
owed on an additional 10 cents of earnings, i.e. [T (ŷi + 10 cents, Ii ) − T (ŷi , Ii )] /(10 cents). It
also calculates total liabilities, which may be used to derive an average tax rate relevant for
participation. This average tax rate is defined as the diﬀerence between tax liability at predicted earnings T (ŷi , Ii ) and at zero earnings T (0, Ii ) in proportion to predicted earnings, i.e.
[T (ŷi , Ii ) − T (0, Ii )]/ŷi .
TAXSIM-generated tax rates do not include any transfer components. In the United States,
lower-income families are eligible to receive cash assistance from the Temporary Assistance to
Needy Families (TANF), previously Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program.
In addition, eligible families may receive in-kind benefits in the form of food vouchers (Food
Stamps) and health insurance (Medicaid). To incorporate benefits, we augment tax data from
TAXSIM with information on AFDC, Food Stamps and Medicaid. Because transfer programs
have diﬀering eligibility and benefit structures at the federal and state levels, we treat each
program separately. In particular, the benefit calculations account for the dependence of benefits
on the state of residence and on the number of dependent children.
Calculations of eﬀective average tax rates account for benefits lost with labor market entry, including AFDC (TANF), Food Stamps, and Medicaid - if entry is predicted above the
eligibility threshold. Where appropriate, calculations of eﬀective marginal tax rates account for
11

see Feenberg and Coutts (1993) for an introduction to TAXSIM.
With the exception of TRA86, pre-reform tax rates are calculated for the year in which the reform was
enacted. We use the previous year as baseline for TRA86 to account for the fact that the reform was extensively
discussed and largely anticipated.
12

23

TANF/AFDC and Food Stamps benefit reduction rates. A concern that arises here is the bias
that occurs from less than 100 percent take-up of welfare benefits (see Moﬃtt, 1992). Because
not all eligibles receive benefits, our calculations as such would overestimate of “true” benefits
on average. To correct this bias we apply an “empirical” take-up rate, calculated from our CPS
data as the share of the eligible population that reports positive benefits during the year. We
apply a take-up rate of 54 percent, calculated using our 1993 March CPS data. This take-up
rate is consistent with empirical evidence in the welfare literature (Moﬃtt, 1992).
Table II reports sample means and standard deviations for the marginal and average tax
rates in the four pre-reform years (1985, 1990, 1993, 2000). The numbers illustrate the dramatic
changes in the tax treatment of single mothers. Most notable is the decline in the overall tax
burden — captured by the average tax rate — from 1985 to 2000. The benefit-adjusted average tax
rate drops from 57 percent to 32 percent over the period. The marginal tax rate shows a more
moderate and less systematic decline than the average tax rate. This pattern is not surprising
given the large expansions of the EITC during this period. An expansion of the EITC reduces
unambiguously the tax burden, whereas its impact on the marginal tax rate depends on the
distribution of individuals on the diﬀerent income intervals of the EITC (phase-in, plateau, and
phase-out). The table also shows that accounting for benefits and transfers is fundamentally
important. In fact, the pattern showing greater marginal than average tax rates is reversed when
the impact of benefits and transfers is included. We report as well tax ratios used in the welfare
calculations. These ratios are calculated for each individual as t/ (1 − t), where t denotes the
marginal or average tax rate (benefit-inclusive) for the intensive or extensive margin.
In Table II, the changes in tax rates across the diﬀerent pre-reform years reflect all changes
in the tax and welfare system taking place at the federal and state levels over the period, and
they incorporate as well any behavioral responses to these tax and benefit changes as well as
macro/time eﬀects on income variables. To isolate the impact of the federal tax reforms on
tax rates (exclusive of behavioral responses feeding back into tax liabilities), we measure the
diﬀerence between imputed post-reform tax rates and pre-reform rates. The post-reform tax
rate is imputed by using federal tax rules applying after the reform have been fully phased in.
The post-reform years for the four tax acts we consider are 1988, 1993, 1996 and 2002. Using the
TAXSIM model, we combine post-reform federal tax rules with pre-reform earnings (adjusted
for inflation) to obtain new federal tax liabilities. The post-reform tax rates to be used in the
24

simulations are then constructed from the new federal taxes combined with the pre-reform state
taxes, payroll taxes and benefits.
Table II confirms that the decrease in eﬀective tax rates over the 15-year period has been
driven to a large extent by tax changes at the federal level. This was particularly the case for
the 1986 and 1993 reforms, which reduced the average tax rate by 8 and 13 percentage points,
respectively.
As a final note, we point out the heterogeneous eﬀects of the tax laws on single mothers.
Substantial variation in the tax parameters is shown by the size of the standard deviation
of diﬀerent tax rates. This heterogeneity highlights the need for using micro-simulations to
evaluate the tax reforms. Large errors may occur in more aggregate studies because of the
correlation between earnings, tax rates and tax changes.

4.4

The Welfare Eﬀects of Tax Reform

In this subsection, we present simulated welfare eﬀects for all four tax reforms. Our simulations
are based on assumptions about the elasticities along the two margins of labor supply response.
Given existing empirical evidence, we assume that participation is more elastic than hours
worked. In our benchmark scenario, we set the participation elasticity equal to 0.40 and the
(compensated) hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.10, implying a total labor supply elasticity
equal to 0.50. Subsequently, we carry out a sensitivity analysis where we alter the size of the
total elasticity, as well as its composition.
Table III summarizes the welfare eﬀects for all four reforms under the benchmark scenario.
The total welfare gain as a percentage of aggregate labor income is reported in column (3), and
can be decomposed into the eﬀect created along the intensive margin (column 1) and along the
extensive margin (column 2). We find substantial welfare gains for all the reforms, especially for
the 1986 reform, which created a welfare gain of 7.09 percent of labor income. The eﬀects are
also high for the 1993 reform (2.33 percent), which contained the largest single expansion of the
EITC. For the 1990 and 2001 reforms, the welfare gains are not quite as large. But, as shown
in column (5), these reforms were also smaller in terms of the total tax cut for single mothers,
and this makes the welfare gains diﬃcult to compare across reforms. To facilitate comparison,
we therefore report the welfare gain per dollar spent in column (6) and the extensive welfare
gain per dollar spent in column (7). These numbers confirm that TRA86 created much larger
25

eﬃciency gains than the other subsequent reforms.
For all four reforms, most of the total welfare gain is generated on the extensive margin.
While more than 3/4 of the gain from TRA86 is created by labor market entry, essentially all
of the positive eﬀect from OBRA90 is driven by labor force participation. For this reform, the
intensive welfare eﬀect is around zero because negative eﬀects in the phase-out region cancel
out positive eﬀects in the phase-in region of the EITC. For OBRA93, the welfare gain is a
result of the extensive margin dominating welfare losses created on the intensive margin. With
EGTRRA in 2001, the diﬀerence between the intensive and extensive welfare eﬀects are less
pronounced. This occurs for two reasons. First, the 2000 tax cuts reduced average tax rates
only slightly. More interesting is that by 2000, previous reforms seem to have eliminated much
of the ineﬃciency along the extensive margin (cf. Section 4.3).
One might argue that our findings regarding the relative sizes of the extensive and intensive
welfare eﬀects were to be expected under the assumed elasticity scenario. Notice, however, that
the diﬀerence between extensive and intensive welfare eﬀects cannot be explained exclusively by
elasticities, since the two kinds of welfare eﬀects are related in diﬀerent ways to the tax-transfer
system. For example, for the tax act of 1990, increasing the hours-of-work elasticity would
leave the intensive welfare eﬀect more or less unchanged since the losses in the phase-out region
would continue to cancel out the gains created in the phase-in region. For OBRA93, increasing
the intensive elasticity would simply exacerbate the welfare loss along that margin, thereby
reinforcing the point regarding the diﬀerence of welfare eﬀects along the two margins.
Our finding that the extensive responses drive most of the welfare eﬀects for the four reforms
reinforces the relevance of this margin of labor supply. Having said that, one should be careful
not to conclude that the large extensive eﬀects reflect the size of the error committed by the
standard (convex) policy simulation. There are other important diﬀerences. First, previous
studies considered hypothetical — typically quite crude — reforms. The error made by leaving
out the participation margin depends crucially on the details of the tax reform and the taxtransfer system in place at the time of the reform. Second, it is not always clear how to interpret
elasticities used in the studies that do not model the participation margin. A common approach
in the literature was to set labor supply parameters based on total elasticities, hence ascribing all
of the extensive response to the intensive margin. We explore the consequences of this approach
in column (4), called ‘traditional’ for lack of a better word. The numbers demonstrate clearly
26

the large error made by ascribing an empirical response to the wrong margin in policy analysis.
In fact, the error thus committed may be larger than ignoring the response altogether.
These errors reflect that the two margins of labor supply response depend on taxes and
transfers in diﬀerent ways. While the intensive margin depends on the eﬀective marginal tax
rate, the extensive margin is related to the eﬀective average tax rate. By implication, the size
of the error depends crucially on the properties of the tax-transfer programs being analyzed.
For example, if one was to consider a change in a proportional tax rate, and if the existing
tax-transfer system is also proportional, lumping margins together would create no error in the
welfare analysis. Likewise, one would create no error in the case of a linear NIT system (cf.
Section 3.3). However, linear taxation is not a realistic description of the actual tax-transfer
policies which involve non-linearities as well as discontinuities. The discrepancy between the
numbers in columns (3) and (4) reflects the importance of these aspects for the welfare analysis.
In Table IV we explore the sensitivity of the results to alternative elasticity assumptions.
The scenario considered above (‘Middle’) is compared with ‘Low’ and ‘High’ scenarios to get a
range for the likely eﬀects. In the Low scenario, the intensive elasticity ε is set equal to 0.05
while the extensive elasticity η is equal to 0.20, implying a total elasticity equal to 0.25. In
the High scenario, the intensive and extensive elasticities are 0.15 and 0.60, respectively, such
that the total elasticity is 0.75. Notice that the Low, Middle, and High scenarios all reflect the
same composition of labor supply responses, with the intensive elasticity being one-fifth of the
total elasticity. Finally, we compare the Middle scenario to one with identical elasticities along
the intensive and extensive margins (ε = η = 0.25). The Identical scenario has the same total
elasticity as the Middle scenario (0.50) so as to isolate the eﬀect of composition.
As we would expect, the size of the welfare eﬀect is quite sensitive to the size of elasticities.
From the welfare theory, we know that the sensitivity of marginal excess burden functions with
respect to elasticities depends on the level of tax rates at the time of the implementation of
the reform. The higher the initial tax rate, the greater the sensitivity of the results to the
elasticities. Therefore, one would expect the sensitivity to be highest for the 1986 reform. To
see that this is indeed the case, one should compare the welfare gains per dollar spent across
reforms to account for the diﬀerent sizes in the revenue costs. For TRA86, it is interesting to
note that a total elasticity of 0.75 — not out of bounds of the empirical estimates — implies Laﬀer
curve eﬀects. In this scenario, the large tax reductions granted to single mothers were recouped
27

entirely from the labor supply responses created by the reform.13
An advantage of our approach is that it allows a sensitivity analysis with respect to the
composition of the total elasticity, not just its size. The results in Table IV demonstrate very
clearly that welfare eﬀects may be very sensitive to the composition of the elasticity. The
sensitivity will be especially high for reforms that aﬀect the two margins of response in very
diﬀerent ways. In particular, this was the case for OBRA90 and OBRA93 which introduced
big improvements in the returns to entry from the EITC, while at the same time worsening
the incentives along the intensive margin for many people due to the phase-out of the credit.
Consequently, the composition of the elasticity becomes crucial for the welfare eﬀects of these
two reforms. For the 1993 reform, changing the benchmark composition (ε = 0.10; η = 0.40)
to one with identical elasticities (ε = η = 0.25) reduces the welfare gain from 2.33 percent of
labor income to 0.79 percent. This reduction in the welfare gain is quite a bit larger than what
would be obtained by halving the total labor supply elasticity without changing composition,
i.e., going from the Middle scenario to the Low scenario.
Despite the sensitivity of the results with respect to both size and composition of the elasticity, Table IV displays significant gains across all elasticity scenarios and for all four reforms.
In every scenario, the welfare gain per dollar spent is larger than one. This implies that the
tax cuts to single mothers are generating pure eﬃciency gains. That is, if one were to finance
the tax cuts through lump sum taxation, which involves a marginal cost of funds (MCF) less
than or equal to one, the reforms would increase aggregate utilitarian welfare.14 In reality, the
EITC is financed, not by lump sum taxes, but through higher distortionary taxes on middleand high-income earners, which implies a marginal cost of funds above one. For the EITC to
create eﬃciency gains in this case, the marginal cost of funds would have to be lower than the
welfare gains per dollar spent reported in the table. This is diﬃcult to say something about
because MCF estimates are highly sensitive to the design of the tax increases (Browning, 1987;
Dahlby, 1998). However, it is interesting to note that if MCF is 1.4, a reasonably high value
13
A randomized social experiment in Canada also indicates that Laﬀer eﬀects may occur at the bottom of the
income distribution. The Canadian Self-Suﬃciency Project (SSP) provides a time-limited earnings supplement
to single parents who find full-time work after having been on welfare for at least a year. The analysis by
Michalopoulos et al. (2005) show that, at the end of the period examined, the SSP program was paying for itself
through increased tax revenues.
14
The marginal cost of funds for lump sum taxation is generally below 1 because, assuming that leisure is a
normal good, such taxes make individuals work more (Ballard and Fullerton, 1992). In the absence of income
eﬀects (quasi-linear utility), the marginal cost of funds is exactly 1.

28

given the existing estimates, then the tax cuts to single mothers are creating pure eﬃciency
gains for all reforms in our benchmark scenario. This is a strong result since it indicates that
one does not even have to rely on higher social welfare weights for the EITC recipients (single
mothers) than for the rest of population to justify the reforms.
To explore the role of heterogeneity for the results, Tables V through VIII show tax/benefit
parameters and welfare eﬀects by earnings groups for the four reforms. In each table, the
grouping of individuals is made according to the income ranges in the EITC program (phase-in,
plateau, phase-out and beyond) prevailing at the time of the implementation of the reform. The
disaggregation is based on predicted earnings from the regression described in Section 4.2.
A general conclusion emerging from the four tables is that the total welfare gains are generated mostly in the phase-out interval (although not for the 1993 reform). To be more precise,
the eﬀects are created by the extensive responses of individuals with predicted earnings in the
pre-reform phase-out interval. For the 1986 reform, 43% of the total welfare gain is driven by
this eﬀect, while for the 1990 and 2001 reforms the share is more than half. These results are
easily grasped by recalling that welfare eﬀects reflect behavioral eﬀects on government revenue,
and are therefore positively related to levels of tax rates, reductions of tax rates and predicted
earnings shares. If all these magnitudes are large for a certain income group and for a given
margin of labor supply response, the welfare eﬀects will be large for this group on that margin.
This applies for example to TRA86 where the phase-out group faced high average tax rates
prior to the reform (58%), got large reductions in these rates (10%-points), and constituted a
large share of predicted earnings (46%). These factors correlated so as to create an extensive
welfare eﬀect for the phase-out group equal to 3.07 percent of the 7.09 percent total.
The disaggregated tables show that the extensive welfare eﬀects are positive for all income
groups across all four reforms. The intensive welfare eﬀects, however, are negative for the
phase-out group after OBRA90 and OBRA93, reflecting the higher phase-out rate introduced
by these reforms. We also obtain negative intensive eﬀects for the beyond group in 1990 and
1993 as well as for the plateau group in 1993. This occurs because the reforms expanded the
size of the phase-out region for the EITC, combined with the fact that we group individuals
according to pre-reform EITC intervals. In the 1993 reform, the negative intensive eﬀects
due to the increased claw-back rate and the expanded phase-out region dominate the positive
intensive eﬀects created by a higher phase-in rate. This may seem surprising given the very
29

large increases in the subsidy rate introduced by this reform. Indeed, as Table II shows, the
population of single mothers as a whole got lower eﬀective marginal tax rates following the
1993 reform. However, the marginal rate reductions from a steeper phase-in of the EITC were
relatively unimportant for eﬃciency because they were occurring at low wage levels, where only
small behavioral revenue eﬀects can be generated. Indeed, Table VII shows that the phase-in
group constituted a very small proportion of aggregate earnings at the time of the 1993 reform.
In all of the scenarios considered so far, elasticities were uniform across the population
of single mothers.

It is diﬃcult to evaluate the empirical validity of this assumption, since

empirical evidence on labor supply elasticities across the income distribution is extremely limited
and only suggestive at best.

Eissa and Liebman (1996), for example, find that behavioral

responses were strongest for the least educated (i.e. lowest potential earnings).

We relax the

assumtpion of uniform participation elasticity and instead allow it to decline with predicted
income: women who are predicted to enter the labor market at higher incomes (phase-out
region) should be less sensitive to a given change in tax-transfer schemes than women predicted
to enter at lower incomes (say the phase-in region).

Table IX presents welfare eﬀects with

a decreasing profile for the participation elasticity, keeping the assumption of uniform hoursof-work elasticities. The results show that our conclusions are robust to the introduction of
heterogeneous participation elasticities. In particular, total welfare gains are substantial and
are created mostly along the extensive margin. While total gains are somewhat lower for the
1986, 1990, and 2001 reforms, the gains created by the 1993 reform are higher compared to
the uniform-elasticity scenario. These results reflect oﬀsetting eﬀects.

Concentrating on the

extensive response at low earnings means that labor-market entry generates less government
revenue and, therefore, lower welfare gains. On the other hand, more of the responsiveness is
concentrated along the margin most aﬀected by those tax acts that expanded the EITC and
reduced participation taxes (OBRA1990 and OBRA1993). For OBRA1993, the latter eﬀect
dominates the dampening eﬀect of the earnings-elasticity correlation, creating larger gains.

5

Concluding Remarks

This paper has examined the welfare eﬀects of tax reform in the United States using a welfare
theoretic model incorporating both the intensive and the extensive margins of labor supply.

30

We find that large eﬃciency gains have been generated by the participation responses of single
mothers. The welfare gains per dollar spent are substantially larger than one for all reforms and
all elasticity scenarios, implying that the tax cuts have created pure eﬃciency gains. These pure
gains suggest that the tax cuts could potentially be justified even with distortionary financing
and without incorporating social welfare weights that are higher for single mothers than for the
rest of the population.
Our analysis has demonstrated the need to distinguish explicitly between labor supply responses along the intensive and extensive margins, and to account for the diﬀerence between
the associated tax wedges. Because the welfare eﬀects created on the two margins are related to
diﬀerent tax rates and diﬀerent tax rate changes, the composition of the labor supply elasticity
becomes crucial for the eﬀects of tax reform. Recent empirical literature has reinforced the
view that participation responses are larger than hours-of-work responses. On the other hand,
papers on the eﬀect of marginal tax rates on taxable income suggest that intensive responses
may be important once they are interpreted more broadly than hours worked (Feldstein, 1995).
Our study demonstrates the need for empirical research to pin down the composition of the
labor supply elasticity into the two types of response.
Related to our work, Liebman (2002) uses a micro-simulation model calibrated to 1999 CPS
data to illustrate the trade-oﬀs in the design of an EITC-including the optimal maximum credit,
phase-in and phase-out rates- with fixed costs and participation eﬀects.

Liebman therefore

extends on the work of Saez (2002) on optimal income taxation. This paper takes a diﬀerent
approach by analyzing actual tax reforms rather than optimal design. Moreover, since the four
tax reforms we consider changed several diﬀerent components of the federal tax code — including
exemptions, deductions, and marginal tax rates — the estimated eﬀects reflect more than just
the EITC.
Recent work by Fullerton and Gan (2004) argues for incorporating directly the stochastic
nature of estimated labor supply models when calculating the welfare eﬀect of tax changes. The
expected welfare eﬀect from a tax change (accounting for the uncertainty about the location
on the budget set) will be diﬀerent from the welfare cost at the expected point, due to the
fact that welfare cost functions are convex in tax rates. Our empirical application follows the
standard approach of using point estimates, and hence does not incorporate such uncertainty
in the welfare analysis. While the Fullerton-Gan framework incorporates discrete labor supply
31

choices along both the intensive and extensive margin, their empirical applications exclude the
participation margin by looking at married women working full time. Our main concern has
instead been with the participation response which we believe is more important, especially for
the population of single mothers.
Although our paper has focused exclusively on tax reform in the United States, the results
may carry implications for welfare reform in other countries as well. In particular, many European countries are characterized by large taxes and transfers creating significant disincentives
to labor market entry for low-wage earners. The findings of Immervoll et al. (2004) show
these distortions, and suggest that in-work benefits may be good policy to alleviate work distortions. Indeed, a number of European countries, including the United Kingdom and France,
have introduced various forms of in-work benefits.

A

Derivation of Compensated and Uncompensated Participation Elasticities

In this appendix, we relate the compensated participation elasticity defined in eq. (18) to the
primitives of the model. This relationship is important for the derivation of the marginal excess
burden of taxation in Appendix B. In addition, we prove that the uncompensated participation
elasticity is equal to the compensated elasticity as long as we consider a change in the price of
participation, (1 − ai ) wi , which keeps the tax-transfer position of a non-participant, T (0, θ),
fixed. That is, the change in the price of participation is generated by a change in the wage or
tax-transfer payment for workers.
The definition of the participation elasticity in eq. (18) may be written as
ηi = pi (q̃i )

(1 − ai ) wi
dq̃i
,
d [(1 − ai ) wi ] Pi (q̃i )

(25)

which relates the elasticity to the change in the fixed cost cut-oﬀ value. The change in the
cut-oﬀ value may be found by diﬀerentiating eqs (13) and (14) which gives
dc̃i
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
dq̃i
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]

dh̃i
= (1 − mi ) wi
+ h̃i ,
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
³
´
³
´
∂vi c̃i , h̃i
∂v
c̃
,
h̃
i
i i
dc̃i
dh̃i
=
+
,
∂c̃i
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
∂ h̃i

(26)

(27)

where we have used eq. (10) implying that the consumption level of a non-participant is fixed.
By substituting (26) into (27) and using the first-order condition (8), we obtain the change in
32

the fixed cost cut-oﬀ:
dq̃i
=
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]

³
´
∂vi c̃i , h̃i
∂c̃i

h̃i .

(28)

After inserting this relationship into the definition (25), we have the following expression for
the participation elasticity
³
´
∂v
,
h̃
c̃
pi (q̃i ) i i i
ηi =
(1 − ai ) wi h̃i .
Pi (q̃i )
∂c̃i

(29)

This relationship is used in the derivation of the marginal excess burden of taxation in Appendix
B.
To compare the compensated and uncompensated participation elasticities, notice that the
uncompensated elasticity may be obtained from the definition (25) by replacing the compensated
change in the fixed cost threshold, dq̃i , with the uncompensated change, dq̄i . The uncompensated change in the threshold may be found by diﬀerentiating eqs (4) and (5) with respect to
(1 − ai ) wi . This gives
dci
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
dq̄i
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]

dhi
+ hi ,
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
dci
dhi
∂vi (ci , hi )
∂vi (ci , hi )
+
,
∂ci
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
∂hi
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]

= (1 − mi ) wi

(30)

=

(31)

where we have assumed that c0i = T (0, z) is fixed, i.e., the change in the price of participation
is generated by a change in the wage or tax-transfer payment for workers. After substituting
(30) into (31) and using the first-order condition (3), we obtain
∂vi (ci , hi )
dq̄i
hi .
=
d [(1 − ai ) wi ]
∂ci
This uncompensated change in the fixed cost threshold is equal to the compensated change in
´
³
eq. (28) because both changes are evaluated at the actual utility level where (ci , hi ) = c̃i , h̃i .

Thus, the uncompensated participation elasticity is equal to the compensated elasticity as long
as we are considering a change in (1 − ai ) wi , which is generated by a change in the wage or

tax-transfer payment for workers.

B

Derivation of the Marginal Excess Burden in Eq. (23)

We start by deriving the eﬀect of the reform on the number of working hours, dh̃i /dθ, and on
the labor market participation rate, dPi (q̃i ) /dθ. The impact on the number of working hours is
33

found by diﬀerentiating the compensated labor supply function h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , vi ). This gives
∂ h̃i ((1 − mi ) wi , vi ) ∂mi
1
∂mi
dh̃i
=−
wi
=−
· εi ,
h̃i
dθ
∂ [(1 − mi ) wi ]
∂θ
1 − mi ∂θ

(32)

where the last equality follows from the definition of the hours-elasticity in eq. (17).
To derive the impact on labor market participation, we first analyze how the fixed cost cutoﬀ value is aﬀected by the reform. The change in the cut-oﬀ may be found by diﬀerentiating
eqs (13) and (14) which gives
dh̃i
∂ai
= (1 − mi ) wi
− wi h̃i
,
³
´ dθ
³∂θ ´
∂vi c̃i , h̃i dc̃
∂vi c̃i , h̃i dh̃
dq̃i
i
i
=
+
,
dθ
∂c̃i
dθ
dθ
∂ h̃i
h
where we have used eq. (10) and the definition ∂ai /∂θ ≡ ∂T (w∂θi hi ,θ) −
dc̃i
dθ

(33)
(34)
∂T (0,θ)
∂θ

substituting (33) into (34) and using the first-order condition (8), we obtain
³
´
∂v
c̃
,
h̃
i
i
i
dq̃i
∂ai
=−
.
wi h̃i
dθ
∂c̃i
∂θ

i

/ (wi hi ). By

This change in the fixed cost threshold may be converted into a change in the participation rate
through the relationship dPi (q̃i ) /dθ = pi (q̃i ) · dq̃i /dθ. This implies
³
´
c̃
∂v
,
h̃
i
i i
dPi (q̃i )
1
∂ai
∂ai
= −pi (q̃i )
=
· ηi ,
wi h̃i
Pi (q̃i )
dθ
∂ci
∂θ
1 − ai
∂θ

(35)

where the last equality follows from the relationship (29).
Finally, the expression for the marginal excess burden in (23) may be obtained by substituting eqs (32) and (35) into (22) and dividing by aggregate labor income.

References
Auerbach, A.J. (1985). “The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation.” Chapter 2 in
Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 1, Elsevier:
Amsterdam.
Auerbach, A.J. and H. Rosen (1980). “Will the Real Excess Burden Please Stand Up?”
NBER Working Paper No. 495.
34

Ballard, C.L. (1988). “The Marginal Eﬃciency Cost of Redistribution.” American Economic
Review 78, 1019-1033.
Ballard, C.L. and D. Fullerton (1992). “Distortionary Taxes and the Provision of Public
Goods.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, 117-131.
Ballard, C.L., J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1985). “General Equilibrium Computations
of the Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the United States.” American Economic Review 75,
128-138.
Blundell, R. (2001). “Evaluating Labour Supply Responses to In-work Benefit Reforms for
Low Income Workers.” in Marco Buti, Paolo Sestito and Hans Wijkander (eds.), Taxation,
Welfare and the Crisis of Unemployment in Europe, Edward Elgar, 157-187.
Browning, E.K. (1987). “On the Marginal Welfare Cost of Taxation.” American Economic
Review 77„11-23.
Browning, E.K. and W.R. Johnson (1984). “The Trade-Oﬀ between Equality and Eﬃciency.” Journal of Political Economy 92, 175-203.
Browning, E.K. (1995). “Eﬀects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Income and Welfare.”
National Tax Journal 48, 23-43.
Card, D. and P.K. Robins (1998). “Do Financial Incentives Encourage Welfare Recipients
to Work?” Research in Labor Economics 17(4), 1-56.
Cogan, J.F. (1981). “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply.” Econometrica 49, 945-963.
Dahlby, B. (1998) “Progressive Taxation and the Social Marginal Cost of Public Funds.”
Journal of Public Economics 67, 105-122.
Dickert, S., S. Houser and J.K. Scholz (1995). “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Transfer Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation.” in J. Poterba (ed.),
Tax Policy and the Economy 9th ed., 1-50.
Eissa, N. and J. Liebman (1996). “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 61, 605-37.
Eissa, N. and H. Hoynes (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics 88, 1931-1958.
Feenberg, D. and Elisabeth Coutts (1993). "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model."
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 2 no. 1, 189-194.

35

Feldstein, M. (1995). “The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy 103, 551-572.
Fullerton, D. and L. Gan (2004). “A Simulation-Based Welfare Loss Calculation for Labor
Taxes with Piecewise-Linear Budgets.” Journal of Public Economics 88, 2339-59.
Harberger, A.C. (1964). “Taxation, Resource Allocation, and Welfare.” in John F. Due (ed.),
The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Revenue System, Princeton University
Press, pp. 25-70.
Heim, B.T. and B.D. Meyer (2004). “Work Costs and Nonconvex Preferences in the Estimation of Labor Supply Models.” Journal of Public Economics 88, 2323-38.
Hotz, V.J., C.H. Mullin and J.K. Scholz (2002).

“The Earned Income Tax Credit

and Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare.” UCLA, Vanderbilt and University
of Wisconsin-Madison mimeo.
Hotz, V.J. and J.K. Scholz (2003). “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” in ed. R. A. Moﬃtt,
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, 141-197.
Immervoll, H., H.J. Kleven, C.T. Kreiner and E. Saez (2004). “Welfare Reform in
European Countries: A Micro-Simulation Analysis.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4324.
Liebman, J. (2002). “The Optimal Design of the Earned Income Tax Credit”, in B. Meyer
and D. Hotz-Eakin (eds), Making Work Pay: The Earned Income Tax Credit and Its Impact
on America’s Families, New-York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Meyer, B. and D. Rosenbaum (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 1063-1114.
Michalopoulos, C., P.K. Robins and D. Card (2005) “When Financial Work Incentives
Pay for Themselves: Evidence from a Randomized Social Experiment for Welfare Recipients.”
Journal of Public Economics 89, 5-29.
Mirrlees, J.A. (1971). “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.” Review
of Economic studies 38, 175-208.
Moﬃtt, R. (1992). “Incentive Eﬀects of the U.S. Welfare System.” Journal of Economic
Literature 30, 1—61.
Moﬃtt, R. and K.C. Kehrer (1981). “The Eﬀects of Tax and Transfer Programs on Labor
Supply.” in ed., R. Ehrenberg, Research in Labor Economics, 103-150.
Mroz, T.A. (1987). “The Sensitivity of an Empirical Model of Married Women’s Hours of
36

Work to Economic and Statistical Assumptions.” Econometrica 55, 765-799.
Piketty, T. (1998). “L’Impact des Incitations Financières au Travail sur les Comportements
Individuels: Une Estimation pour le cas Français.” Economie et Prevision 132-133, 1-35.
Preston, I. and I. Walker (1999) “Welfare Measurement in Labour Supply Models with
Nonlinear Budget Constraints.” Journal of Population Economics 12, 343-361.
Robins, P.K. (1985). “A Comparison of the Labor Supply Findings from the Four Negative
Income Tax Experiments.” Journal of Human Resources 20, 567-82.
Saez, E. (2002). “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor
Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1039-1073.
Small, K. and H.S. Rosen (1981). “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models.” Econometrica 49, 105-130.
Triest, R.K. (1990). “The Eﬀect of Income Taxation on Labor Supply in the United States.”
Journal of Human Resources 25, 491-516.
Triest, R.K. (1994). “The Eﬃciency Cost of Increased Progressivity,” in J. Slemrod (ed.),
Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

37

TABLE 1
FEDERAL INCOME TAX AND EITC PARAMETERS, 1984-2002
Federal Income Tax Parameters

EITC Parameters

Year

1984

[lowest, highest
marginal tax rate)]
(number of
brackets)

Personal Exemption,
Standard Deductiona/, b/

[0.000; 0.500] (15)

$1,000 ; $0

Phase-In
Rate

Maximum Credit

Phase-Out
Rate

Maximum
Earnings

(family with one child; family two or more children)

0.100

$500

0.125

$10,000

1985

[0.000; 0.500] (15)

$1,040 ; $0

0.110

$550

0.122

$11,000

1986

[0.000; 0.500] (15)

$1,080 ; $0

0.110

$550

0.122

$11,000

1987

[0.110; 0.390] (5)

$1,900 ; $2,540

0.140

$851

0.100

$15,432

1988

[0.150; 0.330] (2)

$1,950 ; $4,400

0.140

$874

0.100

$18,576

1989

[0.150; 0.330] (2)

$2,000 ; $4,550

0.140

$910

0.100

$19,340

1990

[0.150; 0.330] (2)

$2,050 ; $4,750

0.140

$953

0.100

$20,264

TRA86

OBRA90 c/
1991

[0.150; 0.310] (3)

$2,150 ; $5,000

0.167; 0.173

$1,192; $1,235

0.119; 0.124

$21,250

1992

[0.150; 0.310] (3)

$2,300 ; $5,250

0.176; 0.184

$1,324; $1,384

0.126; 0.130

$22,370

1993

[0.150; 0.396] (5)

$2,350 ; $5,450

0.185; 0.195

$1,434; $1,511

0.132; 0.139

$23,050

1994

[0.150; 0.396] (5)

$2,450 ; $5,600

0.263; 0.300

$2,038; $2,526

0.160; 0.177

$23,755; $25,296

1995

[0.150; 0.396] (5)

$2,500 ; $5,750

0.340; 0.360

$2,094; $3,110

0.160; 0.202

$24,396; $26,673

1996

[0.150; 0.396] (5)

$2,550 ; $5,900

0.340; 0.400

$2,152; $3,556

0.160; 0.211

$25,078; $28, 495

1997

[0.150; 0.396] (5)

$2,650 ; $6,050

0.340; 0.400

$2,210; $3,656

0.160; 0.211

$25,750; $29,290

2000

[0.150;0.391] (5)

$2,900; $6,650

0.340; 0.400

$2,353; $3,888

0.160; 0.211

$27,450; $31,152

2001

[0.100; 0.386] (5)

$3,000 ; $6,900

0.263; 0.300

$2,428; $4,008

0.160; 0.211

$28,250; $32,100

2002

[0.100; 0.386] (6)

$3,050 ; $7,000

0.340; 0.360

$2,547; $4,204

0.160; 0.211

$30,200; $33,150

OBRA93 d/

EGTRRA2001

a/ The standard deductions are given for head of household tax return.
b/ In 1984-1986, there were no standard deductions because of the zero bracket. The 15 brackets include the zero bracket.
c/ Basic EITC only. Does not include supplemental young child credit or health insurance credit.
d/ Introduced a small benefit for taxpayers with no qualifying children, phased-in at 0.0765 up to a maximum credit of $306.
Source: The Green Book and authors' calculations from Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms and publications.

TABLE II
Tax-benefit parameters: sample averages and standard deviations for the group of single mothers
Tax-benefit parameters

1986 reform

1990 reform

1993 reform

2001 reform

Marginal tax rate
- without benefits
- with benefits

0.259 (0.164)
0.500 (0.161)

0.221 (0.176)
0.426 (0.141)

0.185 (0.211)
0.443 (0.169)

0.236 (0.284)
0.370 (0.200)

Average tax rate
- without benefits
- with benefits

0.145 (0.105)
0.566 (0.094)

0.089 (0.088)
0.492 (0.092)

0.043 (0.099)
0.455 (0.094)

-0.040 (0.177)
0.318 (0.144)

Tax ratio
- intensive margin
- extensive margin

1.945 (6.034)
1.578 (3.204)

0.941 (2.102)
1.067 (1.491)

1.088 (3.580)
0.896 (0.389)

0.779 (1.346)
0.577 (1.742)

Effect of Tax Act
- marginal tax rate
- average tax rate

-0.059 (0.095)
-0.076 (0.029)

-0.016 (0.052)
-0.054 (0.015)

-0.036 (0.143)
-0.128 (0.077)

-0.033 (0.065)
-0.023 (0.014)

Note: The marginal tax rates, average tax rates, and tax ratios are calculated for pre-reform years (1985, 1990, 1993, 2000). Tax parameters
without benefits are calculated using NBER's tax simulation model (TAXSIM). The marginal tax rate includes federal, state and social
security payroll rates. The average tax rate is derived by first calculating the TAXSIM federal, state and social security tax liability when an
individual is working and not working, respectively. Afterwards, we derive the average tax rate by calculating the difference in tax
liabilities between working and not working and divide the difference by earnings. The tax rates with benefits include cash assistance
(AFDC), food stamps and medicaid adjusted for an empirical 54% take-up rate. Each parameter is calculated as an average for all
individuals in the sample. The tax ratios are derived by calculating the average over the individuals of t /(1-t ) where t is the relevant tax
rate of the individual. The tax ratios include benefits. The changes in the marginal and average tax rates reflect only changes at the
federal level. These changes are calculated as the difference between the post and pre reform rates. The post reform tax rate is imputed for
federal tax rules that apply in 1988, 1993, 1996 and 2002, respectively, to allow for the phase-in of the reforms. The data come from the
March Current Population Survey. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations.

TABLE III
Welfare effects from the changed taxation of single mothers
Hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.1 and participation elasticity equal to 0.4

Tax reform

The welfare gain from tax reform
Intensive Extensive Total "Traditional"
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Reduction in
tax burden
(5)

Welfare gain per $ spent
Total
Extensive
(6)
(7)

1986 reform

1.64

5.45

7.09

8.19

7.94

9.38

3.19

1990 reform

0.02

1.91

1.94

0.11

4.47

1.76

1.75

1993 reform

-0.36

2.68

2.33

-1.78

7.93

1.42

1.51

2001 reform

0.35

0.78

1.12

1.73

2.75

1.69

1.39

Note: The welfare gain is measured in percentage of wage income and is calculated using equation (23) in the text. The total welfare gain
is calculated as the sum of the intensive and extensive gains. The "traditional" welfare gain is calculated assuming that the total labor
supply elasticity is entirely along the intensive margin. The reduction in tax burden measures the decrease in tax liabilities in percentage
of wage income and before any behavioral responses. The welfare gain per dollar spent equals RTB/(RTB-EG) where EG is the
efficiency gain and RTB is the reduction in tax burden. Data come from the March Current Population Survey.

TABLE IV
Welfare effects from the changed taxation of single mothers
Different scenarios for the size and composition of elasticities

Elasticity scenario
ε
η
Total

The welfare gain from tax reform
Intensive Extensive Total "Traditional"

Welfare gain
per $ spent

1986 reform
Low
Middle
High
Identical

0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25

0.20
0.40
0.60
0.25

0.25
0.50
0.75
0.50

0.82
1.64
2.46
4.09

2.73
5.45
8.18
3.41

3.54
7.09
10.63
7.50

4.09
8.19
12.28
8.19

1.81
9.38
Laffer
18.27

1990 reform
Low
Middle
High
Identical

0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25

0.20
0.40
0.60
0.25

0.25
0.50
0.75
0.50

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.06

0.96
1.91
2.87
1.20

0.97
1.94
2.91
1.25

0.06
0.11
0.17
0.11

1.28
1.76
2.85
1.39

1993 reform
Low
Middle
High
Identical

0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25

0.20
0.40
0.60
0.25

0.25
0.50
0.75
0.50

-0.18
-0.36
-0.53
-0.89

1.34
2.68
4.02
1.68

1.16
2.33
3.49
0.79

-0.89
-1.78
-2.67
-1.78

1.17
1.42
1.79
1.11

2001 reform
Low
Middle
High
Identical

0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25

0.20
0.40
0.60
0.25

0.25
0.50
0.75
0.50

0.17
0.35
0.52
0.86

0.39
0.78
1.17
0.49

0.56
1.12
1.68
1.35

0.86
1.73
2.59
1.73

1.26
1.69
2.57
1.96

Note: The welfare gain is measured in percentage of wage income and is calculated using equation (23) in the text. The parameterε
denotes the hours-of-work elasticity with respect to the net-wage, whileη is the participation elasticity with respect to the net-income
gain of participation. The total welfare gain is calculated as the sum of the intensive and extensive gains. The "traditional" welfare
gain is calculated assuming that the total labor supply elasticity is entirely along the intensive margin. The welfare gain per dollar
spent equals RTB/(RTB-EG) where EG is the efficiency gain and RTB is the reduction in tax burden in Table II. A Laffer curve
effect arises if EG>RTB implying that the reduction in tax burden creates a net-tax revenue. Data come from the March Current
Population Survey.

TABLE V
Tax/benefit parameters and welfare effects by income groups: 1986 reform
Hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.1 and participation elasticity equal to 0.4

Group shares
Population
Wage income
Tax/benefit parameters
Marginal tax rate
Average tax rate
Change in marginal tax rate
Change in average tax rate
Welfare gain
Intensive
Extensive
Total

Phase-in
<5000

Plateau
5000-6500

Phase-out
6500-11000

Beyond
>11000

Aggregate

0.34
0.10

0.14
0.09

0.37
0.46

0.15
0.35

1.00
1.00

0.52
0.55
-0.05
-0.06

0.54
0.54
-0.11
-0.08

0.52
0.58
-0.07
-0.10

0.38
0.59
0.01
-0.06

0.50
0.57
-0.06
-0.08

0.08
0.31
0.40

0.34
0.40
0.74

1.19
3.07
4.26

0.02
1.67
1.69

1.64
5.45
7.09

Note: The marginal tax rate and the average tax rate incorporate benefits. See notes to Table II and III for explanation of
calculations. The decomposition into different income groups is determined by the income thresholds in the Earned Income
Tax Credit in 1985. Data come from the March Current Population Survey.

TABLE VI
Tax/benefit parameters and welfare effects by income groups: 1990 reform
Hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.1 and participation elasticity equal to 0.4
Phase-in
<6810

Group shares
Population
Wage income
Tax/benefit parameters
Marginal tax rate
Average tax rate
Change in marginal tax rate
Change in average tax rate
Welfare gain
Intensive
Extensive
Total

Phase-out
Plateau
6810-10730 10730-20264

Beyond
>20264

Aggregate

0.34
0.12

0.28
0.24

0.33
0.51

0.04
0.13

1.00
1.00

0.43
0.50
-0.05
-0.07

0.41
0.45
-0.01
-0.06

0.45
0.52
0.01
-0.04

0.35
0.50
0.01
-0.02

0.43
0.49
-0.02
-0.05

0.05
0.30
0.35

0.02
0.52
0.54

-0.04
0.98
0.94

-0.01
0.11
0.11

0.02
1.91
1.94

Note: The marginal tax rate and the average tax rate incorporate benefits. See notes to Table II and III for explanation of
calculations. The decomposition into different income groups is determined by the income thresholds in the Earned Income
Tax Credit in 1990. Data come from the March Current Population Survey.

TABLE VII
Tax/benefit parameters and welfare effects by income groups: 1993 reform
Hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.1 and participation elasticity equal to 0.4
Phase-in
<7750

Group shares
Population
Wage income
Tax/benefit parameters
Marginal tax rate
Average tax rate
Change in marginal tax rate
Change in average tax rate
Welfare gain
Intensive
Extensive
Total

Plateau
Phase-out
7750-12200 12200-23050

Beyond
>23050

Aggregate

0.41
0.14

0.28
0.25

0.27
0.46

0.04
0.15

1.00
1.00

0.36
0.44
-0.14
-0.19

0.41
0.40
0.04
-0.13

0.59
0.51
0.05
-0.05

0.48
0.54
0.03
-0.02

0.44
0.46
-0.04
-0.13

0.11
0.80
0.91

-0.11
0.88
0.77

-0.32
0.88
0.57

-0.04
0.11
0.07

-0.36
2.68
2.33

Note: The marginal tax rate and the average tax rate incorporate benefits. See notes to Table II and III for explanation of
calculations. The decomposition into different income groups is determined by the income thresholds in the Earned Income
Tax Credit in 1993. Data come from the March Current Population Survey.

TABLE VIII
Tax/benefit parameters and welfare effects by income groups: 2001 reform
Hours-of-work elasticity equal to 0.1 and participation elasticity equal to 0.4
Phase-in
<6950

Group shares
Population
Wage income
Tax/benefit parameters
Marginal tax rate
Average tax rate
Change in marginal tax rate
Change in average tax rate
Welfare gains
Intensive
Extensive
Total

Plateau
Phase-out
6950-12700 12700-27413

Beyond
>27413

Aggregate

0.13
0.04

0.32
0.21

0.48
0.58

0.07
0.17

1.00
1.00

0.14
0.24
0.00
-0.01

0.27
0.21
-0.05
-0.01

0.50
0.39
-0.04
-0.03

0.40
0.48
0.00
-0.03

0.37
0.32
-0.03
-0.02

0.00
0.00
0.01

0.09
0.04
0.13

0.25
0.57
0.82

0.01
0.17
0.17

0.35
0.78
1.12

Note: The marginal tax rate and the average tax rate incorporate benefits. See notes to Table II and III for explanation of
calculations. The decomposition into different income groups is determined by the income thresholds in the Earned Income
Tax Credit in 2000. Data come from the March Current Population Survey.

TABLE IX
Welfare Effects with a Decreasing Profile for the Participation Elasticity

Phase-in

Plateau

Phase-out

Beyond

Aggregate

Elasticities
Hours
Participation

0.10
0.60

0.10
0.40

0.10
0.30

0.10
0.10

0.10
0.40

Welfare gain of 1986 reform
Intensive
Extensive
Total

0.08
0.47
0.55

0.34
0.40
0.74

1.19
2.30
3.49

0.02
0.42
0.44

1.64
3.59
5.22

Welfare gain of 1990 reform
Intensive
Extensive
Total

0.05
0.45
0.50

0.02
0.52
0.54

-0.04
0.74
0.70

-0.01
0.03
0.02

0.02
1.73
1.76

Welfare gain of 1993 reform
Intensive
Extensive
Total

0.11
1.21
1.31

-0.11
0.88
0.77

-0.32
0.66
0.35

-0.04
0.03
-0.01

-0.36
2.78
2.43

Welfare gain of 2001 reform
Intensive
Extensive
Total

0.00
0.00
0.01

0.09
0.04
0.13

0.25
0.43
0.67

0.01
0.04
0.05

0.35
0.51
0.86

Note: The decomposition into different income groups is determined by the income thresholds in the Earned Income Tax
Credit before the reform. The 'aggregate' labor supply elasticities in the last column measure the average over the population
and over the four reforms.

Figure I
Labor Force Participation of Unmarried Females: 1989-2000
1.00

0.95

0.90

Participation Rate

No Children
0.85

0.80

One Child
0.75

0.70

Two or More Children
0.65

0.60
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Year

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure II
Kernel Density Estimate

0

h86/h90/h93/h00
.0002 .0004 .0006 .0008 .001

Annual Hours-Single Mothers

0

1000

2000
hours
h86
h93

h90
h00

3000

TABLE A1
Summary statistics: single mothers in the United States

Age
Education
Black
Non-white
Number of children
Labor force participation
Annual hours worked
Wage and salary income
Non-labor income
Gross hourly wage
Observations

1986 reform

1990 reform

1993 reform

2001 reform

32.04 (7.75)
12.96 (2.38)
0.321 (0.467)
0.021 (0.142)
1.94 (1.10)
0.707 (0.455)
1142 (961)
$7,922 (9,210)
$2,756 (4,605)
$6.53 (4.43)

32.91 (7.77)
12.31 (2.36)
0.345 (0.475)
0.023 (0.151)
1.77 (0.99)
0.72 (0.447)
1219 (969)
$10,390 (11,642)
$3,277 (5,742)
$7.85 (5.49)

32.98 (7.79)
39.05 (2.31)*
0.338 (0.473)
0.031 (0.172)
1.78 (1.0)
0.697 (0.459)
1148 (970)
$10,572 (12,740)
$3,553 (5,912)
$8.68 (7.00)

33.44 (8.15)
39.32 (2.32)*
0.315 (0.464)
0.037 (0.188)
1.74 (0.93)
0.830 (0.376)
1426 (903)
$16,430 (19,526)
$3,961 (7,740)
$11.24 (10.68)**

4,498

4,850

5,011

4,072

Note: Authors' tabulations of the March Current Population Survey. Sample includes unmarried mothers age 18-49. See text for further sample
selection. Non-labor income is calculated as the difference between total income and earnings, and therefore includes income for various sources
such as welfare assistance, capital income, social security income and workers' compensation. The wage is defined for workers only. Standard
errors are in paranthesis. All monetary amounts are in nominal dollars. * Eduction recode in CPS-need to edit; ** wage topcoded at $200.

