                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PATTERNS OF COMOVEMENT:
          THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN THE U.S. ECONOMY

                                             Hyunbae Chun
                                            Jung-Wook Kim
                                               Jason Lee
                                             Randall Morck

                                         Working Paper 10937
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10937


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




This research was partly undertaken when Randall Morck was a visiting professor at Harvard University. We
thank Cliff Ball, Nick Bollen, Aida Charoenrook, Wonseok Choi, Bill Christie, Mara Faccio, Akiko
Fujimoto, Amar Gande, Mark Huson, Aditya Kaul, Ron Masulis, Vikas Mehrotra, Robert Shiller, Hans Stoll,
Bernard Yeung, and seminar participants at the University of Alberta and Vanderbilt University. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patterns of Comovement: The Role of Information Technology in the U.S. Economy
Hyunbae Chun, Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 10937
November 2004
JEL No. G0, E3, O3, O4

                                             ABSTRACT

Firm-specific variation in stock returns and fundamental performance measures is significantly

higher in industries that have a history of more investment in information technology (IT). We

hypothesise that IT is associated with creative destruction or product differentiation, either of which

can widen the performance difference between winner and loser firms. Thus, economy-level

volatility can fall while firm-level volatility rises because firm-specific volatility cancels out in the

aggregate. Our results are consistent with rising firm-specific variation in US stocks reflecting a

rising pace of creative destruction; and with greater firm-specific variation in richer and faster

growing countries reflecting more intensive creative destruction in those economies, though other

explanations are probably valid as well.

Hyunbae Chun                                            Jason Lee
Department of Economics                                 Department of Accounting
Queens College                                          University of Alberta
CUNY                                                    Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Flushing, NY 11367                                      T6G 2R6
hchun@qc1.qc                                            jason.lee@ualbert.ca

Jung-Wook Kim                                           Randall Morck
Department of Finance                                   Department of Finance
University of Alberta                                   University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada                               Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
T6G 2R6                                                 T6G 2R6
jungwook.kim@ualberta.ca                                and NBER
                                                        randall.morck@ualberta.ca
“A wave of innovation across a broad range of technologies, combined with considerable
deregulation and a further lowering of barriers to trade, fostered a pronounced
expansion of competition and creative destruction. The result through the 1990s of all
this seeming-heightened instability for individual businesses, somewhat surprisingly, was
an apparent reduction in the volatility of output and in the frequency and amplitude of
business cycles for the macroeconomy.”
                                   Alan Greenspan, Speech on Economic Volatility, 2002.


“The fundamental impulse that keeps the capital engine in motion comes from the new
consumers’ goods, the new methods of production and transportation, the new
markets...[The process] incessantly revolutionizes from within, incessantly destroying the
old one, incessantly creating a new one. This process of Creative Destruction is the
essential fact of capitalism.”
                                          Schumpeter, on the Creative Destruction, 1942.


1.      Introduction
During the past few decades, aggregate volatility in the U.S. economy fell significantly
(Blanchard and Simon, 2001). In particular, McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) find a
structural break in U.S. GDP volatility around 1984. Volatilities of other macroeconomic
variables, such as inflation and unemployment, exhibit similar patterns (Stock and
Watson, 2002).5
         In contrast, the volatilities of firm-level performance measures rose sharply over
the same period. Figure 1 shows this intriguing divergence between macro (aggregate-
level) and micro (firm-level) volatilities. Figure 1 contrasts the aggregate volatilities of
sales growth, return on assets (ROA), and the stock market return with the average
volatilities of firm-level sales growth rates, ROAs, and stock returns.6 All the firm-level
volatilities trend upward from 1971 through 2000, while the aggregate volatilities trend
down or hold steady.
         Lower aggregate volatility is clearly not due to lower firm-level volatility. The
divergence between macro and micro volatilities implies that correlations among firms
declined over time, both in real (sales growth rate and ROA) and financial (stock return)
terms. In other words, firm-specific (idiosyncratic) volatilities rose faster than industry-
or economy-wide (systematic) volatilities over the sample period.7
         In this paper, we propose that creative destruction associated with the rapid
diffusion of Information Technology (IT) plays a major role in the aforementioned
divergence. Creative destruction, Schumpeter’s (1942) theory that economic growth
arises from creative firms adopting new technology, thereby destroying stagnant firms,
necessarily has winners and losers. We propose that the incorporation of IT by existing

5
  Blanchard and Simon (2001) and Stock and Watson (2003) also show that GDP volatilities declined in
other major advanced countries as well. In addition, Stock and Watson (2003) find that business cycles in
G7 countries have not become more synchronized despite large increases in trade and openness.
6
  Details on construction of the three variables and calculation of volatilities are explained in Section 4.
7
  Morck et al. (2000) and Campbell et al. (2001) report increased firm-specific volatility in U.S. stock
return over the latter decades of the twentieth century.


                                                     2
industries induces a tremor of creative destruction, and that this explains both increased
firm-level volatility and increased heterogeneity among firms.
         We propose that IT is a General Purpose Technology (GPT), like electrification in
the early twentieth century. Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) define a GPT as a
technology that transforms the way firms conduct business in general. Bresnahan et al.
(2002) show successful adopters of a GPT to possess complementary inputs, notably
skilled labor and appropriate organizational forms. In a similar vein, Hayek (1941)
stresses managerial foresight as a complementary input. However, the distribution of
these complements is not uniform across firms. Thus, some firms succeed with IT; others
fail. This increases firm-level volatility and heterogeneity as winners and losers diverge
within industries.
         In the process of creative destruction, IT may further increase heterogeneity, even
among successful adopters, by permitting more product differentiation in intangible
aspects of output such as better customer services. Thus, even though firms in the same
industry may produce similar tangible products, they could attract diverse pools of
consumers, generating yet more heterogeneous performance among firms within the
industry.8
         Overall, IT plausibly makes firm performance more volatile and heterogeneous,
raising firm-specific volatility.
         Panel A of Figure 2 shows IT investment (computers, software, and related assets)
rising steadily from about 3% of total investment in the early 1970s to 17% by 2000. In
2000, U.S. firms invested $273 billion in IT – almost 3% of GDP.9, 10 Panel B shows that,
despite declining somewhat over time, substantial cross-industry variation in IT intensity
(the ratio of IT capital to total capital) persists in 2000.11 This variation provides a natural
cross-sectional testing ground for studying the effects of IT assets on the volatilities of
various performance measures.
         We find that industries with higher IT intensity exhibit larger firm-specific
volatility in a range of performance measures. This finding is robust to controlling other
industry characteristics that might affect volatility, such as research and development
(R&D), average firm age, industry price competition, physical investment, foreign
exposure, distribution of firm size, liquidity, book to market ratio and firm
diversification.12 We also find that the growth rate of idiosyncratic volatility is higher in
more IT intensive industries.
         This finding provides several new insights into stock market volatility, the nature
and consequences of IT investment, and economic growth.

8
  Section 2 fully discusses the two channels how IT could affect firm-specific volatility.
9
  U.S. firms invested $180 billion in Research and Development (R&D), excluding federally funded R&D,
or about the half of their IT investment.
10
   Time-series patterns of IT and volatility suggest a possible relationship between the two variables.
However, since both exhibit strong time trends (IT intensity in many industries contains a unit root), they
are subject to well-known inference problems. Thus, our paper mainly focuses on the cross-sectional
effects of IT investment on volatility.
11
   Comparing diffusion patterns of IT and electrification across industries, Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003)
show that IT has diffused more slowly than electrification. In the period of 1960-2001, cross-industry
variation of IT has declined, but is still substantial – even in the latter part of the period. Details on the
distribution of IT investment across industries are discussed in Section 3.
12
   Section 3 discusses in detail the different characteristics between IT and R&D.


                                                      3
        First, our study identifies an underlying factor behind the recent increase in firm-
specific volatility in the U.S. stock market found in Morck et al. (2000) and Campbell et
al. (2001). Schumpeter (1912) argues that innovation is a process of creative destruction,
whereby creative new firms bring innovations to market, destroying established old firms.
Higher firm-specific stock return volatility indicates a more extreme divergence of
winners from losers, and so might be a sign of intensifying creative destruction in the U.S.
economy.
        This builds on other recent findings regarding firm-specific returns volatility. For
example, Wei and Zhang (2004) show that changes in stock return volatility closely track
changes in earnings volatility. This suggests that real economic factors cannot be ignored
in explaining the rising firm-specific returns variance in U.S. stocks. We take this
argument a step further by exploring and testing a detailed economic explanation of why
real firm performance measures exhibit greater firm-specific volatility.
        Our explanation also accords with other recent findings relating firm-specific
returns volatility to a variety of other important economic variables. Morck et al. (2000)
and Durnev et al. (2004) find higher firm-specific volatility related to higher real GDP
per capita and faster economic growth, respectively. This is consistent with more
intensive creative destruction underlying faster and more sustained economic growth, as
in Schumpeter (1912) and the new endogenous growth theory summarized in e.g. Aghion
and Howitt (1998).
        Greater firm-specific volatility is related to general measures of financial
development (Wurgler, 2000) and a variety of variables measuring more specific
dimensions of financial development. These include reduced arbitrage costs (Bris et al.,
2004); greater transparency (Bushman et al., 2002; Durnev et al., 2004; and Jin and
Myers, 2004); and more open capital markets (Li et al., 2004). King and Levine (1993)
demonstrate a highly significant relationship between a county’s financial development
and its economic growth, consistent with Schumpeter’s (1912) thesis that well-
functioning financial institutions and markets are necessary to finance the rapid growth of
innovative firms. Higher firm-specific volatility might thus occur in countries with better
financial institutions and markets because these permit faster creative destruction.
        This insight in no way precludes other theories of firm-specific returns variation.
For example, Jin and Myers (2004) link greater firm-specific fundamentals and returns
variation to better institutions to prevent corporate insiders and officials from
confiscating firm-specific abnormal profits, and present convincing evidence of such a
link. This view is also consistent with much other work, and ought to be regarded as a
complement to ours, rather than an alternative theory. In fact, our paper might be
considered a special case of their framework, in which greater transparency limits insider
malfeasance, allowing better financing terms for honest innovators, and hence faster
creative destruction.
        A second insight is that IT researchers might consider second moments. The
existing IT literature focuses on first moments – the growth rates of individual firms,
industries, and economies. Stiroh (2002) shows that innovation associated with IT can
increase the growth rate of an industry.13 Using a growth accounting framework, Oliner

13
  The relationship between IT and economic performance is somewhat sensitive to the sample period. For
example, Stiroh (2002) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003) find a significant positive IT effect using data
after the late 1980s. However, Loveman (1994) and Stiroh (1998) fail to find any significant relationship in


                                                     4
and Sichel (2000) and Jorgenson (2001) show that the growth in IT capital stock accounts
for over half the rise in U.S. productivity growth in the late 1990s. Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(2003) find similar results at the firm-level. Since IT intensity is positively associated
with firm-specific volatility, highly innovative industries could generally have both low
aggregate volatility and high firm-specific volatility.14 This is because the purely firm-
specific component of volatility is diversified away at the industry or economy level.
         A third insight undermines theories that explain macro volatility with micro
volatility. Kahn et al. (2001) explain declines in aggregate volatility with IT investment,
arguing that better inventory management, production planning, and demand forecasting
reduce aggregate volatility. However, this implies declining firm-level volatility too,
which Figure 1 belies. A variant of the Keynesian fallacy of composition applies.
Aggregate variation is not the simple sum of firm variations.
         Fourth, our findings also illuminate the relationship between volatility and
macroeconomic performance. Morck et al. (2000), Jin and Myers (2004), and others find
higher firm-specific stock return volatility in richer countries. Durnev et al. (2004) find
higher firm-specific stock return volatility correlated with faster GDP and productivity
growth across countries. He et al. (2004) link faster GDP and productivity growth to
increased turnover in the lists of countries’ leading firms. On surface, these results seem
to contradict Ramey and Ramey (1995), who find countries with higher aggregate
volatility to grow slower. Ramey and Ramey interpret their finding as consistent with the
literatures on investment under uncertainty, such as Pindyck (1991), wherein increased
uncertainty depresses corporate investment. However, our findings suggest low aggregate
volatility can coincide with high firm-level volatility because creative destruction induces
firm-specific volatility, which averages out in aggregate measures. In an economic
growth model with creative destruction, Aghion and Howitt (1992) argue that both the
average growth rate and the variance of the growth rate are increasing functions of the
size of innovations as well as the size of the skilled labor force and the productivity of
research.
         The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 examines how IT can affect firm-
level volatilities. Section 3 describes the construction and characteristics of our industry-
level IT variable. Section 4 examines the characteristics of firm-level volatility, and the
changes in correlation patterns of sales growth rates, ROAs, and stock returns. Section 5
explains our decomposition of total volatility into firm-specific and systematic
components. Section 6 discusses regression results, and Section 7 concludes.

2.       Information Technology, Volatility, and Alternative Hypotheses
Section 2.1 describes two channels through which IT might affect firm-specific volatility.
Section 2.2 considers other relevant industry characteristics that might affect firm-
specific volatility.




the earlier period. Evidence of a time varying effect of IT is also consistent with the GPT theory,
suggesting that the gains from new GTPs are delayed for some time. This delayed effect of IT is often
called the IT productivity paradox. See Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) for a theoretical explanation.
14
   In a similar spirit, Dunne et al. (2004) argue that the increasing dispersion of wages and productivity at
the plant-level reflects the differential adoption of new technology, in particular, computer investment.


                                                     5
2.1     IT and Volatility
Information Technology is often considered an example of general purpose technology
(GPT), which Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003), and
others define as a technology that transforms the way firms conduct business.15 Usually,
the introduction of a new GPT is somewhat exogenous and episodic, but firms must
adopt it to survive in the long run. As a GPT, IT spreads to firms in all sectors, permitting
innovation in new processes and products (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). This
section reviews two important channels through which IT causes firms to be more
volatile and heterogeneous; that is, to exhibit greater firm-specific variation.

First channel: IT increases firm-level heterogeneity by permitting improvements in new
production processes with different values for different firms.

         Like most GPTs, IT investment benefits different firms differently. Successful
adoption of IT requires complementary assets – Bresnahan et al. (2002) and Brynjolfsson
et al. (2003) stress skilled workers and firm organization, while Hayek (1941) focuses on
managerial foresight. Firms with more complementary assets gain the most from IT.16
These complementary assets mean that a firm’s effective IT capital stock could differ
from its reported value. Since these complementary assets are predominantly firm-
specific, production processes should exhibit more heterogeneity as IT capital stock rises.
         In a similar spirit to this explanation, Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001) also examine
the ex-post effect of the introduction of IT. They emphasize the difference in the relative
benefits of IT between incumbents (old firms) and entrants (new firms). Their intuition is
that IT may not be fully functional in old firms because the resources used to run old
technology are not fully transferable to new technology. Therefore, new firms without old
technology benefit more from IT. In support of their theory, they find that industries with
higher IT intensity experience larger decreases in aggregate market value when a new IT
arrives.17 If older firms are larger, this implies that heterogeneity between small and large
firms should increase after a new IT arrives. Consistent with this line of argument, we
find that correlations between large and small firm performance declines over time in the
U.S.18 In addition, we also find that correlations between large firms decrease as well.
Thus, heterogeneous benefits of IT are evident not only between small and large firms,
but between firms in general.

Second channel: IT increases firm-level heterogeneity by increasing the importance of
intangible aspects of output.

        IT lets firms develop new products and improve intangible aspects of existing

15
   Other examples of GPTs are steam engine, the factory system, and electricity. In particular, Jovanovic
and Rousseau (2003) contrast characteristics of two GPTs: IT and electricity.
16
   For example, Brynjolfsson (2002) et al. find that firms with higher levels of both computer and
organizational investment have higher stock market valuations than firms that invest heavily in only one of
the two.
17
   A similar argument is also found in Laitner and Stolyarov (2003), who suggest that new information
technologies render old knowledge and physical capital obsolete and thereby reducing the market value of
physical capital.
18
   Correlation patterns are discussed in Section 4.


                                                    6
ones, thus deepening the uniqueness of products made by successful IT adopters. If this
deeper product differentiation reduces the substitutability of different firms’ products
(Syverson, 2004), firm-specific volatility could rise as one firm’s product is revealed to
be superior or attractive to certain groups of customers.
        Surprisingly, given IT’s technological roots, its major benefits to firms seem to
involve product differentiation of this sort.19 Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003) survey Fortune
500 information system managers in 1997 and report the top five reasons for IT
investment: 1) improving customer service, 2) targeting new customers, 3) improving
quality, 4) reducing total cost, and 5) improving timeliness. Four reflect intangible
aspects of output. Likewise, using data on the U.S. postal service, Mukhopadhyay et al.
(1997) report that IT raises the quality of output measured by the timeliness of mail
processing. Athey and Stern (2002) also find that IT decreases response times of
emergency response systems and improves healthcare outcomes.
        A National Science Foundation (NSF) survey (2004) asks the managers of about
two thousand firms if IT has small, moderate, or great effect on cost reduction and quality
improvement. About 80% of respondents replied that IT has at least a moderate effect
(about 40% for a great effect).20

2.2     Volatility and Alternative Hypotheses
This section introduces other industry characteristics that might affect cross-industry
variation in firm-specific volatility. Details about the construction of each corresponding
control variable are in the appendix.

Corporate Demography
Smaller and younger firms might have greater dispersion in performance. An industry
consisting of relatively young firms might thus exhibit greater firm-specific volatility.21
As a proxy for the average age of firms in an industry, we use two measures. Our first age
measure is calculated using the listing year from CRSP monthly data. The second is the
average age of the firms’ capital assets, measured as in Hall (1990). The two measures
are highly correlated, and generate similar results in our multiple regressions.

Price Competition
The degree of price competition in an industry can affect firm-level performance
variation. Intense price competition means that a negative firm-specific shock might
cause bankruptcy, while a positive shock might provide an important competitive edge
over rival firms.22 Intense price competition might thus amplify firm-specific volatility.23

19
   This is a very unique nature of IT as a GPT. For example, electricity does not deepen the uniqueness of
products.
20
   Managers of both small and large firms stress the importance of IT in their responses. There is little
variation in answers to the two questions across firms with different sizes (e.g., less than $5 million, 5-10M,
10-25M, 25-50M, and 50M or more) and across industries (e.g., manufacturing versus non-manufacturing).
In this regard, IT differs from R&D, which is typically concentrated in relatively large firms in
manufacturing. Other differences emerge in Section 3.2.
21
   For recent evidence, see Pastor and Veronesi (2003).
22
   Philippon (2003) develops a model in this spirit.
23
   International competition can also increase firm-level volatility (Comin and Mulani, 2003, Li et al.,
2004). Since international trade is concentrated in tradable goods industries (mainly manufacturing), this


                                                      7
Thus, we must ensure that any relationship between IT and firm-specific volatility is not
merely an artefact of heterogeneity in price competition across industries.24 To measure
the intensity of price competition in each industry, we calculate Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI).

Distribution of Firm Size
The distribution of firm size may reflect pre-existing heterogeneity among firms, which
could affect volatility. 25 We calculate the standard deviation of the logarithm of firm
market capitalizations, sales, and total assets to measure the dispersion in firm size for
each industry.

Conventional Investment
Investment in conventional capital assets might also increase firm-level performance
variation by increasing uncertainty about firms’ future cash-flows. Or, increased volatility
might discourage firms from making capital expenditures.26 Which of these two effects
dominates in a cross-sectional analysis is an empirical question. Regardless, we include
the investment rate in non-IT capital as an additional control variable.

Other Intangible Investments
Other intangible assets, such as R&D and advertising, might also affect firm-level
performance variation. Both R&D and advertising are highly concentrated in a small
number of industries. We discuss R&D in more detail in section 6 and in Appendix II.

Foreign Exposure
A firm’s reliance on foreign sales may affect its performance variation. However,
whether foreign sales affect firm-specific or systematic (market- and industry-wide)
volatility remains as an empirical question. For example, if firms in an industry mainly
trade with a specific country, most of the volatility that comes from international business
is mainly systematic (industry specific) volatility. On the contrary, if firms in the industry
trade with many different countries whose economies exhibit low correlations with each
other, it could affect firm-specific volatility in the industry. We calculate the ratio of
foreign sales to total sales to capture the effect of foreign exposure on volatility using the
segment data of COMPUSTAT.




predicts stronger increases in firm-level volatility in manufacturing, as opposed to sectors that mainly
produce non-tradable goods. However we find strong increases in firm-level volatility in both.
24
    Alternatively, IT might amplify price competition. Using data on individual life insurance policies,
Goolsbee and Brown (2002) find that the growth of the Internet reduced term life premium by 8 to 15%.
This is consistent with the Internet reducing search costs and thus stimulating price competition.
25
   In fact, firm size distribution becomes more dispersed due to creative destruction through IT investment.
By including this variable in our regression may unduly underestimate the significance of IT variables. As
will be discussed in section 6, even after including this variable does not change the effect of IT at all.
26
   Another possible story that predicts a negative relationship between investment and volatility is a
‘declining industry’ effect. If many firms are exiting a declining industry, high volatility might be
associated with a low investment rate. In this sort of ‘plain destruction’, as opposed to ‘creative destruction’,
systematic volatility should plausibly be elevated more than firm-specific volatility.


                                                       8
Firm Diversification27
A large literature links corporate diversification with both corporate governance problems
and access to capital. In both cases, firm performance volatility could be affected.28 Our
firm diversification measure for each industry is the average number of two-digit
segments reported in business segment data in COMPUSTAT.

Other Control Variables
Leverage is another candidate. A fall in the market value of a leveraged firm increases the
volatility of its stock return and accounting earnings. Consequently, industries in which
firms are more leveraged might exhibit greater cross-sectional performance variation.29
         Liquidity might also affect performance variance. The easing of liquidity
constraints should increase investment by previously constrained firms, but not other
firms.

3. Construction and Characteristics of the IT Variable
This section outlines the construction of the IT variable. It then examines the variable’s
characteristics.30 The appendix provides technical details.
         We calculate industry-level IT data from Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth
(henceforth FRTW) published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). These data
list investment in 61 different types of assets at the two-digit (1987 SIC code) industry-
level. 31 We define the IT capital as the sum of seven types of computer hardware
(mainframe computers, personal computers, direct access storage devices, computer
printers, computer terminals, computer tape drives, and computer storage devices) and
three types of software (pre-packaged software, custom software, and own-account
software).32
         We use the Törnqvist index to aggregate these ten types of computer hardware
and software into IT capital.33 Using the same data, we define non-IT capital as all other
asset types. Thus, the total capital is the sum of IT and non-IT capital.
         IT capital is distinguished from other capital by a rapid decline in its constant
quality price index during the last few decades. The BEA uses the hedonic price method
to estimate constant quality prices of computers.34 The hedonic price falls as the quality

27
   Unlike other control variables, the foreign exposure and firm diversification measures are calculated
from COMPUSTAT segment data. Currently these data are available from 1985 on at WRDS. Reporting
conventions for these data changed substantially in 1998. Thus the data range is different from that for
other variables. Restricting our regressions accordingly does not qualitatively change our results as will be
discussed in section 6.
28
   Refer Durnev et al. (2004) for further discussion.
29
   However, one should note that Black’s hypothesis on the effect of leverage is mainly about the time-
series causality between return and volatility and does not have much implication on the cross-sectional
property. We investigate whether the cross-sectional variation of leverage has an effect on the cross-
sectional variation of volatility measures.
30
   In appendix II, we compare IT and R&D, another possible source of creative destruction, in detail.
31
   See Herman (2000) and for a detailed description of the data set.
32
   A recent comprehensive revision of the National Income and Product Accounts published by the BEA
categorizes expenditure on software as fixed investment rather than costs of materials, as in COMPUSTAT.
33
   For further details, see Appendix I.
34
   See BEA (1998) for the hedonic price method used by the BEA. In general, quality improvement is faster
in computers than in software.


                                                     9
of computers rises.35 For example, the memory chip capacity increased at 35 to 45% per
year, a stylized fact known as Moore’s law. Reflecting this rapid improvement in quality,
the price of computers falls about 20% per year. This implies that real investment in
computers can increase at 20% per year without changing nominal spending. This quality
improvement is an important factor magnifying the rise in nominal IT investment. The
real stock of IT capital also rose rapidly, but less so than real IT investment because of
IT’s high depreciation rate – about 30% per year. In this context, Jorgenson (2001) argues
that swiftly falling prices in IT provide powerful economic incentives for firms to
substitute IT for other inputs, like conventional capital and labor.
        Three important episodes demarcate IT investment: the introduction of
mainframes in the late 1970s, the introduction of personal computers from the early to
mid-1980s, and Internet investment (a huge investment boom in hardware, software, and
communication equipment) in the late 1990s. Throughout, software investment trended
up as a share in total IT spending, exceeding hardware investment in the 1990s.
        Table 1 shows the cross-industry distribution of IT intensity in 1970, 1980, 1990,
and 2000. IT intensity is the ratio of the IT capital stock to the total capital stock.
        On average, IT is more intensively used in the service sector than in
manufacturing. However, there is a substantial variation of IT intensity within both
sectors. Within manufacturing, IT intensity is high in industrial equipment (including
computer-producing firms), electronic equipment (including semiconductor firms),
instruments (including laboratory and medical instruments), apparels, and printing and
publishing. Within the non-manufacturing sector, wholesale and business (including
software firms), legal, and other service industries exhibit high IT intensity.36 Agriculture,
mining, transportation, and utilities all have low IT intensity. Figure 3 illustrates the
distribution of IT intensity in 2000 across industries. Figure 3 shows that IT spending is
almost normally distributed across all 50 industries. In contrast, Figure 4 shows R&D,
another possible source of creative destruction, to be highly concentrated in certain
industries. We discuss more about the different characteristics of IT and R&D in section
6 and in the appendix II.

4. Correlation Patterns of Sales Growth Rate, ROA, and Stock Return
4.1 Construction of the Data Series
In this section, we investigate the volatility and correlation patterns of sales growth rate,
ROA, and stock return to show increased heterogeneity among firms in the U.S. economy.
We first estimate the volatilities of aggregate sales, aggregate ROA, and stock index
return. We then calculate the averages of firm-level volatilities.
        To calculate aggregate sales, we sum the real sales of all the firms in our sample
                                                        Nt
                                         ASalest =   ∑ Sales
                                                      i =1
                                                               i ,t                                   (1)


35
   Declines in the hedonic price of computers (or equivalently, improvement in the quality of computers)
depend on productivity growth associated with technological innovations in IT producing industries such as
semiconductors and computer manufacturing industries. For example, Chun and Nadiri (2002) decompose
the sources of productivity in the U.S. computer industries into process and product innovations. In a
similar vein, Irwin and Klenow (1994) and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) argue that learning-by-doing is
a major determinant of productivity growth in the semiconductor industry.
36
   Financial industry is also one of heaviest users of IT within the non-manufacturing sector.


                                                   10
where Nt is the number of firms in quarter t and Salesi ,t is real sales of firm i, equal to
nominal net sales (COMPUSTAT quarterly item 12) divided by the relevant price index
of industry gross output.37 Aggregate annual real sales growth is then

                                           Asalest − Asalest − 4
                                                                     .                          (2)
                                       1
                                       2   ( Asalest + Asalest − 4 )

Analogously, the quarterly real sales growth rate of firm i in industry j is defined as

                                           Salesi , j ,t − Salesi , j ,t − 4
                                                                                                (3)
                                       1
                                       2   ( Salesi , j ,t + Salesi , j ,t − 4 )

where Salesi , j ,t represent real sales of firm i in industry j at quarter t. In calculating firm-
level sales growth rate, we exclude firm-quarter observations with footnotes in
COMPUSTAT. Footnotes flag unusual events, such as mergers, accounting changes,
discontinued operations, and the like. Such events render sales growth estimates
problematic. However, our results are qualitatively similar if we retain these observations.
After calculating aggregate and firm quarterly sales growth rates, we measure their
volatilities (standard deviations) using five-year rolling windows.
         Aggregate ROA and its volatility are defined similarly. 38 For each quarter t,
aggregate total assets and aggregate operating income after depreciation are defined as
                                                          Nt
                                       ATAt =           ∑ TA
                                                          i =1
                                                                 i ,t   ,                       (4)
                                                   Nt
                             AINCOMEt =           ∑ INCOME
                                                   i =1
                                                                            i ,t
                                                                                                (5)


for N t the number of firms, and TAi ,t and INCOMEi ,t the total assets (quarterly item 44)
and operating income (quarterly item 21 minus quarterly item 5) , respectively, of firm i
in quarter t. Aggregate ROA for quarter t is thus

                                                        AINCOMEt
                              AROAt        =                             .                      (6)
                                                  1
                                                  2
                                                      ( ATAt + ATAt −1 )

The quarterly ROA of firm i in industry j is defined as

                                             INCOMEi , j ,t
                                                                                                (7)
                                       1
                                       2   (TAi , j ,t + TAi , j ,t −1 )


37
  See the appendix for the construction of the price index of industry gross output.
38
  Total assets are not available on a quarterly basis until 1976. Thus, we calculate micro and macro
volatilities of ROA from 1981.


                                                            11
where INCOMEi , j ,t and TAi , j ,t represent the operating income39 and total assets of firm i
in industry j at quarter t. As with sales growth, we drop firm-quarter observations with
footnotes. Again, our results do not change qualitatively if we retain these observations.
         To calculate stock return volatilities, we use monthly stock return data from
CRSP for 1971 through 2000. Again we use a five-year rolling window to calculate
volatility for a given year. Aggregate volatility is the volatility of the value weighted
portfolio consisting of all firms in both COMPUSTAT and CRSP. To gauge micro
volatility, we average firm-level volatilities.

4.2 Volatility and Correlation Patterns
As discussed in Section 1, Figure 1 shows both the aggregate (dotted lines) and firm-level
(solid lines) volatilities of real sales growth, ROA and stock returns. Firm-level
volatilities are equally-weighted averages of individual firm volatilities. Value weighting
generates similar patterns. Firm-level volatilities are clearly higher than aggregate
volatilities, and the gap between them rose steadily over the decades. For example, the
difference between firm and aggregate sales growth volatilities was 0.184 in 1971, but
grew to 0.346 by 2000. The increased differences are much larger for ROA volatilities,
rising from 0.015 in 1981 to 0.17 in 200040 and stock return volatilities, rising from 0.043
in 1971 to 0.133 in 2000. When we partition firms into size quintiles, Figure 5 reveals
similar patterns in each, with the largest change in the smallest firms. Rising firm-level
volatility relative to aggregate volatility is evident across the entire corporate sector. This
divergence implies declining correlations across firms over the same period.
         Figure 6 reports average correlations across pairs of firms for sales growth, ROA
and stock returns – first for the full sample of firms and then for the largest quintile,
smallest quintile, and then between largest and smallest quintiles separately. Correlations
of stock returns are, on average, higher than correlations of sales growth and ROA.
However, all three exhibit similar declines. Correlations within the largest quintile are
usually higher than those in the other groups, but also exhibit strong downward trends.
These figures clearly show that something changed in the U.S. economy to make
individual firms more heterogeneous.
         It is useful to formalize the firm-specific and systematic components of the
volatility in firm-level outcomes to motivate our empirical tests in the following section.
Suppose firm-level performance measure can be represented by a simple linear structure.

                                        ri ,t = ηt + ε i ,t                                         (8)

where ri ,t represents the sales growth, ROA, or stock return of firm i in period t, η t
represents a component common to all firms, and ε i ,t represents a component specific to
firm i . The correlation between firms i and j is

39
   Operating income after depreciation is not readily available in the quarterly COMPUSTAT file, but is
available in the annual data (annual item 178). However, it can be estimated as operating income before
depreciation (quarterly item 21) minus the depreciation and amortization (quarterly item 5).
40
   If we use the median of firm volatilities for ROA, the difference between firm level and aggregate
volatilities rises from 0.011 in 1981 to 0.021 in 2000, which is more comparable with the results of the
other two firm performance measures.


                                                      12
                                               cov(ri ,t , rj ,t )                              1
                        ρ (ri ,t , rj ,t ) =                          =                                             (9)
                                               σ (ri ,t )σ (rj ,t )        1 + (σ              2
                                                                                               ε ,t   / σ η2,t )

where σ η2,t is the common variance component and σ ε2,t is the firm-specific component of
variance, which we take to be homogeneous across firms. The magnitude of the
correlation thus depends on the ratio (σ ε2,t / σ η2,t ) . A lower correlation across firms could
reflect either greater firm-specific variation or lower common variation, or both.

5. Decomposition of Volatility Series
This section describes how we decompose volatilities into firm-specific and systematic
components. Our purpose is to isolate the idiosyncratic component that is not associated
with general market- and industry-wide movements. In this regard, we follow Roll (1988)
in distinguishing the ‘firm-specific’ variation from the sum of market- and industry-
related variations. For simplicity, we refer to the latter sum as the ‘systematic’ variation.
        To achieve necessary decomposition, we run the following regression
specification used in Durnev et al. (2004):

                                  ri , j ,t = βi ,0 + β i ,m rm,t + βi , j rj ,t + ε i , j ,t                      (10)

where ri , j ,t are real sales growth rate, ROA, or stock return for firm i in industry j at
time t ( t represents quarter for real sales growth rate and ROA and month for stock
return). rm ,t and rj ,t are the market index and industry indices, and are value weighted
averages excluding the firm in question. This exclusion prevents spurious correlation
between firm and industry returns in industries that contain few firms. We run the
regression for five-year rolling periods. Thus, we have the maximum of 20 observations
for real sales growth rate and ROA and 60 observations for monthly stock returns.41
        Firm-level regression results are aggregated to obtain the industry-level volatility
measures. We calculate the absolute firm-specific variation and absolute systematic
variation within industry j as follows:


                                                 σ ε2, j =
                                                              ∑ SSR
                                                                 i∈ j               i, j
                                                                                                                   (11)
                                                               ∑ T      i∈ j    i



                                                 σ m2 , j   =
                                                              ∑ SSM
                                                                 i∈ j                   i, j
                                                                                                                   (12)
                                                               ∑ T       i∈ j       i



where SSRi , j and SSM i , j are the unexplained (squared sum of residual errors) and

41
  We repeat our exercise for various restrictions on number of observations in each regression. However
the results of the paper are not very different from one another. Here, we report results based on restrictions
on observations where 15(30) or more observations are available for sales growth rate and ROA (stock
return). If we impose no restrictions, which basically means we include all young firms, there is slight
improvement in the statistical significance of the results.


                                                                     13
explained variations of firm i in industry j. The sums in (11) and (12) are scaled by
number of firm-quarter (or firm-month) observations available in industry j. Thus, the
industry-wide average R 2j can be defined as follows:

                                                 σ m2 , j
                                   R 2j =                      .                         (13)
                                            σ ε2, j + σ m2 , j

         Panels A, B, and C of Figure 7 show the time-series patterns of the equal and
value-weighted averages of each variation measure. To obtain value-weighted measures,
we calculate equally weighted averages across all firms in an industry and then apply the
industry weight. For real sales growth rate and stock returns, data start in 1971 (based on
the years between 1967 and 1971) while ROA starts from 1981 (because the quarterly
ROA data begin in 1976).
         Several patterns emerge from these figures.
         First, idiosyncratic variation increased dramatically in sales growth, stock returns,
and, to a lesser degree, ROA. Equal and industry value weighted figures look very similar.
Increasing idiosyncratic volatility is not confined to a few large industries.
         Second, Table 2 shows idiosyncratic volatility to be much larger than systematic
volatility. For each year and each industry, we first calculate the ratio of idiosyncratic
volatility to systematic volatility, and then calculate the means and medians of these
ratios for the whole sample and two sub-periods – 1971-1983 and 1984-2000. The choice
of 1984 as the break point is reflects the general agreement among economists that the
U.S. economy exhibits a structural break at that time.42 The ratio medians reported in the
table indicate that the idiosyncratic volatility in the whole sample is three times as large
as the systematic volatility in real sales growth and ROA, and about five times larger for
stock return. The divergence between idiosyncratic and systematic volatilities becomes
more pronounced in the second sub-period in general, especially for stock returns and
ROA. Reflecting this rising idiosyncratic volatility, the industry average R 2 also declines
over the sample period (Figure 7). For real sales growth and stock returns, R 2 declines by
about 50% from the mid-1970s to the end of the sample period.
         Third, since the mid-1970s, the R 2 of stock returns provides a lower bound for the
 R 2 of the other two measures. This faster rise in idiosyncratic relative to systematic
volatility for stock returns might reflect additional factors at work in that measure alone –
such as reduced arbitrage costs and Internet investing. However, rising idiosyncratic
volatility is clearly not just confined to stock returns. It is observed in real sales growth
and ROA as well over the whole sample period.
         Fourth, in general, absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic variations are
strongly positively correlated with each other for all three variables (Panel B of Table 2).
A positive correlation is most apparent for ROA. In firm-level regressions, a positive
correlation implies dependence between the independent variable and residual that
produces inconsistent estimators. However, in this case, the correlation is between two
aggregate measures calculated to represent industry-level average firm-specific and

42
   See Kim and Nelson (1999), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), and others for more detailed
discussions.


                                                    14
systematic volatilities. This makes it possible to have a positive correlation between the
two measures even if there is no correlation problem in the firm-level regression. In fact,
this positive correlation is useful in inferring the sources of firm-specific variation, for it
suggests that much firm-specific variation is heterogeneous reactions to market-wide
shocks. That is, firms often react differently when hit by the same economy-wide shock,
thus inducing firm-specific variation.
         Fifth, ROA volatility follows a pattern somewhat different from that of the other
two series. The correlation between absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic
volatility is largest for ROA, and consequently the decrease in its R 2 is smallest. Part of
the high correlations might be due to outliers: there are several sharp spikes in the
comovement of absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic volatility. Dropping both
extreme 1% tails of firm-year observations causes the absolute idiosyncratic and absolute
systematic ROA volatilities to resemble those of stock returns and sales growth rates.
Extreme values in ROA are much more frequent than in stock returns and sales growth
rates.43 Another possibility is that earnings might be ‘managed’, while sales and stock
return are not. For example, if firms manage their earnings more when the economy
exhibits more volatility, we would see a larger positive correlation between absolute
idiosyncratic and absolute systematic measures for ROA. To address this issue, we use
cash flow to asset ratios after controlling for accruals using the method of Chan et al.
(2001). This generates qualitatively similar results. Further investigation is needed to
clarify these issues.

6. Regression Analyses
In this section, we test whether industries with higher IT intensity exhibit larger
idiosyncratic variation. First, we examine the bivariate relationships between our
volatility measures and IT intensity (the ratio of IT capital to total capital). We use this
rather than current IT investment because our focus is the extent to which the utilization
of information technology affects cross-sectional patterns of volatility. Creative
destruction plausibly depends not just on current IT investment, but on IT intensity –
firms’ overall abilities to apply IT to their ongoing businesses. Second, we investigate
the effect of IT intensity on volatility measures in a multiple regression framework
controlling for the other industry characteristics described in Section 2.2.

6.1 Bivariate Regressions
We run weighted least square regressions (WLS) for each year and report Fama-MacBeth
coefficients and t-statistics. 44 In calculating Fama-MacBeth t-statistics, we adjust for
possible serial correlation and heteroskedasticity in coefficient estimates using the
method of Newey and West (1987) as modified in Pontiff (1996). 45 All variables are
transformed by taking natural logarithms. We exclude financial industries (1987 SIC

43
   One cause of these outliers is very small total asset figures.
44
   All regressions are weighted by the industry share of market capitalization, sales, and total assets for
stock return, sales, and ROA, respectively. However, the results are not sensitive to using different weights.
45
   As Jin and Myers (2004) note, this may be an overcorrection since spurious serial correlation is pssible
in small sample coefficient estimates even if the estimation errors for the coefficients are uncorrelated.
However, we follow Pontiff (1996) and Jin and Myers (2004) in taking a conservative approach in
calculating t-statistics.


                                                     15
codes from 6000 to 6999) because of accounting data (such as sales and ROA)
incompatible with that in other industries. Thus, the maximum number of industries is 50,
consisting of 20 manufacturing and 30 non-manufacturing industries.46 We also discard
industries containing fewer than 5 firms, and industries whose IT stock is not defined.
The tables also report the average number of industries used in the regressions.
        Table 3 presents regressions using IT intensity to explain three types of volatility
(absolute idiosyncratic, absolute systematic and idiosyncratic relative to systematic) for
each volatility measure (sales growth, ROA, and stock returns). Since the R 2 measure is
confined within the unit interval and highly skewed, we apply a logistic transformation as
in Durnev et al. (2004):

                                       1 − R 2j
                              ψ j = ln(       2
                                                  ) = ln(σ ε2, j ) − ln(σ m2 , j ) .                (14)
                                          R   j



        We report regression results for the whole sample (from 1971 to 2000 for stock
return and sales growth rate and from 1984 to 2000 for ROA) and for two sub-periods.47
        The central finding is that absolute idiosyncratic variation is strongly positively
correlated with IT intensity. Figure 8 (Panels A, B, and C) graphs the relationship
between IT intensity and idiosyncratic volatility in 2000. IT intensity is also positively
correlated with absolute systematic variation. However, discussed below, the positive
correlation between absolute systematic measure and IT intensity appears due to a strong
positive correlation between IT intensity and other control variables (especially, R&D)
that explain much of systematic volatility.
        The logistically-transformed R2 measure in (14), denoted ψ, captures the relative
importance of absolute idiosyncratic versus absolute systematic volatility. IT intensity is
positively related to ψ for the full sample period for stock returns. This relationship is
significant at 1%, and its analogue for sales growth is significant at 10%. Sales growth is
more strongly correlated with ψ in the second subperiod, with a significance exceeding
1%.
        However, the results for ROA are weak. Even though IT intensity explains
absolute idiosyncratic volatility, it fails to explain ψ – and even has wrong sign (negative).
However, as discussed below, the significant negative coefficient disappears if we
include other control variables in multiple regressions. This suggests that the negative
coefficient on IT is picking up other industry characteristics.
        The bivariate regressions involving returns volatility in Table 3 have substantial
adjusted R2s – over 40% for the whole sample for the absolute idiosyncratic regressions.
The R2s are nearly as high form the sales growth and ROA volatility regressions.
        We can think of two reasons for a weaker relationship with sales growth and ROA
than with stock returns. First, the volatilities of sales growth and ROA must be estimated

46
   The number of industries used in this paper is almost the same as in Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001) and
Stiroh (2002).
47
   The results for ROA are reported for the second subperiod only. Quarterly ROA data are available from
1976 on, so we could theoretically obtain decomposed volatility series from 1980 on. However, we require
more than five firms in an industry to calculate ROA volatility series, and this condition is met in only
thirty industries through the early 1980s. Thus we perform regression from the mid 1980s for ROA.



                                                       16
using quarterly observations. Stock returns, however, can be estimated using monthly
data, and so are more precise. Second, we might have an omitted variable bias. If missing
control variables capture systematic volatility and are correlated with IT intensity, our
estimated coefficients of IT intensity are biased. To address this issue, we move on the
multiple regressions analyses.

6.2 Multiple Regressions
In this section, we include all the industry-level control variables described in Section 2.2
in our regressions. These controls are: average firm age, non-IT capital investment rate
(I/K), Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, leverage, liquidity, firm size distribution, foreign
exposure, firm diversification, and measures of intangibles such as R&D, advertising, and
book-to-market ratio.48
        Table 4 reports the averages of annual cross-sectional correlation coefficients and
their associated significance levels. Note that IT intensity is strongly positively correlated
with R&D and advertising spending. This suggests possible complementarities between
intangibles. IT intensity also positively correlates with non-IT capital investment and
liquidity, implying that more rapidly growing and less cash constrained industries invest
more in IT. The book-to-market ratio, which in many studies use to proxy for intangible
assets, is negatively correlated with IT. Intriguingly, IT is the only variable correlated
with all the other intangible measures. For example, R&D is correlated with IT and book-
to-market, but not with advertising spending. Firm diversification is negatively
correlated with both IT and non-IT capital investment, though the latter is insignificant.
This could reflect more diversified firms delaying investment.
        We isolate the independent contribution of IT to volatility by including all of
these variables in the regressions in Table 5. Because business segment data are
unavailable for earlier years, the foreign exposure and firm diversification measures are
not included. Table 6 reports analogous regressions including these two additional
controls.
        The key results from Tables 4, 5 and 6 are as follows.
        First, IT is significantly positively correlated with idiosyncratic variation – both
absolute and relative to systematic variation. In fact, IT is the only variable that explains
both with consistent positive signs and significance levels. These findings survive the
inclusion of all of the control variables discussed above. This is consistent with the use of
information technology being related to creative destruction, which increases
heterogeneity among firms.
        Second, IT intensity is not significantly related to systematic volatility. Including
controls, especially R&D intensity, renders IT insignificant in regressions explaining
systematic volatility. 49 The component of IT related to systematic variation is thus
correlated with R&D intensity, and this explains the significant relationship between IT
and systematic volatility in bivariate regressions. Also, IT attracts a positive and
significant coefficient in regressions explaining idiosyncratic relative to systematic

48
  See Appendix I for the construction of each variable.
49
  As noted above, R&D is quite concentrated in the manufacturing sector, which is perhaps subject to more
business cycle risk than other sectors. To control for this, we include a manufacturing sector dummy along
with IT intensity and R&D. R&D remains significant, suggesting its coefficient is not a mere artefact of
business cycle exposure.


                                                   17
volatilities in both sales growth and stock return; but R&D does not. Overall, IT seems
related to idiosyncratic volatility, while R&D appears related to systematic volatility.
Appendix II explores this further by discussing different characteristics of IT and R&D
that might explain this.
         Third, the signs and significance of IT intensity are very stable. This is in stark
contrast to the coefficients of the various controls, which are quite sensitive to the
particular specification in many cases. We return to this below.
         Fourth, by adding control variables, negative relationship between IT intensity
and logistically-transformed R 2 measures in bivariate regression disappears. However,
still we could not get positive and significant relationship between the two measures
either.
         Since many of the control variables have multiple interpretations, we refrain from
interpreting their coefficients and significance levels. Also, many of the control variables
are quite sensitive to the particular regression specification. For example, when only IT
intensity, age, I/K (non-IT investment over non-IT capital stock) and book-to-market
ratios are included, book-to-market is negatively related to absolute idiosyncratic or
systematic volatility. However, when we include more variables, the sign becomes
positive for the absolute volatility measures. This instability makes interpreting the
variable problematic. However, there are a few variables that tell consistent stories. The
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) attracts positive and significant coefficients in
regressions explaining relative idiosyncratic volatility in both stock returns and sales
growth rates. However, HHI is negatively related with both absolute volatility measures.
Combining these results implies that a higher HHI depresses systematic volatility more
than idiosyncratic volatility. Advertising is also negatively related with both absolute
volatility measures, but positively related to idiosyncratic relative to systematic volatility.
These findings are consistent with monopoly power and brand names helping firms
smooth their performance and rendering creative destruction less necessary. Firm age is
typically negatively related to both absolute volatility measures, but its explanatory
power for idiosyncratic relative to systematic volatility is slight. Older industries are
perhaps more stable, and might also be less affected by creative destruction. Industries in
which all firms are nearly the same size exhibit lower volatility – both idiosyncratic and
systematic. Note also that including firm diversification and foreign exposure in the
Table 6 regressions barely changes the explanatory power of IT intensity for all the
volatility measures.

6.3 Robustness Checks
We repeat our empirical exercise in several different ways. First, we check whether the
de minimus restriction on the number of observations used in calculating our volatility
measures affects the results. Second, we check whether outliers drive the results by
cutting off the extreme 1% from both tails of the total distribution of each volatility
measure. Third, we check whether the inclusion or exclusion of footnote stamped data
from COMPUSTAT alters the results. Fourth, we try nominal rather than real IT intensity
in our regressions. None of these alternative approaches qualitatively changes our results.

6.4 Endogeneity
We have shown that industries with greater IT intensity exhibit greater idiosyncratic



                                              18
volatility. However, we have not resolved whether IT intensity causes idiosyncratic
variation. The converse might be true, or a third factor might cause both.
         The converse, that high idiosyncratic volatility causes IT intensity might follow if
more volatile industries invest more in IT capital to decrease the volatility through, for
example, better inventory management. This implies declining firm level volatility over
time as IT intensity rises, which is testable.
         A third factor merits consideration if buttressed by a plausible economic
explanation. One possibility is that high idiosyncratic volatility reflects pre-existing
heterogeneity among firms that is unrelated to creative destruction, and that this
heterogeneity correlates with the marginal productivity of IT. Again, this is testable.
         To test whether IT intensity reflects pre-existing heterogeneity, lowers volatility,
or raises it, we regress

                              ∆Vol j ,t +1 = α + β ( IT ) j ,t + γ Vol j ,t + ε j                   (15)

where ∆Vol j ,t +1 is a five-year log difference of one of our volatility measure50 (absolute
idiosyncratic, absolute systematic, or idiosyncratic relative to systematic) for industry j ,
 IT j ,t is IT intensity for industry j, and Vol j ,t is volatility of industry j at time t. We
include Vol j ,t to control initial differences in the level of volatility. If IT intensity raises
idiosyncratic volatility, β should be positive in the absolute and relative idiosyncratic
volatility specifications of (15). If high volatility induces IT investment aimed at reducing
volatility, we expect a negative β. If IT investment is correlated with pre-existing high
volatility, β should be insignificant.
         The regression specification in equation (15) resembles those used in the
economic growth literature, for example in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995). In this
literature, special attention attaches to Vol j ,t because, in cross-sectional regressions, the
residuals, ε j , may contain a common factor that affect all the industries. If this factor is
correlated with Vol j ,t , its regression coefficient is biased. In our case, this problem does
not arise in specifications using absolute idiosyncratic volatility because, by construction,
that measure is independent of common shocks. There can thus be no relationship
between the residuals and Vol j ,t . However, specifications using absolute systematic
volatility or idiosyncratic relative to systematic volatility could be vulnerable to this
problem. Consequently, caution is warranted in interpreting results for these two
volatility measures.
         Table 7 reports Fama-MacBeth regression coefficients for (15), along with t-
statistics robust to serial correlation and heteroskedasticity. The results can be
summarized as follows:
         Absolute idiosyncratic volatility rises after high IT intensity. The sole exception is
absolute idiosyncratic stock return variation using the whole sample, where the
coefficient is still positive, but the t-statistic is only 1.67. The coefficient is significant in

50
 Varying the time horizon by measuring the growth rate in volatility over the subsequent one, two, three,
… ten years generates results qualitatively similar to those in Table 7


                                                        19
each sub-sample. Idiosyncratic relative to systematic variation also rises subsequent to
high IT intensity. These results are most significant for the second subperiod, and relative
idiosyncratic volatility in ROA is insignificant, mirroring our earlier cross sectional
results. Note also that γ is negative. Thus the intensity of creative destruction (measured
by idiosyncratic volatility) tends to decrease, all else equal, in the absence of sustained IT
investment.
        Table 7 is consistent with IT intensity causing higher volatility, and difficult to
reconcile with IT intensity being either aimed at reducing volatility or an artefact of pre-
existing heterogeneity.

7. Conclusion
We find that higher firm-specific volatility in firm stock returns, sales growth, and ROA
is associated with higher investment in IT. These findings are robust to a wide range of
specification changes and to including as control variables: average firm age,
concentration, other capital investment, leverage, foreign exposure, and spending on
intangible asset like R&D. We also show that subsequent volatility growth is higher in
industries with greater IT intensity.
         Thus, investment in IT is associated with greater heterogeneity in firm
performance within an industry. We propose that this reflects a divergence between
winners and losers in devising profitable IT applications, and that the growing IT
investment of the past decades hastened creative destruction, as described in Schumpeter
(1912), as successful adopters flourished and other firms stagnated. Closely related to this,
heterogeneity among successful adopters might also increase if IT investment permitted
greater product differentiation, especially along intangible dimensions of output. Again,
this lets winners diverge more sharply from losers.
          This explains how volatility in economy aggregate stock market return, sales
growth, and ROA fell while firm-level variation in stock returns, sales growth, and ROA
all rose. The firm-specific components of the latter rose faster than their systematic
components, thus decreasing their correlation across firms. This fallacy of composition in
volatilities effect is greater in industries that invested more heavily in IT.
         Our findings also explain why greater firm-specific volatility should be related to
better developed financial systems and better economy performance. Better developed
financial systems let a broader range of firms raise money and undertake IT investments
at lower cost. More IT investment reflects, to some extent at least, more intensive
creative destruction, and hence faster growth and higher standards of living.
         Morck et al. (2000), Bris et al. (2004), Bushman et al. (2002), Durnev et al. (2004),
and Jin and Myers (2004) present evidence consistent with interpreting firm-specific
variation as a measure of stock market transparency. Our findings in no way undermine
this view. Rather, more transparent stock markets might well permit more intensive
investment in new technologies such as IT by making the capital needed to finance it
cheaper.      Nonetheless, stock market volatility clearly tracks the volatilities of
fundamentals, limiting, but not necessarily eliminating, the viability of explanations of
individual stock price comovement based on purely stock market-based explanations like
investor herding.
         R&D intensity behaves quite differently from IT intensity. Systematic (market-
wide plus industry-related) variation measures based on stock returns and fundamentals


                                             20
are unrelated to IT intensity after controlling the effect of R&D intensity. The component
of IT intensity related to systematic variation appears to be highly correlated with R&D
intensity. R&D itself is primarily correlated with market-wide and industry-related
comovement. This perhaps reflects underlying economic differences between R&D and
IT related innovation. Further work is needed to clarify this.

References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
       Econometrica, 60(2), March 1992, 323-351.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge: MIT Press,
       1998
Athey, Susan and Scott Stern, “The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency
       Health Care Outcomes,” Rand Journal of Economics, 33(3), Autumn 2002, 399-
       432.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1995.
Barron, Orie E., Donal Byard, Charles Kile, and Edward J. Riedl, “High-Technology
       Intangibles and Analysts Forecasts,” Journal of Accounting Research, 40(2), May
       2002, 289-312.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, “Valuation and Return Dynamics
       of New Ventures,” Review of Financial Studies, 17(1), Spring 2004, 1-35.
Blanchard, Oliver and John Simon, “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
       Volatility,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 2001, 135-164.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Mamuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies: Engine
       of Growth?” Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), January 1995, 83-108.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Technology,
       Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level
       Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), February 2002, 339-376.
Bris, Arturo, William N. Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu, “Efficiency and the Bear: Short
       Sales and Markets around the World,” Working Paper, Yale School of
       Management, 2004.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and Austan Goolsbee, “Does the Internet Make Markets More
       Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 110(3), June 2002, 481-507.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt, “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence,”
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), November 2003, 793-808.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Lorin Hitt, and Shinkyu Yang, “Intangibles Assets: Computers and
       Organizational Capital,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 2002, 137-
       198.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Computer Prices in the National Accounts: An Update
       from the Comprehensive Revision,” National Income and Wealth Division
       Working Paper, Bureau of Economic Analysis, August 1998.
Bushman, Robert M., Joseph D. Piotroski, and Abbie J. Smith, “What Determines
       Corporate Transparency?” Working Paper, University of North Carolina, 2002.
Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, “Have Individual
       Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,”
       Journal of Finance, 56(1), February 2001, 1-43.


                                           21
Chan, Konan, Louise K. C. Chan, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok,
       “Earnings Quality and Stock Returns: The Evidence from Accruals,” Working
       Paper, 2001.
Chan, Louis K. C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, “The Stock Market
       Valuation of Research and Development Expenditures,” Journal of Finance,
       56(6), December 2001, 2431-2456.
Chun, Hyunbae and M. Ishaq Nadiri, “Decomposing Productivity Growth in the U.S.
       Computer Industry,” NBER Working Paper No. 9267, October 2002.
Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani, “Diverging Trends in Macro and Micro Volatility:
       Facts,” New York University C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics Working
       Paper No. 2003-08, September 2003.
Dunne, Timothy, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth R. Troske, “Wage and
       Productivity Dispersion in United States Manufacturing: The Role of Computer
       Investment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2), April 2004, 397-429.
Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Value-Enhancing Capital Budgeting
       and Firm-Specific Stock Return Variation,” Journal of Finance, 59(1), February
       2004, 65-105.
Durnev, Art, Kan Li, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Capital Markets and Capital
       Allocation: Implications for Economies in Transition,” Economics of Transition,
       2004, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 81(3), May-June 1973, 607-636.
Fraumeni, Barbara M., “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income
       and Product Accounts,” Survey of Current Business, July 1997, 7-23.
Goolsbee, Austan and Jeffrey R. Brown, “Does the Internet Make Markets More
       Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 110(3), June 2002, 481-507.
Greenspan, A., Speech on Economic Volatility at a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
       Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30, 2002
       (http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2002/20020830/default.htm).
Hall, Brownyn H., “The Manufacturing Sector Master File: 1959-1987,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 3366, May 1990.
Hayek, Friedrich, The Pure Theory of Capital, University of Chicago Press, 1941.
He, Kathy S., Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Stability and Economic
       Growth,” 2004.
Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizo Perri, “Why Has the U.S. Economy Become Less
       Correlated with the Rest of the World?” American Economic Review, 93(2), May
       2003, 63-69.
Helpman, Elhanan and Manuel Trajtenberg, “A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap:
       Growth Based on General Purpose Technologies,” in Elhanan Helpman (ed.),
       General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, Cambridge: MIT Press,
       1998, 55-83.
Herman, Shelby W., “Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods: Estimates for 1925-98
       and New NIPA Table-Changes in Net Stock of Produced Assets, Survey of
       Current Business, April 2000, 17-30.
Hobijn, Bart and Boyan Jovanovic, “The Information-Technology Revolution and the



                                         22
        Stock Market: Evidence,” American Economic Review, 91(5), December 2001,
        1203-1220.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow, “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the
        Semiconductor Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(6), December 1994,
        1200-1227.
Jin, Li and Stewart C. Myers, “R-Squared around the World: New Theory and New
        Tests,” April 2004 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=531263).
Jorgenson, Dale W., “Information Technology and the U.S. Economy,” American
        Economic Review, 91(1), March 2001, 1-32.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh, “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic
        Growth in the Information Age,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1),
        2000, 125-211.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau, “Moore’s Law and Learning by Doing,”
        Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(2), April 2002, 346-375.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau, “General Purpose Technologies,” forthcoming
        in the Handbook of Economic Growth, 2003.
Kahn, James, Margaret M. McConnell, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, “Inventories and the
        Information Revolution: Implications for Output Volatility,” Federal Reserve
        Bank of New York Working Paper, November 2001, 183-202.
Khan, James A., Margaret M. McConnell, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, “On the Causes of
        the Increased Stability of the U.S. Economy,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review,
        May 2002.
Kim, Chang Jin and Charles R. Nelson, “Has the U.S. Economy More Stable? A
        Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,”
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), November 1999, 1-10.
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), August 1993, 717-737.
Kothari, S. P., Ted E. Laguerre, and Andrew J. Leone, “Capitalization versus Expensing:
        Evidence on the Uncertainty of Future Earnings from Capital Expenditures versus
        R&D Outlays,” Review of Accounting Studies, 7(4), December 2002, 355-382.
Laitner, John and Dmitriy Stolyarov, “Technological Change and the Stock Market,”
        American Economic Review, 93(4), September 2003, 1240-1267.
Li, Kan, Randall Morck, Fan Yang, and Bernard Yeung, “Firm-Specific Variation and
        Openness in Emerging Markets,’ Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(3),
        August 2004, 658-669.
Loveman, Gary W., “An Assessment of the Productivity Impact of Information
        Technologies,” in Thomas J. Allen and Michael S. Scott Morton (eds.)
        Information Technology and the Corporation of the 1990s: Research Studies,
        Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994, 84-110
Lum, Sherlene K. S., Brian C. Moyer, and Robert E. Yuskavage, “Improved Estimates of
        Gross Product by Industry for 1947-98,” Survey of Current Business, 80(6), June
        2000, 24-54.
McConnell, Margaret M. and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, “Output Fluctuations in the United
        States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s,” American Economic Review,
        90(5), December 2000, 1464-1476.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, “The Information Content of Stock



                                          23
        Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price
        Movement?” Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 2000, 215-260.
Mukhopadhyay, Tridas, Surendra Rajiv, and Kannab Srinivasan, “Information
        Technology Impact on Process Output and Quality,” Management Science, 43(12),
        December 1997, 1645-1659.
National Science Foundation, Information Technology Innovation Survey: Fall 2001,
        February 2004.
National Science Foundation, Research and Development in Industry: 2000, May 2003.
National Science Foundation, U.S. Corporate R&D, October 1999.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
        Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,”
        Econometrica, 55(3), May 1987, 703-708.
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel, “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
        Is Information Technology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4),
        Fall 2000, 3-22.
Pakes, Ariel and Mark Schankerman, “The Rate of Obsolescence of Patents, Research
        Gestation Lags, and the Private Rate of Return To Research Resources,” in Zvi
        Griliches (ed.) R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 1984, 73-88.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, “Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability,”
        Journal of Finance, 58(5), October 2003, 1749-1790.
Philippon, Thomas, “An Explanation for the Joint Evolution of Firm and Aggregate
        Volatility,” July 2003 (http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~tphilipp).
Pindyck, Robert S. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment,” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 29(3), September 1991, 1110-1148.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, “Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 111(4), November 1996, 1135-1151.
Ramey, Garey and Valerie A. Ramey, “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between
        Volatility and Growth,” American Economic Review, 85(5), December 1995,
        1138-1151.
Roll, Richard, “R2,” Journal of Finance, 43(3), July 1988, 541-566.
Shiller, Robert, “Comovements in Stock Prices and Comovements in Dividends,”
        Journal of Finance, 44(3), July 1989, 719-730.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwichlung, Leipzig, Dunker und
        Humbolt, 1912. Translated by R.Opie, The Theory of Economic Development: An
        Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Cambridge
        Mass: Harvard University Press, 1934.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York: Harper &
        Brothers, 1942.
Stiroh, Kevin J., “Computers, Productivity, and Input Substitution,” Economic Inquiry,
        36(2), April 1998, 175-91.
Stiroh, Kevin J., “Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do
        the Industry Data Say?” American Economic Review, 92(5), December 2002,
        1559-1576.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?”
        NBER Working Paper No. 9127, August 2002.



                                           24
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Understanding Changes in International
       Business Cycle Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper No. 9859, July 2003.
Syverson, Chad, “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 86(2), May 2004, 534-550.
Wei, Steven X. and Chu Zhang, “Why Did Individual Stocks Become More Volatile?”
       2004 (forthcoming in the Journal of Business).
Wurgler, Jeffrey, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial
       Economics, 58(1-2), 2000, 187-214.


Appendix I: Data Construction
Price Index for Sales
To calculate real sales, we divide nominal sales by the price index of two-digit level
industry gross output obtained from Gross Product Originating (GPO), published by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).51 GPO price index data are available only from
1977 on. To estimate pre-1977 price indexes, we use prices of gross output from Office
of Employment Projection data produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

Construction and Aggregation of Capital Stock (IT and Non-IT)
We construct the capital stock of asset i in industry j at time t using the perpetual
inventory method with asset-specific geometric depreciation rates (δi). Thus a particular
capital stock can be defined as

                                          K i , j ,t = (1 − δ i ) K i , j ,t −1 + I i , j ,t   (A.1)

where the depreciation rate of computers and software is about 0.31 (See Fraumeni
(1997) for asset-specific depreciation rates.).
       To aggregate N types of capitals, we use the Törnqvist index, which is the
geometric average of the price ratios of N types of capitals between t − 1 and t, or

                                           Pt    N
                                                      p
                                               = ∏ ( i , t ) Si                                (A.2)
                                          Pt −1 i =1 pi ,t −1

where Pt is the aggregated price index of N types of capitals at time t, pi,t is the price of
capital of type i at time t, and Si is the weight of capital of type i. Si is

                                       1   p K                  1   p K
                                 Si = ( )( i ,t −1 i ,t −1 ) + ( )( i ,t i ,t ) .              (A.3)
                                       2 ∑ pi ,t −1K i ,t −1    2 ∑ pi ,t K i ,t
                                              i                                     i


Finally, the ratio of aggregate real capital stock is


51
     See Lum et al. (2000) for a detailed description of the GPO data set.


                                                              25
                                     Kt         ∑i pi,t Ki,t Pt −1
                                            =(                 )(  ).                          (A.4)
                                     K t −1    ∑ pi,t −1Ki,t −1 Pt
                                               i


R&D and Advertising
We obtain R&D expenditure (annual item 46) from COMPUSTAT, and deflate this using
the price index of gross domestic product (GDP). Following the method of Chan et al.
(2001), we construct real R&D capital stock as:

                                               4
                                    RDSt = ∑ (1 − kδ ) RDt − k                                 (A.4)
                                              k =0


where RDS is R&D capital stock, RD is R&D expenditures, and δ is a 20% straight-line
depreciation rate.52 We define R&D intensity as the ratio of real R&D capital stock to
real PPE (annual item 8). PPE is deflated by the price index at the two-digit industry-
level from the BEA FRTW. Using advertising expense (annual item 45), we also define
advertising intensity as the ratio of advertising expense to PPE.

Firm Age
We construct age variable using two different method. First, we track the listing year
from CRSP monthly data and measure calendar age of each firm. Second, following Hall
(1990), we construct the average age of capital and use it as a proxy for the age of firm.
We first calculate the age of capital of each firm as the ratio of accumulated depreciation
to current depreciation and amortization (annual item 14) for the current year.
Accumulated depreciation is defined as gross PPE (annual item 7) minus net PPE (annual
item 8). Then we calculate the equally weighted average of individual firm ages within
each industry to obtain industry-level estimates.

Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
We construct sales-based the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI). HHI is defined as the
sum of squared firm’s share of sales within an industry

Conventional Investment
We also construct the capital investment rate (I/K) as the ratio of non-IT investment at
time t to non-IT capital stock at t-1 (in real terms) using the FRTW data set. We use a
non-IT investment rate because the total investment rate might be correlated with IT
intensity.

Book-to-Market Ratio
We calculate industry-level book-to-market ratio as the ratio of industry aggregate value
of common equity (annual item 60) to market capitalization of common stock (annual
item 25 multiplied by annual item 199).

52
  Most studies use 10-25% depreciation rate for R&D capital. For example, using the patent data, Pakes
and Schankerman (1984) estimated the depreciation rate of R&D capital that varies from 18-36%, on
average, 25%.


                                                     26
Foreign Exposure
To measure the extent of foreign exposure, we use COMPUSTAT geographic segment
data. For each industry, we calculate the ratio of foreign sales to total sales. Currently,
geographic segment information is available in COMPUSTAT from 1985 on from
WRDS. However, a significant change in the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s
(FASB) segment reporting standards occurred in 1998, when SFAS No. 131 superseded
the previous segment-reporting rules under SFAS No. 14. The new standard is effective
beginning with December 1998 fiscal year-ends. Given this change, we calculate foreign
exposure up to and including 1997.

Leverage and Liquidity
We estimate leverage as the ratio of the sum of short-term debt (annual item 34) and
long-term debt (annual item 9) to total assets (annual item 6); while liquidity is defined as
the ratio of current assets (annual item 4) to current liabilities (annual item 5).

Distribution of Firm Size and Firm Diversification
Refer section 2 for the construction of these two variables.

Appendix II: IT vs. R&D
We hypothesize that IT affects volatility patterns in the U.S. economy via creative
destruction. IT may not be the only investment that leads to creative destruction. Another
highly plausible candidate is R&D. For example, Kothari et al. (2002) find that R&D
investment has a stronger effect on future earnings variability than investment in property,
plant, and equipment (PPE). Chan et al. (2001) find similar results using stock returns.
Barron et al. (2002) find that the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts is negatively associated
with intangible assets, such as R&D and advertising. This appendix compares IT with
R&D. In Section 6, we compare the relative importance of IT and R&D in explaining
firm-specific (and systematic) volatility.
        First, in contrast to IT investment, the distribution of R&D spending is highly
concentrated in a few industries (See Figures 3 and 4.). Figure 4 shows the cross-industry
distribution of R&D intensity (the ratio of R&D capital to PPE using nominal dollars) in
2000. R&D intensity is exceptionally high in five durable goods manufacturing industries,
chemical products (including pharmaceuticals), business services (including software),
and other services (including R&D and testing services). In 2000, R&D spending by the
industrial machinery, transportation equipment, and chemical products industries
accounted for almost 80% of total R&D spending in the manufacturing sector (NSF,
2003).53
        In contrast, more than 75% of industries have R&D intensities below one percent.
And in a sizeable fraction of industries, most firms report no R&D activity whatsoever.

53
  According to a National Science Foundation survey (1999), nineteen out of the twenty firms with R&D
spending greater than one billion dollars reside in four manufacturing industries. For example, IBM and
Hewlett-Packard reside in industrial machinery; General Electric, Lucent, and Intel in electric and
electronic equipment; General Motors and Ford in transportation equipment, and Johnson & Johnson and
Pfizer in chemical products. Currently, COMPUSTAT classifies IBM as a business service firm because its
sales of software and computer related services are greater than its sales of computer hardware.


                                                  27
Kothari et al. (2002) report a median R&D intensity of zero for 40% of two-digit
industries.
         In addition to being highly localized in certain large firms in a few industries,
R&D seems aimed at developing specific sorts of tangible products. An NSF (1999)
survey reports more than 70% of R&D spending used to develop new products such as
machinery or medicines. Investment in these sorts of innovation is highly dependent on
possessing large research infrastructures – well-equipped laboratories and highly
educated researchers.
         Schumpeter (1942) argues that innovations of this sort are best undertaken by
large, quasi-monopolistic firms, or in partnership with them. These firms have sufficient
internal cash flow to finance such infrastructure and sufficient stability to attract and keep
risk-averse technical experts. In contrast, IT seems more like the turn-of-the-century
electricity, steel, and machinery that inspired Schumpeter’s (1912) description of creative
destruction consisting of rapidly growing upstarts displacing established giants.
         Thus R&D and IT investments may, at the present time in the U.S. economy,
typically represent two qualitatively different forms of innovation. IT is a general purpose
technology, whose application creates value proportional to certain complementary inputs,
such as managerial talent and allows qualitative product differentiation in a broad cross-
section of industries. Indeed, Figure 3 shows that IT spending is almost normally
distributed over 50 industries. In contrast, Figure 4 shows that R&D is highly specific to
certain firms in certain industries. Big R&D spenders are large, established firms with
capital intensive on-going innovation programs of the sort described in Schumpeter
(1942).
         A second difference between IT and R&D is that the latter often provides a return
only in the very long run – see, for example, Chan et al. (2001). New drugs, new
automobile designs, and the like often require a decade or more of investment before
generating positive cash flows. In contrast, IT investments seem to produce returns over
much shorter horizons.
         The prolonged uncertainty regarding the outcome of R&D investment might
increase the systematic volatility of R&D intensive stocks and decrease their firm-
specific volatility during certain periods. If all the major pharmaceuticals firms are racing
to develop a new drug, their stocks tend to move together, reflecting changes in expected
demand for the drug, as long as they look equally likely to win. This leads to industry-
wide comovement. Once it becomes clear which firms are winning, their prices begin to
diverge from those of the losers. This results in firm-specific volatility.54 If long periods
of uncertainty are punctuated by sudden revelations of who is winning, we might observe
a high degree of comovement most of the time in R&D intensive industries.
         Berk et al. (2004), citing the same prolonged R&D investment period, propose
another mechanism through which R&D activity might correlate with systematic
volatility. They point out that, unlike major capital investments, which are undertaken in
a given year and then become sunk costs, investment in a given R&D project must
continue over many years. For example, an oil company firm developing a new oilfield
extraction technology must continue funding such an initiative for many years to expect a
return, and generally reviews this funding commitment each year. Even if the future
technological risk associated with the project is highly firm-specific, and thus
54
     This line of reasoning follows from Shiller (1989).


                                                       28
diversifiable, the decision each year about continuing the R&D project or not depends on
systematic factors, such as the interest rate and the expected oil price after the completion
of the project.
        Some logic of this sort appears to apply to R&D, but not to IT. Section 6 shows
that R&D intensity is related to systematic variation, and IT is entirely unrelated to
systematic volatility after controlling for R&D intensity. Why this is so probably has to
do with the differences listed above; however more work is clearly needed to clarify this.




                                             29
Figure 1. Aggregate (Macro) and Firm-Level (Micro) Volatilities, 1971-2000
This figure plots aggregate and firm-level volatilities of real sales growth rate, return on asset (ROA), and
stock return. Aggregate volatilities of real sales growth rate and ROA are calculated from the growth rate of
aggregate real sales and aggregate ROA for all the firms in COMPUSTAT using 5 year rolling windows.
Aggregate stock return volatility is calculated using the value-weighted portfolio consisting of all firms
both in CRSP and COMPUSTAT using 5 year rolling windows. Firm-level volatilities are averages of
volatilities of real sales growth rate, ROA, and stock return of all firms in the sample.

(a) Real sales growth rate

                                 0.4


                                0.35


                                 0.3


                                0.25

                                                                                Aggregat e sales
                                 0.2
                                                                                Firm level

                                0.15


                                 0.1


                                0.05


                                     0
                                     1960    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




(b) ROA

                                0.2

                               0.18

                               0.16

                               0.14

                               0.12                                             Aggregate ROA
                                                                                (multiplied by 10)
                                0.1
                                                                                Firm level
                               0.08

                               0.06

                               0.04

                               0.02

                                 0
                                 1980       1985    1990   1995   2000   2005




(c) Stock return

                              0.25


                               0.2

                                                                                   Aggregate
                              0.15
                                                                                   stock return
                                                                                   Firm level
                               0.1


                              0.05


                                 0
                                 1960       1970    1980   1990   2000   2010




                                                                  30
Figure 2. Time-Series and Cross-Sectional Patterns of IT Investment, 1971-2000
Figure 2(a) plots the share of IT investment in equipment and total investment in the U.S. (all in nominal
dollars). IT investment is defined as the sum of computers and software investment. Total investment is the
sum of equipment & software and structures. Figure 2(b) illustrates the cross-industry distribution of
logarithm of IT intensity where IT intensity is measured as the ratio of IT capital to total capital in 1994
real dollars.

(a) Time-series pattern of IT investment


           0.35


                                          Ratio of IT to total investment
           0.30
                                          Ratio of IT to equipment invesment


           0.25




           0.20




           0.15




           0.10




           0.05




           0.00
                  1971                           1976              1981        1986          1991          1996




(b) Cross-industry distribution of logarithm of IT intensity
                                          ries
                         Number of indust




                                                 20
                                                                                                    2000
                                                 10                                             1995
                                                  0                                      1990
                                                          5                           1985
                                                 Lo
                                                   g(                                      ar
                                                     IT       10                 1980    Ye
                                                          int
                                                              en 15         1975
                                                                sit    20
                                                                    y)




                                                                            31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Other services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Legal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Amusement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Motion pictures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miscellaneous repair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Auto service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Business services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Personal services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hotels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wholesale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Electricity & gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Radio & television
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Telephone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transportation services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pipelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transportation by air
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Trucking and warehousing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Local transit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Railroad transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rubber & plastics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Petroleum products
                                                                  IT intensity is defined as the ratio of IT capital to total capital, all in nominal dollars.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Chemicals




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Printing & publishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Paper
Figure 3. Distribution of IT Intensity in U.S. Industries, 2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Textile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tobacco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Food
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Instruments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Electronic equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Industrial machinery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fabricated metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Primary metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stone & clay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Furniture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lumber & wood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nonmetallic minerals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oil extraction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Coal mining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Metal mining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Agricultural services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Farms
                                                                                                                                                                 0.35



                                                                                                                                                                        0.3



                                                                                                                                                                              0.25



                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2



                                                                                                                                                                                             0.15



                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1



                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.05



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                     IT intensity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Other services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Legal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Amusement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Motion pictures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miscellaneous repair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Auto service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Business services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Personal services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hotels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wholesale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electricity & gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Radio & television
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Telephone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transportation services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pipelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transportation by air
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Trucking and warehousing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Local transit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Railroad transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Leather
                                                                   R&D intensity is defined as the ratio of R&D capital to PPE, all in nominal dollars.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      33
Figure 4. Distribution of R&D Intensity in U.S. Industries, 2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rubber & plastics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Petroleum products
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Chemicals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Printing & publishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Textile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tobacco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Food
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Instruments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electronic equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Industrial machinery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fabricated metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Primary metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stone & clay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Furniture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lumber & wood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nonmetallic minerals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oil extraction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coal mining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Metal mining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Agricultural services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Farms
                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                                              0.9

                                                                                                                                                                    0.8

                                                                                                                                                                          0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                R&D intensity
Figure 5. Firm-Level Volatility by Size Quintiles
This figure plots equally weighted average of firm-level volatility for each size quintile.

(a) Real sales growth rate

                           0.8

                           0.7

                           0.6
                                                                             Quint ile 1(Smallest )
                           0.5
                                                                             Quint ile 2
                           0.4                                               Quint ile 3
                                                                             Quint ile 4
                           0.3
                                                                             Quint ile 5 (Largest )
                           0.2

                            0.1

                             0
                                1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010




(b) ROA

                           0.9

                           0.8

                           0.7

                           0.6                                               Quint ile 1 (Smallest )

                           0.5                                               Quint ile 2
                                                                             Quint ile 3
                           0.4                                               Quint ile 4
                           0.3                                               Quint ile 5 (Largest)

                           0.2

                            0.1

                             0
                             1980      1985   1990   1995   2000    2005




(c) Stock return

                          0.3


                          0.25


                          0.2                                                  Quintile 1 (Smallest)
                                                                               Quintile 2
                          0.15                                                 Quintile 3
                                                                               Quintile 4
                           0.1                                                 Quintile 5 (Largest)


                          0.05


                            0
                            1960       1970   1980   1990    2000     2010




                                                            35
Figure 6. Patterns of Correlations
This figure plots correlation patterns of real sales growth rate, return on asset (ROA), and stock return.
Large-Large (Small-Small) indicates the average correlation patterns among the firms in the 1st quintile (5th
quintile). Large-Small denotes the average correlation patterns between firms in the 1st quintile and firms in
the 5th quintile.
(a) Real sales growth rate
                           0.18

                           0.16

                           0.14

                           0.12

                               0.1                                                    Total sample
                                                                                      Large-Large
                           0.08
                                                                                      Small-Small
                           0.06                                                       Large-Small

                           0.04

                           0.02

                              0
                              1960     1970      1980    1990        2000     2010
                          -0.02




(b) ROA
                          0.18
                          0.16
                          0.14
                          0.12
                                                                                     Total sample
                           0.1
                                                                                     Large-Large
                          0.08
                                                                                     Small-Small
                          0.06
                                                                                     Large-Small
                          0.04
                          0.02
                             0
                         -0.021980            1990       2000               2010




(c) Stock return
                         0.4

                        0.35

                         0.3

                        0.25                                                          Total sample
                                                                                      Large-Large
                         0.2
                                                                                      Small-Small
                        0.15                                                          Large-Small
                         0.1

                        0.05

                           0
                           1960      1970       1980    1990     2000        2010




                                                                36
Figure 7. Decomposed Volatilities: Idiosyncratic, Systematic, and R2
This figure plots the equal and value weighted (industry weight) averages of decomposed volatilities for
each industry. For the value-weighted averages, we first calculate the equally weighted averages of
decomposed volatilities of firms in each industry and then apply the industry weight to obtain the value-
weighted averages.

Panel A: Equally/value weighted average for sales growth rate

(i) Firm-specific and systematic variations (real sales growth rate)


         0.1

        0.09

        0.08
                                                                           Equally Weighted
        0.07                                                               (idiosyncratic)
        0.06                                                               Equally Weighted
                                                                           (systematic)
        0.05
                                                                           Industry Value Weighted
        0.04                                                               (firm specific)

        0.03                                                               Industry Value Weighted
                                                                           (systematic)
        0.02

        0.01

           0
           1960      1970      1980     1990      2000      2010




(ii) R2 (real sales growth rate)


          0.5
         0.45
          0.4
         0.35
          0.3                                                           Equally Weighted (R2)

         0.25
                                                                        Industry Value Weighted
          0.2                                                           (R2)
         0.15
          0.1
         0.05
            0
            1960     1970      1980     1990     2000     2010




                                                   37
Panel B: Equally/value weighted average for ROA

(i) Firm-specific and systematic variations (ROA)


       0.08

       0.07
                                                                Equally Weighted
       0.06                                                     (idiosyncratic)

       0.05
                                                                Equally Weighted
                                                                (systematic)
       0.04

       0.03                                                     Industry Value
                                                                Weighted (f irm
                                                                specif ic)
       0.02
                                                                Industry Value
       0.01                                                     Weighted
                                                                (systematic)
          0
          1980    1985     1990    1995    2000     2005
      -0.01




(ii) R2 (ROA)


      0.4


     0.35


      0.3


     0.25                                                  Equally Weighted (R2)


      0.2                                                  Industry Value Weighted
                                                           (R2)

     0.15


      0.1


     0.05


        0
        1980     1985     1990    1995     2000     2005




                                          38
Panel C: Equally/value weighted average for stock return

(i) Firm-specific and systematic variations (stock return)


       0.045

        0.04                                                    Equally Weighted
                                                                (idiosyncratic)
       0.035

        0.03                                                    Equally Weighted
                                                                (systematic)
       0.025

        0.02                                                    Industry Value
                                                                Weighted (firm
       0.015                                                    specific)
                                                                Industry Value
        0.01
                                                                Weighted (systematic)
       0.005

           0
           1960     1970    1980    1990    2000     2010



(ii) R2 (stock return)




         0.4


        0.35


         0.3


        0.25
                                                             Equally Weighted (R2)

         0.2
                                                             Industry Value Weighted
                                                             (R2)
        0.15


         0.1


        0.05


          0
          1960     1970    1980    1990    2000    2010




                                            39
                                                        Figure 8. IT Intensity and Idiosyncratic Volatilities in 2000
                                                        The figures show the relationship between IT intensity and idiosyncratic volatility measures in 2000.
                                                        Bivariate regression results in 2000 are also reported. Details on regression specification and sample
                                                        restrictions are reported in Table 3. t-statistics are calculated from heteroskedastic-consistent standard
                                                        errors.

                                                        Panel A: IT intensity and idiosyncratic volatility of stock return in 2000
                                                        ln(idiosyncratic volatility of stock return) = -2.472 +0.273ln(IT)                                                       adjusted R2 = 0.390
                                                                                                              (t-stat=4.003)                                                     sample size=43


                                                        -2.50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Business services

                                                        -2.75


                                                                                                                                                                                                Other services
ln(absolute idiosyncratic volatility of stock return)




                                                                                                                                         Telephone                     Miscellaneous repair
                                                        -3.00                                                                                        Chemicals    Apparel         Electronic equipment
                                                                                                                                                          Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                        Instruments
                                                                                                                                                                                           Industrial machinery
                                                                                                                                                                   Health
                                                                                                                                                                        MotionTransportation
                                                                                                                                                                               pictures      services Wholesale
                                                        -3.25                                                                                               Retail
                                                                                                                                                             Miscellaneous manufacturing


                                                                                                                                                            Fabricated metal
                                                                                                                             Paper    Amusement
                                                                                                         Local transit
                                                        -3.50                                                                           Radio & televisionEducation
                                                                                                      Oil extraction
                                                                                         Petroleum products
                                                                                                                                       Trucking and warehousing
                                                                                                                                                     Leather
                                                                                                                                                    Textile
                                                                                                                              Auto service
                                                        -3.75                                                             Primary metal
                                                                                                       Water transportation                        RubberPersonal services
                                                                                                                                                          & plastics                        Printing & publishing

                                                                                         Transportation by air                                      Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                 Hotels                 Food Stone & clay
                                                                                                                                                          Furniture
                                                        -4.00
                                                                                                                                                Tobacco
                                                                                                                                       Lumber & wood



                                                        -4.25
                                                                                                        Electricity & gas



                                                                            Railroad transportation
                                                        -4.50
                                                                -6             -5                                -4                               -3                              -2                                -1                  0
                                                                                                                                                ln(IT)




                                                                                                                                             40
                                                        Panel B: IT intensity and idiosyncratic volatility of real sales growth in 2000
                                                        ln(idiosyncratic volatility of sales growth) = -1.719 +0.340ln(IT)                                                             adjusted R2 = 0.230
                                                                                                                (t-stat=3.243)                                                         sample size=40


                                                         -1


                                                                                                                                                      Chemicals


                                                        -1.5

                                                                                                                                                                         Motion pictures
ln(absolute idiosyncratic volatility of sales growth)




                                                                                                       Oil extraction

                                                         -2                                                                                                                            Instruments                      Business services
                                                                                                      Water transportation                                                                       Other services
                                                                                                                                                           Education                      Industrial machinery
                                                                                                                                                            Construction
                                                                                                                                                              Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                                          Telephone                             Electronic equipment
                                                                                                              Hotels

                                                                                                                                   Amusement
                                                                                                                                         Stone & clay
                                                        -2.5                                                                                                                     Transportation services   Wholesale
                                                                                                                                                    Rubber & plastics
                                                                                                                           Auto service
                                                                                                                           Paper
                                                                                                                                                                    Health
                                                                                                                                         Radio & television
                                                                                                                                                        Transportation equipment
                                                                                                                        Primary metal
                                                         -3                                                                                             Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                Printing & publishing
                                                                                                       Electricity & gas                                      Fabricated
                                                                                                                                                                  Apparelmetal
                                                                                        Transportation by air
                                                                                                                                         Food
                                                                                                                                        Lumber & wood

                                                        -3.5
                                                                                                                                        Trucking and Textile Retail
                                                                                                                                                     warehousing


                                                                                        Petroleum products


                                                         -4                                                                                                  Furniture
                                                                           Railroad transportation                                                         Personal services




                                                        -4.5
                                                               -6             -5                               -4                                  -3                                 -2                                -1                  0
                                                                                                                                                ln(IT)




                                                                                                                                              41
                                               Panel C: IT intensity and idiosyncratic volatility of ROA in 2000
                                               ln(idiosyncratic volatility of ROA) = -2.668 +1.168ln(IT)                                             adjusted R2 = 0.559
                                                                                            (t-stat=6.698)                                           sample size=40
                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                       Other services



                                                -2
ln(absolute idiosyncratic volatility of ROA)




                                                                                                                                                                              Instruments

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Business services
                                                                                                                                                                                             Wholesale
                                                -4                                                                                      Chemicals
                                                                                                                                                            Motion pictures

                                                                                                                                                       Health

                                                                                                                                      Rubber & plastics
                                                                                                                                                    Apparel
                                                                                                                             Telephone       Education
                                                                                             Oil extraction                                      Miscellaneous manufacturing Industrial machinery
                                                                                                                                              Construction
                                                -6
                                                                                                      Hotels                                    Fabricated
                                                                                                                                  Stone & Transportation
                                                                                                                                          clay             metal    Electronic equipment
                                                                                                                                                         equipment

                                                                                                               Paper    Amusement Textile                                         Printing & publishing
                                                                              Transportation by air                                                                Transportation services
                                                                                                                           Lumber & wood         Retail
                                                                                                                            Radio & television
                                                                                                                                          Leather
                                                                                                                            Food
                                                                                                             Primary metal                     Personal services
                                                -8                                           Electricity & gas Auto serviceTrucking and warehousing
                                                                                                                                                Furniture


                                                                              Petroleum products
                                                                                          Water transportation



                                               -10
                                                                 Railroad transportation




                                               -12
                                                     -6             -5                                 -4                             -3                                -2                                -1                  0
                                                                                                                                   ln(IT)




                                                                                                                                42
Table 1. IT Intensity by Industry and by Year: 50 Industries and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000
IT intensity is the ratio of IT capital to total capital in percentage. IT capital is defined as the sum of computers and software.

              Sector                           Industry                         IT intensity in nominal dollars                  IT intensity in 1994 real dollars
                                                                        1970          1980         1990           2000    1970          1980         1990            2000
  Agriculture (1-2)              1 Farms                                 n.a.          n.a.       0.061           0.347   n.a.           n.a.       0.042        0.666
                                 2 Agricultural services                 n.a.         0.293       0.137           0.124   n.a.          0.059       0.092        0.237
  Mining (3-6)                   3 Metal mining                          n.a.          n.a.       0.250           0.642   n.a.           n.a.       0.175        1.242
                                 4 Coal mining                           n.a.          n.a.       0.202           0.879   n.a.           n.a.       0.146        1.684
                                 5 Oil extraction                       0.174         0.509       0.370           0.776   0.010         0.174       0.286        1.733
                                 6 Nonmetallic minerals                  n.a.         0.041       0.409           1.504   n.a.          0.011       0.288        2.907
  Construction                   7 Construction                         0.607         0.271       0.840           4.031   0.036         0.073       0.591        7.381
  Manufacturing (8-27)           8 Lumber & wood                        1.090         1.615       1.296           2.205   0.066         0.434       0.927        4.081
    Durables (8-17)              9 Furniture                            1.120         1.836       2.954           4.443   0.075         0.535       2.182        7.915
                                 10 Stone & clay                        0.584         3.502       1.995           2.829   0.040         0.967       1.418        5.318
                                 11 Primary metal                       0.740         0.663       0.863           1.352   0.048         0.183       0.611        2.583
                                 12 Fabricated metal                    1.327         1.024       2.501           4.348   0.089         0.295       1.820        7.798
                                 13 Industrial machinery                7.713         7.817       7.694       12.831      0.929         2.847       6.065       19.917
                                 14 Electronic equipment                0.807         3.984       5.946           8.268   0.074         1.363       4.520       14.206
                                 15 Transportation equipment            1.111         1.577       4.374           3.627   0.078         0.473       3.176        6.634
                                 16 Instruments                         2.558         2.486       8.106       11.459      0.217         0.849       6.394        17.646
                                 17 Miscellaneous manufacturing         2.879         1.369       3.526           4.697   0.216         0.416       2.613        8.161
   Non-durables (18-27)          18 Food                                0.925         0.752       1.765           2.250   0.061         0.209       1.265        4.252
                                 19 Tobacco                             2.229         1.352       3.020           2.339   0.162         0.404       2.263        4.203
                                 20 Textile                             1.211         0.517       1.506           3.262   0.076         0.144       1.104        5.790
                                 21 Apparel                             3.540         2.281       3.806           5.101   0.296         0.741       2.883        8.596
                                 22 Paper                               0.549         0.779       1.091           1.453   0.032         0.202       0.773        2.774
                                 23 Printing & publishing               2.176         2.629       8.334       14.635      0.175         0.876       6.581       22.020
                                 24 Chemicals                           0.683         0.564       2.218           3.259   0.049         0.164       1.608        5.989
                                 25 Petroleum products                  0.732         0.797       0.760           0.451   0.044         0.212       0.542        0.891
                                 26 Rubber & plastics                   1.622         1.210       1.980           3.153   0.098         0.320       1.402        5.961
                                 27 Leather                             3.647         2.035       2.103           3.928   0.238         0.502       1.466        6.765




                                                                                     43
Table 1. IT Intensity by Industry and by Year: 50 Industries and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000
[Continued]

             Sector                     Industry              IT intensity in nominal dollars                  IT intensity in 1994 real dollars
                                                       1970         1980        1990            2000   1970           1980         1990            2000
Transportation (28-34)   28 Railroad transportation    0.047        0.028       0.045       0.430      0.003         0.007        0.031            0.800
                         29 Local transit              0.442        0.246       0.395       1.037      0.037         0.072        0.281            1.987
                         30 Trucking and warehousing   0.384        0.118       0.451       2.009      0.023         0.028        0.309            3.587
                         31 Water transportation       0.644        0.126       0.151       0.823      0.040         0.034        0.109            1.541
                         32 Transportation by air      0.670        0.766       0.376       0.537      0.039         0.185        0.258            1.021
                         33 Pipelines                  0.352        0.109       0.231       1.101      0.036         0.032        0.167            1.943
                         34 Transportation services    1.007        0.395       1.601       8.708      0.073         0.127        1.229        13.761
Communication (35-36)    35 Telephone                  0.210        0.266       1.584       2.536      0.020         0.087        1.188            4.156
                         36 Radio & television         0.630        0.706       0.630       2.436      0.043         0.215        0.468            4.136
Utilities (37)           37 Electricity & gas          0.071        0.213       0.772       0.870      0.005         0.063        0.555            1.665
Trade (38-39)            38 Wholesale                  3.939        5.840      11.169       18.879     0.480         2.267        9.089        27.264
                         39 Retail                     0.614        1.138       3.801       4.569      0.051         0.365        2.805            8.362
Services (40-50)         40 Hotels                     0.197        0.463       0.455       1.078      0.013         0.130        0.332            2.178
                         41 Personal services          0.413        1.216       2.201       4.321      0.035         0.372        1.622            7.606
                         42 Business services          2.579        8.280      29.380       28.941     0.409         4.346        24.254       41.404
                         43 Auto service               0.454        2.166       1.306       1.652      0.031         0.576        0.894            3.073
                         44 Miscellaneous repair       0.861        1.889       3.802       6.845      0.065         0.595        2.813        10.821
                         45 Motion pictures            0.765        2.867       3.518       5.581      0.078         0.900        2.634            9.689
                         46 Amusement                  0.252        0.931       1.259       2.221      0.020         0.293        0.933            4.307
                         47 Health                     0.959        1.113       4.267       5.477      0.081         0.360        3.194            9.607
                         48 Legal                      9.613        4.318      14.430       21.950     1.227         1.707        11.880       30.150
                         49 Education                  16.624       4.607       3.386       3.853      1.830         1.444        2.571            6.999
                         50 Other services             9.521        4.307      12.003       17.229     1.227         1.811        9.693        25.615
                         Average (equally weighted)    1.984        1.745       3.725       5.523      0.199         0.606        2.571            7.981




                                                                  44
Table 2: Time-Series Patterns of Decomposed Volatility Series
In panel A, we first calculate the ratio of absolute idiosyncratic volatility over absolute systematic volatility for each
year for each industry. Then we calculate averages and medians for the whole sample and for each sub-period. In
panel B, we calculate the correlations between absolute idiosyncratic volatility and absolute systematic volatility for
each industry and then calculate averages and medians for the whole sample and for each sub-period.



Panel A: The ratio of absolute idiosyncratic volatility to absolute systematic volatility



                                                             Stocks         Sales           ROA
                             Whole              mean         5.965          4.857            7.1
                                               median        4.585          3.159           3.273
                                                  N           1431           1388            920


                          First Period          mean         3.277           3.06           3.952
                          (1971-1983)          median        2.927          2.227           2.471
                     (1981-1983 for ROA)          N             609          566             128


                        Second Period           mean         7.957          6.095           7.61
                          (1984-2000)          median        6.584          3.895           3.38
                                                  N             822          822             792




Panel B: Correlations between absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic volatility



                                                             Stocks          Sales           ROA
                            Whole               mean         -0.013          0.558          0.712
                                               median        -0.022          0.612          0.836
                                                  N             49            49              49


                         First Period           mean         0.311           0.417          0.295
                         (1971-1983)           median        0.349           0.454          0.689
                    (1981-1983 for ROA)           N             48            45              42


                        Second Period           mean         0.164           0.48           0.703
                         (1984-2000)           median        0.203           0.536          0.814
                                                  N             49            49              49




                                                           45
Table 3. Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression Results on Effects of IT on Volatilities
                          (Bivariate Regression Analysis)
The model is estimated with WLS over a cross-section of industries for each year. All regressions are weighted by
the industry share of market capitalization, sales, and total assets for stock return, sales, and ROA, respectively.
Dependent variables are logarithms of absolute idiosyncratic, absolute systematic and relative idiosyncratic
volatilities for stock return, real sales growth, and ROA. Relative idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the difference
between logarithms of absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic volatilities. The sample period is 1971-2000
for stock return and sales and 1984-2000 for ROA. IT is the ratio of IT capital to total capital stock (all in 1994 real
dollars). IT capital is defined as the sum of computers and software. In constructing volatility measures, firms with
less than 30 monthly observations for stock return and firms with less than 15 quarterly observations for real sales
growth and ROA, are excluded. The sample also excludes industries with less than five firms and industries whose
IT capital is not defined. Average coefficients are calculated using Fama-MacBeth method. t-statistics are adjusted
for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey-West method. Coefficient estimates of intercepts are not
reported in the table. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.

                                                         Adjusted        Number of          ln(IT)
    Period                  Volatility Measure              R2           Industries        Estimate        Adj. t-stat
                                                                                                  a
                         Stock          abs. idio.        0.409            40.733           0.259           12.891
                                                                                                  a
                         Stock          abs. syst.        0.215            40.733           0.156            7.200
     1971-2000           Stock           rel. idio.       0.246            40.733           0.102a           7.249
                                                                                                  a
                         Sales          abs. idio.        0.213            36.500           0.274           12.107
                         Sales          abs. syst.        0.133            36.500           0.233a           6.560
                         Sales           rel. idio.       0.030            36.500           0.040c           1.792
                                                                                                  a
                         Stock          abs. idio.        0.477            39.769           0.268           16.707
                         Stock          abs. syst.        0.238            39.769           0.142a          12.668
     1971-1983           Stock           rel. idio.       0.340            39.769           0.126a          16.614
                                                                                                  a
                         Sales          abs. idio.        0.226            32.538           0.280           24.633
                                                                                                  a
                         Sales          abs. syst.         0.183           32.538           0.295           13.297
                         Sales           rel. idio.       -0.009           32.538           -0.015          -0.766
                                                                                                  a
                         Stock          abs. idio.        0.357            41.471           0.251            8.156
                         Stock          abs. syst.        0.197            41.471           0.167a           4.801
     1984-2000           Stock           rel. idio.       0.175            41.471           0.084a           4.060
                                                                                                  a
                         Sales          abs. idio.        0.204            39.529           0.269            6.957
                         Sales          abs. syst.        0.094            39.529           0.186a           4.052
                         Sales           rel. idio.       0.060            39.529           0.083a           7.856
                                                                                                  a
                         ROA            abs. idio.        0.319            36.647           0.751            7.652
                                                                                                  a
                         ROA            abs. syst.        0.336            36.647           0.852           13.490
                                                                                                    b
                         ROA             rel. idio.       0.038            36.647          -0.101            -2.369
a
 : Significant at 1 percent level.
b
  : Significant at 5 percent level.
c
 : Significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          46
Table 4. Average Cross-Sectional Correlation Coefficients between Control Variables
Average cross-sectional correlation coefficients between variables are calculated for 1971-2000. IT is the ratio of IT capital to total capital stock (all in 1994 real
dollars). Age is the average age of firms in an industry. (I/K) is the ratio of non-IT investment in year t to non-IT capital in year t-1. Book-to-market is the ratio
of common equity to market capitalization of common stock. Advertising expenditure (ADV) and R&D capital stock (R&D) is scaled by property, plant, and
equipment (PPE) (all in real dollars). Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) variables are calculated using sales. Dispersion is the standard deviation of log of firm
size (market capitalization) for each industry. Leverage is the sum of short-term and long-term debt divided by total assets. Liquidity is defined as the ratio of
current assets to current liabilities. Foreign exposure is the ratio of foreign sales to total sales. Firm diversification is the average number of two-digit segments.
Correlation coefficients related to foreign exposure and diversification are reported for 1989-1997. Numbers in parentheses are p-values. Coefficients significant
at 10% or better are in boldface.

                                                                Book-to-                                                                                    Foreign
                           ln(IT)     ln(AGE)         I/K        Market     ln(1+R&D) ln(1+ADV)           HHI      Dispersion    Leverage      Liquidity   Exposure
ln(AGE)                    -0.170
                          (0.247)
I/K                         0.331      -0.273
                          (0.014)      (0.048)
Book-to-Market             -0.290       0.250        -0.346
                          (0.039)      (0.073)      (0.009)
ln(1+R&D)                   0.504       -0.143        0.140       -0.276
                          (0.000)      (0.318)      (0.326)      (0.044)
ln(1+ADV)                   0.347        0.016       -0.009       -0.173        0.154
                          (0.011)      (0.913)      (0.951)      (0.224)      (0.277)
HHI                        -0.189       -0.403       -0.002        0.016       -0.102       -0.038
                          (0.190)      (0.002)      (0.989)      (0.912)      (0.477)      (0.794)
Dispersion                 -0.146        0.266       -0.047       -0.220       -0.026       -0.067       -0.058
                          (0.323)      (0.055)      (0.747)      (0.118)      (0.857)      (0.646)      (0.688)
Leverage                   -0.202       -0.205        0.127        0.027       -0.319       -0.224        0.099       -0.145
                          (0.160)      (0.147)      (0.373)      (0.850)      (0.017)      (0.107)      (0.491)      (0.312)
Liquidity                   0.285       -0.009       -0.177       -0.018       0.155         0.403        0.135       -0.200       -0.478
                          (0.042)      (0.949)      (0.209)      (0.901)      (0.275)      (0.002)      (0.344)      (0.156)      (0.000)
Foreign Exposure            0.109        0.055       -0.069       -0.164       0.383         0.087        0.196        0.338       -0.296        0.127
                          (0.461)      (0.709)      (0.637)      (0.254)      (0.004)      (0.550)      (0.170)      (0.013)      (0.032)      (0.380)
Diversification            -0.280        0.531       -0.144        0.103       -0.201       -0.119        0.169        0.419       -0.252       -0.068       0.325
                          (0.041)      (0.000)      (0.307)      (0.470)      (0.149)      (0.404)      (0.228)      (0.001)      (0.066)      (0.636)      (0.017)




                                                                                 47
Table 5. Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression Results on Effects of IT on Volatilities (Multivariate Regression Analysis)
The model is estimated with WLS over a cross-section of industries for each year. All regressions are weighted by the industry share of market capitalization,
sales, and total assets for stock return, sales, and ROA, respectively. Dependent variables are logarithms of absolute idiosyncratic, absolute systematic and
relative idiosyncratic volatilities for stock return, real sales growth, and ROA. Relative idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the difference between logarithms of
absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic volatilities. In constructing volatility measures, firms with less than 30 monthly observations for stock return and
firms with less than 15 quarterly observations for real sales growth and ROA, are excluded. The sample also excludes industries with less than five firms and
industries whose IT capital is not defined. IT is the ratio of IT capital to total capital stock (all in 1994 real dollars). Age is the average age of firms in an industry.
(I/K) is the ratio of non-IT investment in year t to non-IT capital in year t-1. Book-to-market is the ratio of common equity to market capitalization of common
stock. Advertising expenditure (ADV) and R&D capital stock (R&D) is scaled by property, plant, and equipment (PPE) (all in real dollars). Herfindahl-
Hirschman index (HHI) variables are calculated using sales. Dispersion (DIS) is the standard deviation of log of firm size (market capitalization, sales, and total
assets). Leverage (LEV) is the sum of short-term and long-term debt divided by total assets. Liquidity (LIQ) is defined as the ratio of current assets to current
liabilities. Average coefficients are calculated using Fama-MacBeth method. t-statistics are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey-
West method. Coefficient estimates of intercepts are not reported in the table. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
                                                 No. of                                                    ln(1+       ln(1+
                                           2
    Period      Volatility Measure Adj. R      Industries.   ln(IT)    ln(AGE)       I/K        BM         R&D)        ADV)        HHI        DIS         LEV        LIQ
                                                                  a          a                                                                      b           a
                Stock   abs. idio.    0.804     40.733        0.061    -0.811      0.173        0.243      0.036        -0.210    0.344      0.210       -1.444     0.201a
                Stock   abs. syst.    0.711     40.733       -0.030b   -0.754a
                                                                                   1.494b       0.552a      0.178      -1.317c   -0.667a     0.219   a
                                                                                                                                                         -1.982 a
                                                                                                                                                                    0.195c
                                                                  a
                Stock    rel. idio.   0.588     40.733       0.091     -0.057     -1.321b      -0.310c     -0.141      1.107b     1.011a     -0.009      0.538      0.006
    1971-2000   Sales   abs. idio.    0.549     36.500       0.105
                                                                  a
                                                                       -0.267c
                                                                                   2.788   c
                                                                                               1.348 a
                                                                                                           1.048   a
                                                                                                                        0.639    -0.428      0.353   a
                                                                                                                                                          -1.689     0.162
                Sales   abs. syst.    0.578     36.500       0.032     -0.212      3.233       1.041a      1.045b      -3.132a   -0.552      0.290a      -1.641b     0.529a
                Sales    rel. idio.   0.364     36.500       0.074a    -0.055      -0.445      0.307       0.003        3.771a    0.124      0.063       -0.048     -0.367a
                Stock   abs. idio.    0.797     39.769       0.063a    -0.714a     1.069       0.424a      -0.333c     -0.464    -0.129a     0.100       -2.687a    0.188a
                                                                             a                       a                                   a                      a
                Stock   abs. syst.    0.670     39.769       -0.015    -0.681      1.936       0.484       -0.012      -0.972    -0.852      0.006       -2.774     -0.076
                Stock    rel. idio.   0.688     39.769       0.078a    -0.034      -0.867      -0.059      -0.321      0.508     0.724a      0.095       0.087      0.264a
    1971-1983   Sales   abs. idio.    0.494     32.538       0.104b    -0.283      5.802a      1.355a      1.213b       -0.208   -3.859a     0.204b      -3.780a     -0.139
                                                                                           a         a          b
                                                                                                                       -5.785a           a           a
                Sales   abs. syst.    0.600     32.538       0.060      0.082      8.806       1.330       1.543                 -4.583      0.181       -3.172a     0.391a
                Sales    rel. idio.   0.339     32.538       0.044b    -0.365b    -3.004a      0.026       -0.330      5.577b     0.723a     0.023       -0.608     -0.530b
                                                                  b          a                                  b                        b          b
                Stock   abs. idio.    0.809     41.471       0.059     -0.885      -0.511       0.104      0.319        -0.016   0.705       0.294        -0.493    0.210c
                Stock   abs. syst.    0.743     41.471       -0.041a   -0.811a      1.157       0.604a     0.323a      -1.581c   -0.525a     0.382a      -1.376a    0.402a
                Stock    rel. idio.   0.512     41.471        0.101a   -0.074     -1.668c      -0.501b     -0.004       1.565a    1.230a     -0.087       0.883c    -0.191
                                                                  a
                Sales   abs. idio.    0.591     39.529       0.106     -0.254c     0.483       1.343a      0.922a      1.286a    2.196c      0.466a      -0.090     0.393a
    1984-2000   Sales   abs. syst.    0.562     39.529       0.010     -0.438a     -1.029      0.820c      0.664c      -1.104a   2.530c      0.373a      -0.471     0.635a
                Sales    rel. idio.   0.383     39.529       0.096a    0.183b      1.512       0.523       0.258       2.390a    -0.334      0.093 c     0.381      -0.242a
                ROA     abs. idio.    0.532     36.647       0.127b     -0.214     -1.415      -1.869b     3.344a      -3.306a    -1.721     0.539c      3.024b      1.255a
                ROA     abs. syst.    0.587     36.647       0.128     -0.711b      1.057      -2.049c     2.203a      -4.289a   -3.217b     0.430c      1.593       1.903a
                ROA      rel. idio.   0.528     36.647       -0.001    0.497b      -2.472      0.180       1.141b      0.983      1.496      0.109       1.430b     -0.649b
a
: Significant at 1 percent level. b: Significant at 5 percent level. c: Significant at 10 percent level.


                                                                                    48
Table 6. Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression Results on Effects of IT on Volatilities: Foreign Exposure and
Diversification
The model is estimated with WLS over a cross-section of industries for each year. All regressions are weighted by the industry share of market capitalization,
sales, and total assets for stock return, sales, and ROA, respectively. Dependent variables are logarithms of absolute idiosyncratic, absolute systematic and
relative idiosyncratic volatilities for stock return, real sales growth, and ROA. Relative idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the difference between logarithms of
absolute idiosyncratic and absolute systematic volatilities. In constructing volatility measures, firms with less than 30 monthly observations for stock return and
firms with less than 15 quarterly observations for real sales growth and ROA, are excluded. The sample also excludes industries with less than five firms and
industries whose IT capital is not defined. Foreign Exposure (FE) is defined as the ratio of foreign sales to the sum of domestic and foreign sales. Firm
diversification (SEG) is the average number of two-digit segments. Since geographic and business segment information in COMPUSTAT is available from 1985
and has a significant change in the FASB segment reporting standards in 1998 and we construct 5-year average of the variables, the sample period is restricted to
1989-1997. Average coefficients are calculated using Fama-MacBeth method. t-statistics are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity using the
Newey-West method. Coefficient estimates of intercepts are not reported in the table. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are in boldface.
       Volatility                 No. of                                                   ln(1+       ln(1+
       Measure          Adj. R2   Inds.    ln(IT)       ln(AGE)     I/K        BM          R&D)        ADV)       HHI        DIS       LEV       LIQ       FE       SEG
                                                    a          a          a            c           a                    a          b                            a
Stock abs. idio.          0.836 39.889 0.090             -0.946    -2.451     0.286        -0.026       -0.109   1.088      0.195      -0.021     0.085   0.906     -0.176
                                             a
Stock abs. syst.          0.765 39.889 -0.036             -0.889     0.748    0.896a       0.048a      -1.200c   -1.154a     0.305a    -0.423    0.443a   0.646a    -0.040
                                             a
                                                         -0.056a   -3.200a          b
Stock rel. idio.          0.592 39.889 0.126                                  -0.610       -0.074       1.090c    2.242a    -0.110a    0.402a   -0.358a   0.260     -0.137
Sales abs. idio.          0.716 39.667     0.123b       -1.018b    -2.953b    1.823a       -0.505a     0.946a     -0.109    0.379a     0.662a    0.067c   2.778a      0.137
Sales abs. syst.          0.690 39.667      0.024       -1.260c    -3.507c    1.669 a      -0.274a     -0.094      0.766    0.398a     0.529     0.384a   1.799a     0.505a
Sales      rel. idio.     0.422 39.667     0.098a         0.241     0.554      0.154       -0.231a     1.040b    -0.875c    -0.019     0.133    -0.317a   0.978b    -0.367b
    ROA abs. idio.        0.583 36.556     0.144b         0.534    -0.151     -0.383        0.954      -7.645a   -2.445a    1.344a     -0.326   1.486a    3.511b    -2.553a
    ROA abs. syst.        0.642 36.556      0.127        -0.363    -0.517     -0.416        0.294      -6.305b   -3.047a    1.165a     -0.073   2.129a    3.611a    -2.191a
    ROA    rel. idio.     0.538 36.556      0.017         0.897     0.366      0.034       0.660a      -1.340b    0.602     0.179c     -0.252   -0.644    -0.100    -0.361
a
 : Significant at 1 percent level.
b
  : Significant at 5 percent level.
c
 : Significant at 10 percent level.




                                                                                           49
Table 7. Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression Results on Volatility Growth and IT
In this table, we test whether industries with high IT intensity exhibit faster volatility growth. Dependent variables
are 5 year log difference in each volatility measure between year t and t+5. Independent variables are ln(IT) and
ln(VOL). ln(IT) is log of IT intensity in year t for each industry and ln(VOL) is log of volatility measure in year t.
The model is estimated with WLS over a cross-section of industries for each year. All regressions are weighted by
the industry share of market capitalization, sales, and total assets for stock return, sales, and ROA, respectively. In
constructing volatility measures, firms with less than 30 monthly observations for stock return and firms with less
than 15 quarterly observations for real sales growth and ROA, are excluded. The sample also excludes industries
with less than five firms and industries whose IT capital is not defined. Average coefficients are calculated using
Fama-MacBeth method. t-statistics are adjusted for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey-West
method. Coefficient estimates of intercepts are not reported in the table. Coefficients significant at 10% or better are
in boldface.
                                              Adjusted   Number of     ln(IT)                    ln(VOL)
                                                  2
    (t+1) Period   Volatility   Measure          R       Industries   Estimate     Adj. t-stat   Estimate   Adj. t-stat
                                                                                                       a
                    Stock       abs. idio.     0.215      41.240       0.039         1.666       -0.224      -3.783
                                                                            a
                    Stock       abs. syst.     0.173      41.240       0.041         4.883       -0.256a     -4.961
     1976-2000      Stock        rel. idio.    0.376      41.240       0.060a        5.077       -0.738
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                             -10.286
                                                                               a                       a
                    Sales       abs. idio.     0.227      37.680       0.110         5.120       -0.388      -7.495
                    Sales       abs. syst.     0.289      37.680       0.106a        4.107       -0.490a      -9.788
                    Sales        rel. idio.    0.449      37.680       0.042b        2.441       -0.892a     -15.791
                                                                                                       c
                    Stock       abs. idio.     0.218      40.750       0.006         0.154       -0.149       -1.906
                    Stock       abs. syst.     0.112      40.750       0.028a        4.225       -0.300a     -18.609
     1976-1983      Stock        rel. idio.    0.405      40.750       0.092a       20.965       -0.829a      -9.297
                                                                               a
                    Sales       abs. idio.     0.295      33.875       0.082        23.033       -0.406a     -13.224
                    Sales       abs. syst.     0.247      33.875       0.078a        3.925       -0.398a      -6.099
                    Sales        rel. idio.    0.390      33.875       -0.012       -1.485       -0.820a     -21.387
                                                                            b
                    Stock       abs. idio.     0.214      41.471       0.055         2.498       -0.259b     -3.395
                                                                               a                       b
                    Stock       abs. syst.     0.202      41.471       0.048         5.243       -0.235      -3.224
     1984-2000      Stock        rel. idio.    0.362      41.471       0.045a        3.445       -0.695a     -8.634
                                                                               a
                    Sales       abs. idio.     0.195      39.471       0.123         4.157       -0.379a      -5.091
                    Sales       abs. syst.     0.309      39.471       0.119a        3.512       -0.534a     -10.336
                    Sales        rel. idio.    0.477      39.471       0.068a        7.555       -0.925a     -12.174
       (ROA)         ROA        abs. idio.     0.221      37.333       0.424
                                                                               a
                                                                                    15.333       -0.452a     -8.108
     1986-2000       ROA        abs. syst.     0.209      37.333       0.371
                                                                            a
                                                                                     6.410       -0.374
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                             -8.250
                     ROA        rel. idio.     0.384      37.333       -0.028       -0.491       -0.700a     -11.312
a
 : Significant at 1 percent level
b
  : Significant at 5 percent level.
c
 : Significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          50
