                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE STRUCTURE OF EARLY CARE AND
                       EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES:
            HISTORICAL EVOLUTION AND INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS

                                           Ann Dryden Witte
                                           Marisol Trowbridge

                                          Working Paper 10931
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10931


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Ann Dryden Witte and Marisol Trowbridge. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Structure of Early Care and Education in the United States:
Historical Evolution and International Comparisons
Ann Dryden Witte and Marisol Trowbridge
NBER Working Paper No. 10931
November 2004
JEL No. H5, H6, I2, I3

                                            ABSTRACT

Most European governments have universal, consolidated, education-based ECE programs that are
available from early in the morning to late in the evening throughout the year. European ECE
programs are uniformly of high quality, generally last at least three years, and are funded to serve
all children. The US ECE system is composed of three separate programs (Head Start, Pre-
Kindergarten (Pre-K) and the child care voucher program) targeted to low-income children. With
a few notable exceptions, US ECE programs are funded to serve less than half of the eligible
children. US ECE programs developed quite separately. They have different goals, different funding
sources, different administrations and policies, and generally last for an academic year or less. Pre-K
and Head Start operate only 3 to 6 hours a day and are open only during the academic year. The
average quality of US ECE programs is generally much lower than the average quality of European
ECE programs. Further, the quality of US ECE programs varies widely even within local areas.
Although the US has greatly increased expenditures on ECE, US governments pay only 40% of the
costs of ECE, while European governments pay 70% to 90% of the costs of ECE. None of the major
US ECE programs simultaneously provides work supports for parents, child development
opportunities for children and preparation for school for low-income children. The evidence suggests
that the US ECE system is neither efficient nor equitable. Consolidation of funding and
administration of current US ECE programs could substantially lower transaction costs for parents
and provide more stable care arrangements for children. Increased funding could improve the quality
of existing programs, extend hours and months of operation, and make care available to all eligible
families. Both the evaluation literature and the European experience suggest that such a consolidated,
well-funded system could be successful in preparing poor children for school. Further, the benefits
of such a program could well exceed the costs since it is precisely low-income children that benefit
most from stable, high-quality ECE. However, such a targeted program will have neither the positive
peer group effects nor the social-integration benefits of universal ECE programs.
Ann Dryden Witte
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
awitte@wellesley.edu

Marisol Trowbridge
Wellesley College
         Recent economic research suggests that there is a high return to early care and
education (ECE) and a much lower return to compensatory interventions later in the life-
cycle. This research also highlights the importance of both cognitive and non-cognitive
skills that are formed early in the life cycle for educational achievement, earnings and
other dimensions of socioeconomic success (Carneiro & Heckman, 2003).
         During the last ten years, the federal government has twice included early care
and education (ECE) as a component of a broader reform agenda. In 1996, funding for
child care vouchers was expanded as part of the much broader welfare reform agenda.
Under welfare reform, mothers receiving cash assistance were required to work or be in
other approved activities. Further, time limits were placed on the receipt of cash
assistance. Child care vouchers were made available to help these mothers pay for their
children’s care. In 2002 under the Good Start, Grow Smart initiative, the goals of the
Head Start program was directed to serve the needs of the education reform embedded in
the No Child Left Behind law. Under Good Start, Grow Smart, the Head Start program is
to prepare children to read and succeed in school. States had much earlier developed Pre-
Kindergarten (Pre-K) programs as part of earlier school reform efforts.
         In the US, ECE has been a byproduct or other policy initiatives. It has not been
seen as a central and important area for careful policy formation. As a result, the US has
what the Committee for Economic Development calls a “patchwork of early care and
education opportunities” (Committee for Economic Development, 2002, p. 6). A recent
OECD report goes further and states: “the present patchwork of services, regulations and
funding sources leads to confusion, uneven quality and inequality of access. (OECD,
2004b, pp. 184).
         European governments have established ECE programs that provide work
supports for parents, provide child development opportunities for children and prepare all
children for school. The US has established three separate ECE programs (Head Start,
Pre-K and the child care voucher program) as offshoots of other major policy initiatives.
Each programs has is own funding sources, goals, administration, standards, policies and
evaluation literature.
         As pointed out by the Committee for Economic Development (CED), effective
policy making for early care and education is hampered by the lack of a comprehensive
view of publicly funded early care and education programs. Research and data collection
is generally limited to a single program and is often focused on a specific period or policy
regime. In this paper, we pull together information for all three programs. We draw these
diverse literatures together to provide an assessment of the US system as a whole.
         To briefly preview our conclusions, the US ECE system does not reach all
potential beneficiaries, often provides unstable care with limited education or
developmental content, frequently imposes high transaction costs on low-income families
and requires three separate administrative structures. None of the major US ECE
programs simultaneously provides work supports for parents, child development
opportunities for children and school preparation for low-income children. US ECE
programs have benefits for low-income families that receive services, and there appear to
be social benefits emanating from these programs as well. However, we have no
convincing evidence that the social benefits of any of the three US ECE programs


                                                                                          3
outweigh the social costs. We do have evidence that more cohesive, stable, intensive and
higher quality ECE programs have social benefits that outweigh their higher social costs.
        By providing developmental activities to low-income children and work supports
to low-income families, US ECE programs increase vertical equity in the US. However,
we find glaring vertical and horizontal inequities in the outcomes that result from the
current US ECE system. As far as vertical equity is concerned, only 45% of three- to
five-year-old children in the US living in low-income families are enrolled in preschool,
while 75% of three to five year olds in higher income families attend preschools. As far
as horizontal equity is concerned, fewer than half of all eligible low-income children
receive services from Head Start, Pre-K programs or have preschool care purchased with
a child care voucher.
        The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we briefly review the way
in which US and European government policies affect the way in which preschool
children are cared for. The third section provides a brief review of the development of
early care and education in the US, including Head Start, Pre-Kindergarten, and the child
care voucher program. In section 4, we discuss the wide array of methods currently used
to fund US early care and education. In section 5, we consider major issues facing the
current US ECE “system”: (1) the goals and structure of US early care and education
programs, (2) the costs of having three distinct, generally under-funded ECE programs,
(3) the consolidation or coordination of different programs, (3) equality of access and (4)
the effectiveness of early care and education programs. The final section of the paper
contains our conclusions.



        Governments in most developed countries have played a growing role in early
care and education since the 1970s when the labor force participation of women with
children began to rise rapidly. Governments affect the way in which preschool children
are cared for and educated through: (1) parental leave policies, (2) tax policies and (3)
expenditure policies. To set the stage for our discussion of major US policies regarding
early care and education, we briefly describe and contrast major European and US
policies in these three area.

Parental Leave Policies
       European countries make far greater use of parental leave than the US. Maternity
leaves were enacted in Germany and France more than a century ago to protect the
physical health of working women at the time of child birth. Child rearing payments,
parental leaves and paternity leaves began during the 1960s and developed rapidly during
the 1970s, as the labor force participation rates of European women began to rise rapidly.
European leave policies tend to be universal rather than targeted (e.g., available only for
low-income, single parents).
       Today, all new parents in many European countries have the option of taking a
period of paid leave after the birth of a child. Some countries also provide childrearing
payments that can extend until the child is 3 years old. For example, Finland provides 18
weeks of maternity leave and 26 weeks of parental leave, with the stay at home parent
paid 70% of prior earnings. In Finland and Norway, parents have the option of a


                                                                                            4
subsidized place in child care or a cash benefit of equivalent value for children under age
3.
        In Europe, parental leaves are paid for through temporary disability programs,
unemployment insurance programs, family allowance systems or as a separate social
insurance benefit. See Kamerman (2000) for a description of parental leave policies and
the Clearinghouse on International Development in Child, Youth and Family Policies for
updated information (2002).
        The US did not have a national family leave policy until 1993.1 However, the Aid
to Families with Dependent Children program was originally set up to allow divorced and
unmarried mothers to stay home and care for their children (Helburn & Bergmann,
2002). Under the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), new parents are entitled
to 12 weeks of job-protected leave if they work at firms with at least 50 employees and
worked at lest 1,250 hours the prior year. Fewer than half of US private sector workers
are eligible for leaves under FMLA. Further, leaves under FMLA are unpaid. Take-up
rates for FMLA are far lower than take-up rates for the more generous European
programs (Waldfolgel, 2001).
        The potential impacts of parental leave are many: (1) health effects for family
members, particularly the mother and child; (2) static and dynamic employment and
income effects particularly for the mother; (3) budgetary impacts for governments and (4)
business impacts for employers. Research on the nature and extent of these impacts is
limited. Ruhm (1998) finds that parental leave guarantees raise the employment of
women, but at longer durations, they may be paid for through the receipt of lower relative
wages. In a later article, Ruhm (2000) concludes that the substantial child health benefits
associated with parental leaves may make it a cost-effective way of improving child
health. Overall, existing research suggests that parental leaves of more than the 12 weeks,
provided by FMLA, but less than one year may be economically efficient. The European
and US experience suggest that leaves will have to provide substantial wage replacement
(about 50% to 75%) to encourage substantial numbers of parents to use parental leaves.

Tax Policy
        Child-related tax policies are not generally targeted to young children, but rather
are available to all children in school or below the age of majority. European countries
tend to have universal child or family allowances and to make more limited use of tax
deductions and tax credits. See Clearinghouse of International Developments in Child,
Youth and Family Policies (2002) for details.
        By way of contrast the US has no child or family allowance, but it has
exemptions, deductions and credits related to children. Most of these US tax policies
depend on family income. For example, the US Child Tax Credit is up to $1000 per child
under 17. The full credit is available to married families with incomes below $110,000
and single families with incomes below $75,000. The credit may be partially refundable
for working families with low-incomes.
        In 2003, the US Dependent Care Tax Credit (DCTC) allowed a non-refundable
credit of from 20% to 35% of qualifying care expenses up to $3000 for one child and

1
 Some states enacted leave statutes prior to 1993. In 1989, 12 states had maternity leaves and 11 states had
parental leaves (Clearinghouse on International Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies, 2002).


                                                                                                           5
$6000 for two children under the age of 13.2 For a family with one child in care and
income below $15,000, the maximum amount of the credit would be $1020. However,
most families with income below $15,000 will owe no taxes, will not spend $3000-$6000
on child care and thus will not benefit from the DCTC. For a family with one child in
care and incomes above $43,000, the maximum amount of the credit would be $600.
Most families with incomes above $43,000 will pay tax, may pay $3,000 for child care
and may claim the DCTC. Indeed, the use of the DCTC rises with income. Altshuler and
Schwartz (1996) find that about 1% of the total DCTC payments are claimed by
taxpayers in the lowest two income deciles and 32% of the credits are claimed by
taxpayers in the top two income deciles.
        Tax expenditures related to the DCTC amounted to a little less than $1 billion in
1980, but they had risen to almost $4 billion by 1988 (Hayes, Palmer & Zaslow, 1990). In
that year the credit accounted for over half of all federal expenditures on early care and
education. Unlike the Earned Income Tax Credit, the DCTC is not indexed. Accordingly,
from 1981 to 2003, creditable child care expenses were limited to $2,400 for one child
and $4,800 for two or more children. During the same period, the percent of eligible
expenses that could be claimed ranged from 30% for families with incomes below
$10,000 to 20% for families with incomes above $28,000. By 1999, the total federal
credit was down to $2.7 billion. As the value of the tax credit declined, the value of direct
government expenditures on child care increased rapidly.

Expenditure Policies
         Most European governments invest substantially more funds in early care and
education than the US. In 1999, the US was in a seven-way tie for 13th place out of 30
OECD countries in the percent of GDP devoted to early care and education. The US
spent .4% of GDP on early care and education, while Norway, Hungary and Denmark
spent .8% of GDP.3 See Heymann, et al. (2004).
         European and US approaches to early care and education are quite different.
European governments tend to provide universal, publicly-provided early care and
education (ECE) for all children 3 to 6 years old. The quality of care tends to be relatively
uniform within a country, and quality tends to be high overall. However, child/staff ratios
vary widely across countries, with some countries (e.g., Finland) having ratios
substantially below those in the US and other countries having ratios substantially higher
(e.g., France). Staff credentials are uniformly higher in Western European countries than
in the US. For example, Germany provides universal ECE for all children 3-6 through the
education ministry, and 85% of 3-6 year olds participate in the program. The maximum
child/staff ratio allowed ranges from 10 to 14 children per teacher across regions.
Teachers are required to have 3 to 4 years of post-secondary education.


2
  Many states also offer dependent care tax credits or deductions. These credits/deductions are generally a
proportion of the federal credit, and some states have refundable credits (e.g., Colorado, Nebraska, and
New York). See pp. 35-37 of Mitchell, Stoney and Dichter (2001) for details of state tax programs related
to early care and education.
3
  These numbers do not control for the proportion of the population under 6. With its higher fertility rate
the US has a larger proportion of children under 6 then most European countries.


                                                                                                              6
         Some European governments require no parental co-payment for ECE, while
others require parental payments of from 10% to 30% of the cost of ECE. For example,
Germany requires that parents pay from 16% to 20% of ECE costs, with the payment
depending on family income. European ECE programs tend to be open year round and to
run from early in the morning until late in the evening. For example, the Swedish ECE
program is open from 6:30 A.M. to 6 P.M. all year. See Clearinghouse on International
Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies (2004a & 2004b) for details regarding
ECE policies.
         European programs for children ages 0 to 3 are usually distinct from those for
older preschool children. Given parental leave policies, there is less need for ECE for
many younger children. For example, in France ECE for children ages 0-3 is provided by
the health and welfare system, while ECE for children 3-6 is provided by education
system. Publicly provided ECE for children 0-3 is only available if there is a need for
such care (e.g., parents are working).4 In France, twenty nine percent of children 0 to 3
are enrolled in ECE, the highest level of enrollment in Western Europe.
         ECE programs in the US are overwhelmingly targeted to children in economically
disadvantaged families. The US government funds three major ECE programs: (1) Head
Start, (2) Pre-Kindergarten and (3) the child care voucher program. These three programs
have different sources of funding, different administrative structures and policies, and
different minimum standard regulations. With few exceptions, the programs do not
provide ECE for all eligible children whose parents want their children to participate. US
parents pay a much larger portion of the cost of ECE than European parents. For
example, in 1995, families provided 60% of the cost of childcare (Mitchell, et. al., 2001).
The OECD estimates that the federal government paid 25% and state and local
governments paid 15% of the remaining costs (OECD, 2002). Finally, as we will detail
below, US ECE programs often do not provide full-day, full-year care and are of highly
varying quality.
         Figure 1 gives US federal expenditures on ECE from 1962 through 2002 in
billions of 2002 $US. We provide estimates of spending on child care that both exclude
and include funding for the Social Service Block Grant (SSBG). We know that a portion
of SSBG funds are spent on child care, but we don’t know on an annual basis what
proportion. In 1990, 16% of SSBG funding was used for ECE (Stoney & Greenberg,
1996). Thus, actual expenditures on ECE is closer to the bottom than to the top line on
the graph.
         As can be seen in Figure 1, US federal government spending on early care and
education has grown rapidly since the beginning of welfare reform in the late 1980s.
These increases stemmed both from expansions of the child care voucher program and
expansions of Head Start. Federal government expenditures on Head Start and on the
child care voucher program were $1,206 million in fiscal year (FY) 1988. By FY2002,
federal expenditures on Head Start and the child care voucher program were between $13
and $15 billion, with approximately half of these expenditures being for Head Start and
half for the child care voucher program. Spending on the child care voucher program




4
    Two year olds are gradually being shifted into the universal care program.


                                                                                         7
include spending from the Child Care Development Fund (CCDF), transfers from TANF
to CCDF and direct child care expenditures by TANF (Trowbridge & Witte, 2004a).5



                                                   !                 "




                                               #



         There is far less information on state expenditures for ECE. Some states
substantially supplement federal funding for Head Start. For example, in 1998, states
provided $174 million to Head Start programs, in part to meet federally required local
match requirements (Novack, 1999). However, a number of states such as Ohio provided
substantial funding above match requirements.
         Federal rules encourage states to provide CCDF funding by Maintenance of
Effort (MOE) and matching fund requirements for some CCDF funding. CCDF funding
is of three types. Two types of funding, called mandatory spending and discretionary
spending, are 100% federal funds. The third type of funding, called matching funding,
requires that states maintain the level of child care spending in either FY1994 or FY1995.
This requirement is known at the maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement. States that
meet the MOE requirement are eligible for matching funding. To obtain this funding,
states must match federal expenditures at the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage
(FMAP) rate. In FY2002, states expended $989 million in general revenue to meet the
MOE. While in the early years of the CCDF program, all states met their MOE
requirements, by FY2002 eight states failed to meet the MOE requirement. The MOE
shortfall in FY2002 was $129 million. Further, many more states used Pre-K
expenditures to meet the MOE requirement in FY2002 than in the early years of the


5
  The numbers include TANF spending on child care subsidies. The numbers given do not include federal
funds used for Pre-K programs since we were unable to find any reporting of federal funding for Pre-K.


                                                                                                         8
CCDF program. States provided $898 million in matching funds in FY2002 and failed to
obligate $23 million in matching funds.
         We know that some states provide funds to the CCDF voucher program in excess
of their MOE and matching requirements either to ensure that all eligible families that
request a voucher receive one (e.g., Illinois, Rhode Island) or to increase the quality of
care purchased with CCDF vouchers. However, we only have information on the amount
of such state funding for seventeen states (Collin, et al., 2000). In FY 1999, these
seventeen states allocated both state general revenue and revenue from child protective
services to child care vouchers. In total these seventeen states allocated $858 million in
general revenue and $43 million in child protective service funding to the child care
voucher program.
        In 1996 when previous child care voucher programs were consolidated and all
direct voucher funding was passed to the states in a block grant, there was fear that there
would be a “race to the bottom.” We have not seen a race to the bottom, but rather a race
to the wings with some states failing to use all federal funding available to them and other
states providing substantial state funds to supplement the federal CCDF program.
        In addition to responding to federal initiatives in highly varying ways, states have
also developed their own Pre-Kindergarten (Pre-K) programs. In fact, the bulk of
spending on Pre-K comes from state and local governments, not from the federal
government. We have information on state expenditures on Pre-K programs that goes
back to the 1987-88 school year. In that year, twenty-three states reported spending
$202.6 million on Pre-K programs (Marx & Seligson, 1988). By the 2001-2002 school
year, thirty-seven states reported spending $2,435 million on Pre-K programs (Barnett, et
al., 2003). These numbers for state spending on Pre-K include some flow-through money
from federal sources. While we do not know exactly how much flow-through money is
included in reported state spending, the federal Department of Education estimated that,
in FY2002, approximately $200 million in federal education spending was spent on Pre-
K programs (http://www.ed.gov/programs/titleiparta/index.html).6
        Our best estimate is that in FY2002, state and federal spending on early care and
education was between $20 and $22 billion. Approximately 2/3 of this spending came
from the federal government. There is also substantial spending on ECE by some local
governments (e.g., Palm Beach, Broward & Miami-Dade Counties in Florida). However,
we do not know the total amount of local spending nationwide.



       As noted earlier, US early care and education policy is highly fragmented in terms
of funding, policies, regulations. To understand how this situation emerged, we briefly
review the history of federal and state ECE programs.




6
  Title 1 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) provides direct, formula based funds to
local schools with large numbers of poor children. In late 2001, only about 30% of schools used Title 1
funding for Pre-K programs, while 80% used state or local education funds for this purpose (Smith, et al.,
2003).


                                                                                                             9
        US governments have only shown sustained interest in early care and education
since the 1960s.7As part of the War on Poverty, the federal government established the
Head Start program, and state and local governments established Pre-Kindergarten (Pre-
K) programs.

Head Start Programs
        Head Start was designed to provide comprehensive services on a part-day (3 to 6
hours), part-year (generally the school year) basis to three- to five-year-old children
living in poverty (i.e., living in families with incomes below the Federal Poverty Level).
Head Start has never been funded to serve all eligible children. Even today, it serves less
than 40% of eligible children. Until the Good Start, Grow Smart initiative in 2002, Head
Start was seen mainly as a child development program and family intervention program.
It provides a wide array of service (e.g., medical and dental screenings) in addition to
ECE services.
        Traditionally most children in Head Start came from families that were either
current or former cash assistance recipients because of Head Start income limits and
because Head Start required active parental participation in the program. Consistent with
the civil rights movement’s distrust of some state governments, Head Start grants were
given directly to mainly non-governmental local groups such as anti-poverty programs
called Community Action Programs. In 2003 there were 19,200 Head Start Centers,
serving 909,608 children with an average cost per child of $7092. Of these centers, the
majority was community programs, and 115 centers were sponsored by faith-based
organizations.
        Both welfare reform and the Good Start, Grow Smart initiative of 2002 have
caused changes in Head Start. The decline in welfare caseloads after welfare reform
meant that Head Start now serves more working families and fewer TANF recipients. In
1997, 45% of Head Start families were receiving TANF. By 2001 only 24% of Head
Start families were TANF recipients.
        The Good Start, Grow Smart initiative seeks a number of changes in Head Start.
First, Head Start is to be subject to a new accountability system that will assess every
Head Start centers performance in developing literacy, language and numeracy skills.
Second, Head Start is being asked to align their activities with State K-12 standards.
Finally, Head Start is being asked to upgrade the education and training of its staff.
        Major changes in Head Start include the following. First, Head Start is now
serving greater numbers of younger children, including infants and toddlers, in the Early
Head Start program. In 1997, 61% of the children in Head Start were four years old. By
2001, only 54% of Head Start children were four-year-olds. Second, Head Start is now
either directly funded or obtaining funding from other sources (mainly CCDF vouchers
for wrap-around care) to provide full-day, full-year care to the growing number of
working families it serves. In 1997, 38% of Head Start families needed full-day, full-year
child care, while in 2001 49% of Head Start families required such care. In 1997, 9% of
Head Start families requiring full-day, full-year care received it at Head Start facilities
and an additional 4% of these families received full-day, full-year care using other public
subsidies, mainly child care vouchers for wrap-around care. In 2001, 41% of Head Start
7
 During World War II the federal government provided child care for an estimated 550,000 to 600,000
children so that their mothers could work to support the war effort.


                                                                                                      10
families requiring full-day, full-year care received it at Head Start facilities and an
additional 13% of these families received full-day, full-year care at providers other than
Head Start using other public subsidies, mainly child care vouchers for wrap-around care.
Finally, Head Start teachers have gradually become more educated. In 1997, 34% of
Head Start teachers had an associate degree or higher in ECE or a related field. By 2001,
41% of Head Start teachers had such degrees.
         While basic funding for Head Start comes from the federal government, grantees
are expected to provide 20% matching funds. Eighteen state governments help local
groups to meet the federal match requirement. Nine of these states (e.g., Ohio,
Minnesota) provide funds above the federal matching requirements to expand the number
of children served by Head Start (Education Commission of the States, 2004, Novak,
1999). Individual local organizations apply for funding, and grants are awarded by the
Department of Health and Human Services Regional Offices on a three-year basis. Each
year, funding is disbursed by the regional offices, but first the federal government
allocates money to the states based upon a formula which takes into account the number
of children from birth to age four who are living in families with incomes below the
poverty line in each state (Currie and Neidell, 2003).
        In a recent paper, Currie and Neidell (2003) found that poorer counties (counties
with a poverty rate greater than the national median, 11%) receive lower levels of Head
Start funding than richer counties. Since poor counties frequently have large
concentration of Black and Hispanic children, on average Black and Hispanic children
attend larger and more poorly funded Head Start Programs than white children (Currie
and Neidell, 2003).

Pre-K Programs
         While Head Start was a federal creation, Pre-K programs are state and local
creations serving mainly disadvantaged four year olds. States like California began Pre-K
programs in the mid 1960s, but the major expansion of Pre-K programs occurred in the
1990s. In 1988, 23 states had small Pre-k programs (Marx, and Seligson, 1988). All of
these states have expanded their programs, many markedly, since 1988. In addition, 17
states have established Pre-k programs since 1988. Since 1988, states have become more
flexible in regards to what types of organizations they will use to distribute money for
Pre-k programs. Pre-K programs also have increased the amount of money spent per
child. In 1988 the average money spent per child was between $700 and $1000; today,
the average spent per child is between $3000-$5000.
         States and local areas have created quite distinct program. In eight states (e.g.,
Louisiana, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin), Pre-K programs are provided only by the
publics schools. In seventeen states, funding flows to the public schools, but the school
may contract with other entities (e.g., private child care facilities, YWCAs, Head Start
programs) to provide Pre-K services. Sixteen states allow organizations other than the
public school both to receive Pre-K funding and to provide Pre-K services. One state
(Nevada) had all Pre-K services provided by a private entity (Classroom on Wheels of
Nevada). Whether publicly or privately provided, the major goal of most Pre-K programs
is to prepare poor children for school. While most Pre-K programs are targeted to
disadvantaged children, two states (Georgia and Oklahoma) make Pre-K services
available to all four year old children. New York is phasing in a universal Pre-K program.


                                                                                        11
         We have more comprehensive information on school-based Pre-K programs than
on programs outside the public schools. By FY 2000-2001, 35% of public elementary
schools offered either half-day or full school-day Pre-K programs. Nineteen percent of
schools offered half-day Pre-K (generally 3 hours) and 13% offered full school-day Pre-
K (generally six hours). Three percent of schools offered both half-day and full school-
day programs. See Smith, et al. (2003) for details.
         Interestingly, public-school based Pre-K (particularly full-day Pre-K) is far more
likely to be available in the Southeast than in other parts of the country. Thirty-six
percent of public schools in the Southeast offered full school-day Pre-K programs in
FY2000-2001, while only 4% of public schools offered Pre-K programs in the central
area of the country. A similar pattern of availability is found for public kindergarten
programs. Eighty-four percent of public schools in the southeast offer full school-day
kindergarten, while only 37% of public schools in the Northeast make full school-day
kindergarten available.8
         States using private entities to provide Pre-K services have widely varying
programs. We describe four examples of the programs. Trowbridge and Witte (2004b)
provide a description of all Pre-K programs currently operating or planned.
         Massachusetts’ Pre-K program, the Community Partnerships for Children, is run
by local councils. These councils have representatives from the public schools, Head
Start, and the CCDF child care voucher program. Funding comes from federal (e.g.,
TANF transfers), state, and local sources. Services are provided for children ages three to
five living in families with incomes up to 125% of state median income. Preference is
given to low-income families on the waiting list for child care vouchers. At least 1/3 of
services provided must operate full-day, full-year and participating programs must be
accredited.
        Georgia offers free pre-kindergarten to all four-year olds in the state through a
lottery-funded program administered by an independent state agency (the Office of
School Readiness). Participation is voluntary, and slightly less than 60% of children
participate in the program. Funding and policy decisions are made at the state level.
Public and private child care and preschool providers are eligible to receive state
payments for every enrolled four year old, if they agree to use one of several approved
curricula and meet other state standards. Programs are required to operate 6.5 hours a
day, five days a week, 180 days of the year.
         New Jersey’s Early Childhood Program Aid provides funding to 128 districts in
which at least 20% of students are low income. This funding ensures that kindergarten is
extended to a full school-day for all five year olds, and half-day preschool is offered to all
resident three and four year olds. Services must be offered five days a week for the entire
school year. In 1999 about 44,186 children were served in the targeted districts, whose
children account for about 40% of the state’s children. Funding decisions for districts are
made at the state level, based on a modified K-12 enrollment and poverty level formula.
The program is intended to foster collaboration with local child care providers, and public




8
 Note the data for kindergarten are for the AY1998-1999. These are the latest data available. See Watson
and West (2004).


                                                                                                       12
school districts may provide preschool directly and/or may contract with Head Start,
licensed private nonprofit agencies, and licensed child care centers.9
        The Texas Pre-Kindergarten Program is unique in that it is the only state pre-
kindergarten program that requires a school district to provide a Pre-K program if 15
“educationally disadvantaged” four year olds reside in the district. “Educationally
disadvantaged” refers to children whose families are low-income, unable to speak
English, or homeless. In 1999, 13,411 three year olds and 125,018 four year olds were
served. Funding is done through the Foundation School Program (regular education aid)
with each district claiming reimbursement for its Pre-K program based on the average
daily attendance of enrolled children. The Pre-K programs can be operated only by
school districts and within public school facilities, although subcontracting is permitted.
Pre-K programs must meet at least three hours a day for the full school year and be taught
by a certified teacher.10

CCDF Child Care Subsidy Program
        The federal government established a child care voucher program as part of
welfare reform, which began in the late 1980s. The Family Support Act of 1988 provided
active AFDC recipients (i.e., those working or engaged in other approved activities such
as the JOBS program) and working former recipients during their first year off welfare
with an entitlement to child care vouchers for children less than age 13. Child care
vouchers were expanded to include low-income families without recent AFDC receipt by
the 1990 Omnibus Reconciliation Act. This Act created the At-Risk Child Care Program
to provide child care vouchers to low-income families who were at risk of becoming cash
assistance recipients. The At-Risk Child Care Program was funded by the Child Care
Development Block Grant (CCDBG). CCDBG also provided states with funds to
undertake activities to improve the quality and supply of child care for all families. Child
care vouchers funded under these and subsequent programs were seen primarily as a
support that allowed low-income single parents to work.
        Impatient with the pace at which welfare reform proceeded in the early 1990s,
Congress passed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) in 1996. This Act changed many social welfare programs, most radically the
AFDC program. The Act also called for dramatic changes in the child care voucher
program. The funding stream for vouchers was renamed the Child Care Development
Fund (CCDF).11 The program was seen as an important element in allowing cash
assistance recipients to achieve financial independence. Funding for child care vouchers
was increased dramatically and consolidated into a single block grant to the states. The
entitlement to child care under the Family Support Act was abolished and states were
given substantial latitude to develop programs that best suited their particular
circumstances.
        Because of the substantial changes in the economic and political milieu from the
1960s to the late 1980s, the child care subsidy program developed very differently than

9
   See http://www.state.nj.us/njded/genfo/toc.htm for more information regarding pre-kindergarten
programs in New Jersey.
10
    See http://www.tea.state.tx.us/curriculum/ece.html for further information.
11
   Although vouchers are now said to be funded by Care Development Fund, the block grant to the states is
still called the Child Care Development Block Grant.


                                                                                                       13
the Head Start that began in the 1960s. While direct federal grants to provide services
were central to the Head Start, the federal child care subsidy program is a block grant to
states mainly to provide child care vouchers. Under the child care subsidy program,
parents are given vouchers that they can use to purchase ECE from licensed formal
providers (e.g., centers and family child care homes) or from informal sources (e.g.,
family and friends) that can pass minimal screening requirements (e.g., criminal record
checks). Most vouchers are used to purchase formal care. For example, in FY2000, 74%
of children receiving child care vouchers were cared for in regulated settings (i.e., centers
and family child care homes), with 58% being cared for in child care centers (Child Care
Bureau, 2003).
          Child care centers in the US are overwhelmingly run by non-governmental
entities. These entities have differing goals, different funding sources and often run quite
different types of programs. In 1990, the latest period for which national data are
available, about 10% of child care centers were public, and 90% were private. Of the
private centers, two thirds were nonprofit and one third was for profit. Among the
nonprofit centers, 25% were independent nonprofits, 15% were sponsored by a religious
organization, 8% were run by large nonprofit organizations (e.g., the YWCA), 8% were
public schools and 9% were Head Start providers. Within the for-profit sector, 6% of
centers were part of child care chains and 29% were independent entities (Willer,
Hofferth & Kisker, 1991). Family day care is almost all private (OECD, 2004b).
         Beginning in the late 1990s, state child care voucher programs began to evolve
quite differently. During the early years of CCDF, states tended to retain separate child
care voucher programs for current and former cash assistance recipients and other low-
income families. Even today many states give priority for child care vouchers to active
cash assistance recipients and to former cash assistance recipients during their first year
off cash assistance (e.g., Florida, Massachusetts). Other low-income families are placed
on waiting lists for child care vouchers. By way of contrast other states provide vouchers
to all eligible applicants and have consolidated their child care voucher program for
current and former cash assistance recipients and other low-income families (e.g.,
Illinois, Rhode Island). States also vary widely in both the level and definition of income
used to determine eligibility, the level of parental co-payments, the proportion of
providers that accept child care vouchers and the type of care purchased with vouchers.
Some states have devolved most policy making and administration of the voucher
programs to local governments (e.g., Florida, Texas) while other states retain state-run
programs (e.g., Illinois and Massachusetts). See Loprest, et al. (2000) for a more detailed
description of the operation of the CCDF block grant and Collins, et al., (2000) for a
more detailed examination of differences across state programs.


        While federal government funding for early care and education has come from
general revenue, state and local governments have used a wide array of revenue raising
and revenue enhancing methods to increase funding for early care and education. The
methods include taxes, fees, lotteries and gaming, and partnering with the private sector,
philanthropy or local community groups. We will describe, in turn, important examples
of each of these methods of increasing funding for early care and education. Mitchell, et
al. (2001) provides a detailed account of financing methods.


                                                                                          14
Taxes
        States have used general revenue, income tax check offs, sales tax revenue and
excise tax revenue to increase funding for early care and education. The vast majority of
states use general revenue to provide Pre-K services. Typically, states put a separate line
item in the budget for Pre-K, have Pre-K as a line item in the education budget or embed
Pre-K in the state education aid formula. Some states such as Rhode Island substantially
supplement federal CCDF child care voucher funds with state general revenue. Many
other states (e.g., Minnesota, Ohio) substantially supplement federal Head Start funding
with general revenue.
        State taxation earmarked for early care and education is used frequently, with sin
taxes being particularly popular sources of earmarked revenue. Two states (Arkansas and
South Carolina) have increased state sales taxes to fund Pre-K programs. Arkansas placed
a surtax on beer to fund preschool and California passed Proposition 10, which placed a
tax on tobacco to fund universal Pre-K in a number of counties.
        Local governments also have raised taxes to support early care and education. For
example, Florida allows counties to set up children services districts to fund programs for
children of all ages. In ten Florida Counties the children services districts are funded by
the general revenue of the county, while districts in eight counties (Broward,
Hillsborough, Martin, Miami-Dade, Okeechobee, Palm Beach, Pinellas and St. Lucie)
have independent taxing authority. The districts with independent taxing authority
typically levy an add-on to the property tax. For example, Pinellas County levies $1 per
$1000 of assessed valuation for children’s programs, and Palm Beach County levies $.47
per $1000 of assessed valuation.

Fees
        A number of states and municipalities have fees that are used for child care. Some
fees are imposed and others are voluntary. Whether imposed or voluntary, fees have not
been a major source of revenue for child care. For example, Santa Cruz, CA Child Care
Developer Fee Loan Program requires that new developments make payments to offset
the increase in child care costs that they impose on the County. These funds are used to
provide loans or grants to child care providers. However, the annual loan volume is
generally less than $100,000. Kentucky allows any person registering or reregistering
their vehicle to donate $1 to the Motor Vehicle Child Care Assistance Account. This
account is used to provide child care assistance to low-income families that have incomes
just exceeding the limit for CCDF child care subsidies. Donations have not exceeded
$50,000 and are usually far less.

Lotteries and Gaming
        The “voluntary” taxes associated with gambling have been an important source of
state child care funding for some states. For example, Georgia funds its voluntary,
universal Pre-K program with lottery dollars ($224 million in FY2000). Missouri funds
its Early Childhood Development, Education and Care Fund (ECDEC) with riverboat
gambling fees. ECDEC fund appropriations were approximately $21 million in FY 1999-
2000.




                                                                                        15
Public Partnerships
        The most successful examples of the public sector partnering with private sector
organizations, including for-profit employers, have occurred in the southeast. We will
highlight two quite different programs, one in North Carolina and one in Florida.
        North Carolina (NC) has had by far the most successful public-private
partnerships for early care and education. Two successful public-private partnerships for
early care and education, Smart Start and T.E.A.C.H, have operated in North Carolina
since the early 1990s. With support from national foundations, North Carolina’s Smart
Start and T.E.A.C.H programs have expanded to many other states.12

        Smart Start, passed by the NC Legislature in 1993, is a comprehensive initiative
to make early care and education services available to all children under age 6 whose
families need and want such services. An amendment passed in 1995 required that the
local, private, not-for-profit boards that administer Smart Start raise a 10% match for
state funding. At least half of the matching funds must be in cash, not in kind.
        State funding for Smart Start was $192 million in state FY2004. The state and
local Smart Start programs raised over $200 million from the private sector since its
founding.13

         Florida passed the Child Care Partnership Act as part of its 1996 welfare reform.
The Act was designed to encourage businesses to pay a portion of the cost of child care
for their employees who earn low wages. The Act created a nine-member Executive
Partnership composed of corporate leaders that established specific guidelines and
eligibility criteria for the program.
         Under the Partnership, the state matches $1 for $1 employer contributions to
provide child care vouchers for their low-income employees. The combined state and
employer funds are placed in a purchasing pool administered by the same local child care
agency that administers child care voucher program. Employees earning less than 200%
of the FPL are eligible to use funds from the pool.
         During the first year of the program, the state contributed $2 million to purchasing
pools. In FY 2003-2004, the state contributed $19 million.
         A study documenting which companies employed large numbers of child care
voucher recipients helped martial business support for the Child Care Partnership Act
(Lee, Ohlandt & Witte, 1996). The study has been replicated in a number of other states
and the District of Columbia; however, to date, no other state has passed a bill
comparable to Florida’s Child Care Partnership Act.14
         This might suggest that there is limited opportunity to have employers directly
bear some of the child care costs of their employees. However, in the Netherlands,



12
   See http://www.smartstart-nc.org/national/states.htm for a list of states and communities
implementing Smart Start and http://www.childcareservices.org/TEACH/T.E.A.C.H.-TA-
Center.htm for a list of states implementing T.E.A.C.H.
13
   See http://www.smartstart-nc.org/overview/donors.htm for a list of donors.
14
   See http://www.hhs.oregonstate.edu/familypolicy/occrp/publications/2001-Parents-Receiving-ChildCare-
Subsidies.pdf for a description of the studies carried out.


                                                                                                    16
employers have for many years borne approximately 1/3 of the costs of child care for
their employees.

          !" #
        As should be clear from the write up above, the current early care and education
system in the US has grown by increment. Today’s “system” is a hodgepodge of different
federal, state and local programs. In this section, we will consider: (1) the goals and
structure of US early care and education programs, (2) the costs of having three distinct
ECE programs, (3) consolidation or coordination of different programs, (3) equality of
access and (4) the effectiveness of early care and education programs.

Goals of Early Care and Education
        Unlike early care and education (ECE) in Western European countries, US ECE
is neither a cohesive system nor universal, even for disadvantaged children. US ECE is a
conglomeration of programs established across the last 40 years with different funding
sources, different standards, different structures and, until recently, different goals.
Expenditure programs established during the 1960s (e.g., Head Start and Pre-K
established prior to the 1990s) were targeted at low-income children. These programs
focused mainly on the child. Head Start sought comprehensive child development, while
Pre-K generally sought to prepare disadvantaged children for school.
        Programs established in connection with the reform of welfare in the 1980s and
1990s provided child care subsidies so that poor, single parents could work. They were
seen primarily as work supports and were focused more on the parents than on the
children.
        In the mid to late 1990s, three states (Georgia, New York and Oklahoma)
established universal Pre-K programs to prepare children for school and to further the
testing goals of the elementary and secondary schools reform movement. These programs
come closer to the European model, but services are only available during the school day
for a single year, while cohesive European programs are often available all day for three
years.
        We will consider and provide information on two major issues regarding the goals
of early care and education that governments have addressed. First, will US early care
and education be targeted or will it be universal? Second, what relative weight will US
governments place on child development, school readiness and providing child care so
that parents can work?
                        %
        Today most US early care and education funding is targeted rather than universal.
Georgia and Oklahoma currently offer universal access to one year Pre-K programs and
New York is phasing in a one-year universal Pre-K program. There is strong advocacy
for universal Pre-K programs in a number of other states. In Florida, this advocacy led to
the passage of a constitutional amendment in 2000 that states:

       Every four-year-old child in Florida shall be provided by the State with a high
       quality pre-kindergarten learning opportunity in the form of an early childhood
       development and education program which shall be voluntary, high quality, free
       and delivered according to professionally accepted standards.


                                                                                       17
        The Florida Legislature hurriedly passed a bill “implementing” this amendment
during its 2003-2004 session. The bill seems to have pleased no one and makes no
provisions for funding the programs established. The bill calls for a three-hour-a-day
program beginning in September 2005 that has minimal quality requirements. Since
Florida’s overcrowded elementary schools have no room to house the new program,
services are to be provided by child care centers that currently serve children with child
care vouchers. These centers are of markedly varying quality. The bill asked the
Governor to figure out how to fund the programs and report back to the Legislature. The
Governor vetoed the bill.
        The situation in Florida points out the major difficulty in establishing high
quality, universal Pre-K programs. High quality, universal programs are very expensive
and, as the National Governor’s Association and the National Association of State
Budget Officers have pointed out, state finances remain “fragile”, even in a recovering
economy (National Governors Association and National Association of State Budget
Offices, 2004).
        Further, the push for universal Pre-K has not come to grips with the fact that
many states do not have universal kindergarten. Only nine states (Alabama, Arkansas,
Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and West
Virginia) currently require that districts offer full school-day (generally six hours)
kindergarten (Education Commission of the States, 2003). Nine states (Alaska, Colorado,
Idaho, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Pennsylvania and
Washington) do not require that school districts offer any kindergarten. Total enrollment
in kindergarten peaked in 1992 at 4 million and declined to 3.7 million in 2001;
correspondingly, the percent of four to six year olds in kindergarten has declined from
35.4% in 1992 to 31.2% in 2001 (Wirt, et al., 2004).
                      .                                            ,
        Both the European and US literature agree that the goal of early care and
education programs should encompass: (1) providing work supports for parents, (2)
providing situations conducive to the cognitive, social-emotional and physical
development of children and (3) preparing children to enter elementary school (Boocock,
1995; Bowman, et al., 2000). While a number of cohesive European programs achieve
all three of these goals, the US has established separate programs to concentrate on child
development and school readiness (Head Start and Pre-K), and to provide child care
while parents work (the child care voucher program).
        In his 2002 State of the Union address, President Bush highlighted the importance
of ECE to his education reform plan, No Child Left Behind. Under his Good Start, Grow
Smart initiative, Head Start was asked to concentrate on preparing children to read and
succeed in school. Head Start is to be evaluated on how well they achieved these goals.
States were asked to try to better coordinate ECE programs. The initiative did not speak
to the need to provide care while low-income parents work.

Costs of Multiple Programs
       The separately operating Head Start, Pre-K and child care voucher program are
administratively costly, impose high transaction costs on parents (e.g., each program has
its own eligibility requirements and application procedures) and fail to provide stable


                                                                                       18
early care and education for children. While there has been much discussion of the high
administrative costs and high transaction costs of the current US ECE system, there has
been less discussion of the implications of the systems for the stability of care received
by children.
        Consider a not unlikely scenario for a new single mother who receives cash
assistance under the Transitional Aid to Needy Families (TANF) program in Florida. In
order to continue to receive TANF benefits, the mother must go to work or participates in
other approved activities when her child is three months old. She uses a child care
voucher to help her pay for center care of her three-month-old child. The job, the voucher
and the child care arrangement last six to nine months. The mother returns to work when
her child is twelve months old. Her earnings make her ineligible for TANF. She has a
child care voucher for a year and places her one-year old in center care. The center, like
most centers in the US, has a 40 percent annual turnover rate for staff; so, the child may
well have more than one caregiver during the year. Further, the child’s caregiver is likely
to have limited education or experience in ECE. The mother continues to work, but loses
her child care voucher. She pays a neighbor to take care of her two-year old while she
works. After a year, the neighbor moves and the mother places her now three-year-old
child in a family child care home. When the child turns four, she is eligible for Pre-K.
The Pre-K program will operate either three or six hours per day. The mother enrolls the
child in Pre-K and has a neighbor pick up the child after Pre-K ends. When the child is
five, she goes to kindergarten at the local public school for six hours per day. A different
neighbor picks the child up at the end of the kindergarten day. By the time the child
enters elementary school, the child will have had nine different care settings and perhaps
twelve or thirteen different caregivers. She will have had two years of part-day, part-year
early care and education.
        Contrast this with a not unlikely scenario in a Western European country. The
new, single mother will receive a ten-month paid, parental leave after the birth of her
child. She will have the choice of receiving payments until the child is three and staying
home or placing her child in a government provided early care and education program.
The child will transfer to the ECE education system when she is three and will remain in
the system until she goes to elementary school. By the time the child enters elementary
school, the child will have had two or three different care settings and probably less than
six different care givers. She will have had at least three years of full-day, full-year early
care and education.

Consolidation or Coordination
        Since at least the mid 1990s, Federal, state and local governments have made
attempts to coordinate early care and education programs, rather than push for
consolidation of ECE. However, most efforts at coordination have come recently,
particularly in connections with the recent recession. Unfortunately, these efforts have
not been successful by and large, with existing programs often spending more energy
protecting their own turf than coordinating their activities. See Groginsky (2002) and
Schumacher, et al. (2001) for details.
        In its 2001 survey of the states, the National Conference of State Legislatures
found that 21 states required a state entity to facilitate coordination or collaboration
among programs, agencies, policies or funding for early care and education (Groginsky,


                                                                                           19
2002). The Center for Law and Social Policy chose to highlight the coordination efforts
of three states (Georgia, Massachusetts and Ohio). While we cannot speak authoritatively
about the coordination efforts of Georgia and Ohio, we can speak about coordination
efforts in Massachusetts.
         Massachusetts is more successful in using CCDF vouchers to provide “wrap-
around” care for children in Head Start programs than many other states. The wrap-
around care provides care after the Head Start program ends and allows the combined
CCDF voucher and Head Start program to provide support to parents that work full time.
         The Commonwealth also requires that at least 1/3 of the children in its Pre-K
program - the Community Partnership for Children (CPC) - receive full-day, full-year
services. This is a far higher proportion of full-day, full-year care than is available in
most state Pre-K programs. For example, Georgia’s Pre-K program only requires a
minimum duration of 6.5 hours for a five day week, 180 days a year. It sets no
requirement for full-day, full-year care.
          In spite of being in the forefront of coordination efforts, the Massachusetts
legislature was sufficiently dissatisfied with the level of coordination in the
Commonwealth that it set up the Council on Early Care and Education in 2003 to report
back to the legislature on how to improve coordination of early care and education
programs. The Council, run by the state Department of Education (the CPC program), the
Department of Health (early intervention services) and the Office of Child Care Services
(CCDF funded child care vouchers), released its report in March 2004 (Department of
Education, Department of Public Health and Office of Child Care Services, 2004). The
report called for “bold action to coordinate services and resources, streamline
administrative procedures, and reduce fragmentation in Massachusetts’ early education
and care policies and programs” (Department of Education, Department of Public Health
and Office of Child Care Services, 2004, cover letter). The report provides many
examples of the lack of coordination (e.g., different payments to providers for care under
CCDF program and the CPC program, different application procedures, different sets of
performance standards). At a number of points, the report talks about the need to
coordinate efforts with Head Start. However, given the current structure of Head Start,
neither the Commonwealth nor any other state is in a position to require Head Start
programs to coordinate with state Pre-K programs or with the CCDF subsidy program.
         In a recent paper, Edie, et al. (2004) describe seven possible models for a
coordinated US early care and education system. The models are: (1) an expanded Head
Start model, (2) a Pre-Kindergarten collaboration model, (3) a “School of the 21st
Century” Model, (4) a system based on the military model, (5) a “Smart Start” model, (6)
an enhanced CCDF child care voucher model and (7) a “Ready to Teach” model. We
briefly describe the Schools of the 21st Century model and the Military model here since
they are not broadly known.
         The Schools of the 21st Century model would use the public schools as a base to
provide year around early care and education services for children ages three to five and
after-school and vacation care for children ages five to 12 (Zigler, Finn-Stevenson &
Marsland, 1995). While this model is comprehensive and could provide more stable care
settings, it builds on the public schools, which have seen increasing criticism. However,




                                                                                       20
this model does have some evidence of short-term effectiveness in preparing children for
school and providing work supports for parents.15
        The Military Model is based on the early care and education program developed
by the US military. Except for personnel matters and funding, the military system
operates somewhat like the child care voucher program. Military families needing child
care receive vouchers and go to a resource and referral agency which provides
information on the child care options available (centers, family child care homes, before-
and after-school programs). The military rigorously enforces minimum standards in its
800 centers and 9000 family child care homes operated by military spouses or family
members. The military provides half of all ECE costs directly with the other half of costs
being split between the military and low-income military families. Ongoing training is
required of all teachers/caregivers. There is a well defined career ladder with increased
compensation upon completion of each level of training and evidence of demonstrated
competence.

Equality of Access
        The US system of early care and education does not provide access to early care
and education that is either horizontally or vertically equitable. As far as vertical equity is
concerned, the OECD estimates that only 45% of three- to five-year-old children in the
US living in low-income families are enrolled in preschool, while 75% of three to five
year olds in higher income families are enrolled (OECD, 2004b).
        Due to poor coordination and under funding, ECE programs for low-income
children are also horizontally inequitable. Subsidized care opportunities for children less
than four are generally limited to child care vouchers. Four year olds living in families
with incomes below the FPL are eligible for Head Start, Pre-K and child care vouchers.
However, because almost all of these programs are under-funded, only some of these
children will actually receive subsidized ECE.
        Fewer than one in four children eligible for CCDF vouchers will actually receive
vouchers. Parents that receive vouchers will pay anywhere from $0 to 10%-20% of their
gross income for the CCDF subsidized care. Caregivers are likely to have limited
education and ECE experience.
        Less than 40% of eligible four year old children will receive comprehensive
services (including health and dental care) from Head Start for part of the day, part of the
year. The parents of these children will pay nothing for the services their children receive.
Head Start caregivers are likely to have a Child Development Associate (CDA)
credential, which generally requires about a year of post high school education, or and
A.A. degree.
        Other four year olds will be in Pre-K programs that run from 3 to 6 hours a day.
The programs will often be staffed by qualified teachers and will aim to prepare the
children for school. The parents will pay nothing for the Pre-K program.




15
     See www.yale.edu/bushcenter/21C/research.html.



                                                                                            21
Effectiveness of Early Care & Education Programs
         The major ECE programs in the US have rarely been subjected to rigorous
evaluation. When Head Start was last reauthorized in 1998, Congress ordered a random-
assignment evaluation of the impacts of Head Start. The results of this evaluation are not
yet available.
         The existing literature on Head Start is mixed. In some situations and for some
students, Head Start has significantly positive effects at least in the short term. Head
Start’s part-day, part year program costs approximately $7,000 per child. See Haskin and
Sawhill (2003) for a recent survey of the Head Start literature or Schweinhart (2001) for a
somewhat older but more detailed survey.
         The evaluation research on the impacts of Pre-K programs is more limited than
the research on Head Start. Gilliam and Zigler (2000) provide a thorough survey of the
literature through 1998 and Schweinhart (2001) provides a briefer review of the literature
through 2000. Gilliam and Zigler conclude that the evaluations of Pre-K programs
provide modest support for positive program effects on children’s developmental
performance, school performance and attendance, and reduced percentages of children
held back a grade.
         More recently Gormley & Gayer (2003) provide a strong quasi-experimental
evaluation of Oklahoma’s universal Pre-K program and Henry, et al. (2003) provide a
comprehensive evaluation of Georgia’s Pre-K program. Both evaluations provide
evidence of significant positive effects through the beginning of kindergarten. These two
evaluations are quite different. While the Oklahoma study compares results for students
who attended Pre-K with those who did not, the Georgia study compares the results for
children that attended its Pre-K program with results for children that attended Head Start
and for children that attended private preschool. The Georgia study finds that the Georgia
Pre-K program more effectively prepared children for school than either Head Start or
private preschools. The study attributes Pre-K’s better results to better teacher quality, a
strong focus on preparing children for school and frequent feedback and monitoring. The
Georgia study also finds substantial learning loss in the period between Pre-K and
kindergarten, particularly for Afro-American children.
         A recent paper (Magnuson, et al., 2004), uses data from the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study and finds that typical Pre-K programs increase reading and
mathematics skills at school entry, but they reduce self control and increase behavioral
problems. The positive effects on skills dissipate by the end of the first grade, but the
behavioral problems continue. The largest and most lasting effects are found for
disadvantaged children and for those attending schools with low levels of academic
instruction.
         Child care vouchers have been around for a shorter period of time than either Pre-
K or Head Start. Further, the programs vary substantially not only across states but within
states. See Child Care Bureau (2003) for details. The majority of care is provided in child
care centers (57% in FY2000) or family child care homes (29%). The majority of care is
full-time (8 to 10 hours per day), but the average duration of care is short, generally less
than six months (Myers, et al., 2002). Annual expenditure per child served in 1999
ranged from $2321 in Virginia to $5913 in Minnesota (Witte and Queralt, 2002).
         To date there have been few evaluations of the impacts of CCDF vouchers.
Further, until recently child care vouchers were seen primarily as a work support and,


                                                                                         22
consequently, existing evaluations tend to assess impacts on parental work or welfare
receipt rather than child outcomes. Witte and Queralt (2003) find that the combined effect
of Rhode Island’s reform of its cash assistance and child care voucher programs was to
almost triple the probability that current and former cash assistance recipients would
work 20 or more hours per week and approximately to cut in half the probability that a
single mother would be on cash assistance and neither working nor in some other
approved activity. The impact of North Carolina’s Smart Start program, a state-enhanced
version of CCDF subsidies, on children has been evaluated using a quasi-experimental
design. The latest report (Bryant, et al., 2003) indicates that Smart Start significantly
improved the quality of child care providers. Further, the report indicates that children in
higher quality centers scored significantly higher on measures of skills and abilities
deemed important for success in kindergarten than children from lower-quality centers.
        In 2001, the Child Care Bureau funded a project to evaluate the impacts of
different child care voucher strategies, using four random assignment experiments. To
date, only one experiment is underway. This experiment is testing the impact on school
readiness of using different curricula for subsidized children in child care centers. The
experiment is being carried out in Miami-Dade County, Florida. Preliminary results of
the project should be available in 2005.16
        The overall conclusion of the literature is that the large scale ECE programs in the
US have had, at best, short term positive impacts on the children that participated in the
programs. However, rigorous evaluations of smaller scale, more intensive and more
expensive programs show more positive and longer term impacts. See Table 6 of
Carneiro and Heckman (2003) for descriptions of the programs. The two most cited of
these studies are the experimental evaluations of the High Scope/Perry Preschool
program and the Carolina Abecedarian program. We will briefly describe and assess the
results of these evaluations.
        The High Scope/Perry Preschool program operated from 1962 until 1967 in
Ypsilanti Michigan. The program provided weekly home visits with parents and
intensive, high quality preschool services for one to two years to low-income children
with average IQs of 80. The program was evaluated using a random assignment
experiment that followed participants through age 27. For almost three decades, the study
followed the lives of 123 children from African American families who lived in the
neighborhood of the Perry Elementary School in Ypsilanti, Michigan from 1962-1967.
The median percentage of missing cases in each year that the survey was administered
was only 4.9% (Schweinhart, Barnes & Weikart, 1993). The internal validity of this
study isn’t questioned, but our ability to make generalizations outside of the experimental
group is limited due to the small sample size and the non-random nature of the sample.
        In 1990 dollars, the average cost per child of the High Scope program was
$13,400 ($15,844 in $2002). Evaluation results indicate that the experimental group had
significantly fewer special education placements and significantly higher graduation rates
than the control group. Further, experimental group members had significantly higher
earnings, higher percentages of home ownership and second car ownership at age 27,
higher levels of schooling completed, lower percentages receiving social services at some
time in the previous 10 years, and lower arrest rates than control group members.
16
     See http://www.mdrc.org/project_16_38.html for a brief description of the project.



                                                                                          23
Measured through age 27, the program returned $5.70 for every dollar spent. A
substantial fraction (65%) of the returns to the program is attributable to reductions in
criminal activity. The experimental group averaged significantly fewer lifetime arrests
(2.3 v. 4.6) and significantly fewer undropped misdemeanor cases, and fewer months on
probation or parole. Such large scale criminal justice impacts can only be expected in
high crime areas like the area served by the Perry Preschool. Recently, Rolnick (2004)
has estimated that the average real rate of return to the project was 4% to the individuals
involved and 12% to the public. See Schweinhart, Barnes & Weikart (1993) for details
about the program.
        The Carolina Abecedarian program operated from 1972 to 1985 in Chapel Hill,
North Carolina. The program provided intensive full-day, year-round services to children
from infancy to five years of age in low-income families. The program was evaluated
using a random assignment experiment that followed 112 participants, mostly of Afro-
American descent, through age 21. In 2002 dollars, the average cost per child of the
experiment was $67,225. The experimental group had significantly higher IQs than the
control group through age 12. Significant increases in reading and mathematics scores
continued until age 21. The experimental group also was significantly less likely to be
retained in grades or to receive special education placement than the control group.
Further, experimental group members were significantly more likely to attend college by
age 21 than were control group members (36% of experimental group members attended
college v. 13% of control group members). The program did not have a significant impact
on number of arrests, possible because Chapel Hill is not a high crime area.
        Mass and Barnett (2002) have carried out a benefit-cost analysis of the
Abecedarian program. Their analysis estimates most benefits, given that many things
such as earnings of participants were not followed. They conclude that overall, including
all estimated benefits, the return to the program is no less than 3% and may be higher
than 7%. They also estimate that the return to the public (excluding participants) is -3%.
That is, most of the gains from the program accrue to program participants.
        Taken as a whole, the US evaluation literature provides some support for
intensive preschool programs (i.e., programs lasting two years or more that are full-day
and full year) providing significant, long term net benefits.
                                                              %
        Evaluations of European ECE programs rely on random assignment experiments
much less than US evaluations, possibly because European ECE tends to be universal and
random assignment raises ethical issues. Overall, evaluations of high quality, well
integrated, universal European ECE programs conclude: (1) there is no strong or
consistent evidence that the form (pedagogic approach, daily schedule, or setting) of
universal, high quality, stable programs influences long-term outcomes for children, (2)
ECE programs have stronger effects on more disadvantaged students, (3) European-style
ECE programs can narrow the achievement gaps faced by disadvantaged children, though
most of these effects tend to diminish over time and (4) maternal employment and out of
home care in universal, high quality, stable, full-day, full-year programs after the first
year appear to yield benefits to both the child and the mother. See Boobock (1995),
Waldfogel (2001) and Groot, et al. (2004) for details.

      Cleveland and Krashinsky (1998) make a convincing case that in Canada a
comprehensive public program, providing relatively high quality, licensed, full-day, full-


                                                                                        24
year child care to all children aged two to five years with working parents and enriched
nursery school for children cared for by their parents at home can provide benefits
approximately twice the costs. The system that Cleveland and Krashinsky evaluate costs
approximately $8500 (1998 Canadian $) for full-day, full-year care. Under the system,
caregivers would be paid about $30,000 and fringe benefits would add 20% to costs; so,
the total cost per caregiver would be $36,000. This amount far exceeds the average pay of
the typical child care worker in the US, but it is substantially less then the pay of the
typical public school teacher. In carrying out their analysis, Cleveland and Krashinsky
estimate both static and dynamic benefits for parents and children.

                                   $
         Recent economic research suggests that there is a high return to early care and
education (ECE) and a much lower return to compensatory interventions later in the life-
cycle. This research also highlights the importance of both cognitive and non-cognitive
skills that are formed early in the life cycle for educational achievement, earnings and
other dimensions of socioeconomic success (Carneiro & Heckman, 2003).
         Most European governments have universal, consolidated, education-based ECE
programs that are available from early in the morning to late in the evening throughout
the year. European ECE programs are uniformly of high quality, generally last at least
three years, and are funded to serve all children. European programs yield benefits to
both the mother and the child. They also narrow the achievement gap faced by
disadvantaged children, though most of these effects tend to diminish over time.
         The US ECE system is composed of three separate programs (Head Start, Pre-
Kindergarten and the child care voucher program) targeted to low-income children. With
a few notable exceptions, US ECE programs are funded to serve less than half of the
eligible children. US ECE programs developed quite separately. They have different
goals, different funding sources, different administrations and policies, and generally last
for an academic year or less. Pre-K and Head Start operate only 3 to 6 hours a day and
are open only during the academic year. The average quality of US ECE programs is
generally much lower than the average quality of European ECE programs. Further, the
quality of US ECE programs varies widely even within local areas. Although the US has
greatly increased expenditures on ECE, US governments pay only 40% of the costs of
ECE, while European governments pay 70% to 90% of the costs of ECE. None of the
major US ECE programs simultaneously provides work supports for parents, child
development opportunities for children, and low-income children with the cognitive and
non-cognitive skills needed for success in school.
         The evidence suggests that the US ECE system is neither efficient nor equitable.
Consolidation of funding and administration of current US ECE programs could
substantially lower transaction costs for parents and provide more stable care
arrangements for children. Increased funding could improve the quality of existing
programs, extend hours and months of operation, and make care available to all eligible
families. Both the evaluation literature and the European experience suggest that such a
consolidated, well-funded system could be successful in preparing poor children for
school. Further, the benefits of such a program could well exceed the costs since it is
precisely low-income children that benefit most from stable, high-quality ECE. However,
such a targeted program will have neither the positive peer group effects nor the social-


                                                                                         25
integration benefits of universal ECE programs. Further, and perhaps more importantly,
targeted programs are likely to have less broad-based popular support than universal
programs.




                                                                                     26
Administration for Children and Families. (2003). TANF Financial Data. Available at:
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/index.html. Accessed: 6/04.

Altshuler, R. & Schwartz, A. (1996). On The Progressivity Of The Child Care Tax
Credit: Snapshot versus Time-exposure Incidence, National Tax Journal, 49, 55-71.

Barnett, S., Bobin, K., Hustedt, T. & Schulman, K. (2003). The State of Preschool.
Rutgers, NJ: National Institute for Early Education Research.

Boocock, S. (1995). Early Childhood Programs In Other Nations: Goals And Outcomes,
The Future of Children, 5, 94-114.

Bowman, B., Donovan, M. & Burns, M. (eds.). 2000. Eager to Learn: Educating Our
Preschoolers. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Bryant, D., Maxwell, K, Taylor, K, Poe, M., Peisner-Feinberg, E. and Bernier, K. (2003).
Smart Start and Preschool Child Care Quality in NC: Change over Time and Relation to
Children’s Readiness.

Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs. (2001). Norway; Key Economic Indicators.
Available at: http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/1627.pdf. Accessed:
7/15/04.

Carneiro, P & Heckman, J. (2003). Human Capital Policy. NBER working paper 9495.
Available at www.nber.org/papers/w9495. Accessed 7/1/2004.


Child Care Bureau. (2003). Child Care and Development Fund Report to Congress.
Washington, DC: Administration for Children and Families, US Department of Health
and Human Services.

Children’s Defense Fund. (1999). Seeds of Success: State Pre-K Initiative 1999-1999.
Washington, DC: Children’s Defense Fund.

CIA. (2000). World Factbook. Available at:
http://luna.wellesley.edu/search/XCIA+world+factbook&submit=SUBMIT&l=&b=&m=
&SORT=D&p=&Da=&Db=/XCIA+world+factbook&submit=SUBMIT&l=&b=&m=&S
ORT=D&p=&Da=&Db=/1,25841,25841,B/l856&FF=XCIA+world+factbook&2,2,,1,0.
Accessed: 7/15/04.

Clearinghouse on International Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies.
(2002). Mother’s Day: More Than Candy And Flowers, Working Parents Need Paid
Time-Off, Issue Brief, Spring. Available at: http://www.childpolicyintl.org/. Accessed:
8/04.


                                                                                          27
Clearinghouse on International Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies.
(2002). Tax Day: How Do America’s Child Benefits Compare?, Issue Brief, Spring.
Available at: http://www.childpolicyintl.org/. Accessed: 8/04.

Clearinghouse on International Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies.
(2004a). Table1.22: Early Childhood Education and Care Policy Dimensions and
Programs in Selected Countries. Available at: http://www.childpolicyintl.org/.
Accessed:8/25.

Clearinghouse on International Developments in Child, Youth and Family Policies.
(2004b). Table1.23: Main Institutional Day Care for Children in 8 European Nations.
Available at: http://www.childpolicyintl.org/. Accessed: 8/25.

Cleveland, G. & Krashinsky, M. (1998). The Benefits and Costs of Good Child Care.
Toronto: Childcare Resource and Research Unit, University of Toronto.

Collins, A., et al. (2000). National Study of Child Care for Low-Income Families: State
and Community Substudy Interim Report. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.

Committee for Economic Development. (2002). Preschool for All. New York:
Committee for Economic Development.

Committee on Ways and Means. (2000). Green Book. Available at:
http://aspe.hhs.gov/2000gb/. Accessed: 6/04.

Currie, Janet and Neidell, Matthew. (2003). Getting Inside the “Black Box” of Head
Start Quality: What Matters and What Doesn’t? NBER working paper 10091. Available
at http://www.nber.org/w10091. Accessed on 6/24/04.

Department of Education, Department of Public Health and Office of Child Care
Services. (2004). Report of the Massachusetts Early Education and Care Council.
Boston: Department of Education, Department of Public Health and Office of Child Care
Services.

Digest of Education and Statistics. (1996). Average undergraduate tuition and fees and
room and board rates paid by students in institutions of higher education, by type and
control of institution: 1964-65 to 1995-96. Available at:
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d96/D96T309.asp. Accessed on 6/04.

Edie, D. , Adams, D., Riley, D. & Roach, M. (2004). Alternative Models for an Early
Care and Education System. Madison, WI: Wisconsin Child Care Research Partnership.

Education Commission of the States. (2004). Pre-kindergarten. Available at:
http://www.ecs.org/ecsmain.asp?page=/html/IssuesEL.asp. Accessed 6/2/04.




                                                                                          28
Foner, E. & Garraty, J. (1991). The Readers Companion to American History. New York:
Houghton Mifflin. Available at:
http://college.hmco.com/history/readerscomp/rcah/html/ah_027603_iiihigheredu.htm.
Accessed May 31, 2004.

Gilliam, W. & Zigler, E. (2000). A Critical Meta-Analysis of All Evaluations of State-
Funded Preschool from 1977 to 1998: Implications for Policy, Service Delivery and
Program Implementation. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15, 441-473.

Gormley, W. & Gayer, T. (2003). Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma: An
Evaluation of Tulsa’s Pre-K Program. Crocus Working Paper #2. Available at:
http://www.crocus.georgetown.edu/oklahoma.html, accessed 7/2/2004.

Gormley W. & Phillips D. (2004). The Effects of Universal Pre-K in Oklahoma:
Research Highlights and Policy Implications. Crocus Working Paper #2. Available at:
http://www.crocus.georgetown.edu/oklahoma.html, accessed 7/2/2004.

Groginsky, S. (2002). Child Care and Early Education Coordination in the States: A
Statutory Overview. Denver, CO: National Conference of State Legislatures.

Groot, W. Maasen van den Bring, H., Dobblesteen, S. and van Mierlo, N. (2004). “The
Economics of Early Childhood Education: a Survey, in C. Sofer (ed.), Human Capital
over the Life Cycle. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 15-35.

Hayes, C., Palmer, J. & Zaslow, M. (1990). Who Cares for America’s Children.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Head Start Bureau. (2003). Head Start Program Fact Sheet. Available at:
http://www2.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/hsb/research/2004.htm. Accessed: 6/04.

Helburn, S. & Bergmann B. (2002). America’s Child Care Problem. New York:
Palgrave.

Henry, G., et al. (2003). Report of the Findings from the Early Childhood Study: 2001-
2002. Atlanta, GA: Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University.

Heymann, J., et al. (2004). The Work, Family, and Equity Index: Where Does the United
States Stand Globally?. Boston, MA: Harvard School of Public Health. Available at:
http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/globalworkingfamilies/. Accessed 8/25/2004.

Kamerman, S. (2000). Parental Leave Policies: An Essential Ingredient in Early
Childhood Education and Care Policies, Social Policy Report, 14, 3-15.

Lee, C., Ohlandt, S & Witte, A. (1996). Parents Receiving Subsidized Child Care: Where
Do They Work?. Tallahassee, FL: Florida Children’s Forum.




                                                                                         29
Susanna Loeb, Bruce Fuller, Sharon Lynn Kagan, Bidemi Carrol, Judith Carroll, Jan
McCarthy. (2003). Child Care in Poor Communities: Early Learning Effects of Type,
Quality, and Stability. NBER working paper 9954. Available at
www.nber.org/papers/w99454. Accessed 7/14/04.

Loprest, P., Schmidt, S. & Witte, A. (2000). Welfare Reform under PRWORA: Aid to
Children with Working Families?, Tax Policy and the Economy, 14, 157-2003.

Magnuson, K., Ruhm, C. & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Does Pre-kindergarten Improve
School Preparation and Performance? NBER working paper 10452. Available at
www.nber.org/papers/w10452. Accessed 7/2/2004.

Marx, F. & Seligson, M. (1988). The Public School Early Childhood Study: The State
Survey. New York, NY: Bank Street College.

Masse, L. & Barnett W. (2002). A Benefit Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Early
Childhood Intervention. Cost-Effectiveness and Educational Policy. Larchmont, NY:
Eye on Education.

Mitchell, A., Stoney, L. & Dichter, H. (2001). Financing Child Care in the United States.
Kansas City, MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.

Myers, M., et al. (2002). The Dynamics of Child Care Subsidy Use: A Collaborative
Study of Five States. New York: National Center of Children in Poverty.

National Child Care Information Center. (2004). Early Care and Education Funding.
Available: http://www.nccic.org/poptopics/ecarefunding.html. Accessed on 9/6/2004.

Novak, K. (1999). Review of State Funding for Head Start. St Paul, MN: Research
Department, Minnesota House of Representatives.

OECD. (2000a). Early Childhood Education and Care Policy in the Flemish Community
of Belgium. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/47/40/2479277.pdf. Accessed
on 7/14/04.

OECD. (2000b). Early Childhood Education and Care Policy in Sweden. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/31/17/31551259.pdf. Accessed: June 29, 2004.

OECD. (2001a) Early Childhood Education and Care Policy in Finland. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/52/27/2534770.pdf. Accessed: June 29, 2004.

OECD. (2001b). Starting Strong: Early Childhood Education and Care; United States.
Available at: http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/43/58/1942386.pdf. Accessed: June 30,
2004.

OECD. (2001c). Starting Strong: Early Childhood Education and Care. Paris: OECD



                                                                                      30
OECD. (2002). Early Childhood and Education Care Profiles – Norway. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/44/14/1942347.pdf. Accessed: June 29, 2004.

OECD. (2004a). Early Childcare and Education Home Page. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/document/3/0,2340,en_2649_34511_27000067_1_1_1_1,00.html.
Accessed: June 20, 2004.

OECD. (2004b). OECD Thematic Review of Education and Care Policy; Background
Report; United States of America. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/25/55/27856788.pdf. Accessed: June 29, 2004.

Office of Management and Budget. (2005). Budget of the United States Government
Public Budget Database. Available at:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/fy2005/db.html. Accessed on 6/04.

Reynolds, Alan. (2002). Marginal Tax Rates. Available at:
http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/MarginalTaxRates.html. Accessed on 7/14/04.

Reynolds, A. (2003). Prevention and Cost-Effectiveness in the Chicago Longitudinal
Study of the Child-Parent Centers. presentation to Making Connections: A 2-daySchool
Readiness Learning Symposium, Sacremento, CA, December 9-10, 2003. Available at:
http://www.healthychild.ucla.edu/First5CAReadiness/Symposium/Arthur%20Reynolds.p
df. Accessed 7/5/2004.

Rolnick, A. (2004). A Conversation with Art Rolnick. The Evaluation Exchange, 10, 16-
17.

Ruhm, C. (1998). The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates: Lessons
from Europe, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 285-317.

Ruhm, C. (2000). Parental Leave and Child Health, Journal of Health Economics, 19,
931-960.

Shumacher, R., Greenberg, M. & Lombardi, J. (2001). State Initiatives to Promote Early
Learning. Washington, DC: Center for Law and Social Policy.

Schweinhart, L. (2001). Recent Evidence on Preschool Programs. Champaign IL: ERIC
clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. Available at
http://www.ericdigests.org/2002-2/preschool.htm. Accessed 7/02/2004.

Schweinhart, L, Barnes, H. & Weikart, D. (1993). Significant Benefits: The High/Scope
Perry Pre-School Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, MI: High Scope Press.

Smith, T., Kleiner, A., Parsad, B. & Farris, E. (2003). Pre-kindergarten in the US Public
Schools: 2000-2001. Washington, DC: US Department of Education.




                                                                                       31
Stoney, L. & Greenberg, M. (1996). The Financing of Child Care: Current and Emerging
Trends, The Future of Children, 16, 83-102.

Tax Policy Center. (2000). Comparative Income Tax Rates, 2000. Available at:
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/TaxFacts/TFDB/Content/PDF/oecd_inctax_2000.pdf.
Accessed on 7/15/03.

The Brookings Institution. (1999). Investing In Children. Available at:
http://www.brookings.edu/comm/childrensroundtable/issue1.htm. Accessed: June 29,
2004.

The Urban Institute. (2003). Half of Working Families with Children Pay for Child Care
- Nearly Three in Ten Receive Help with These Expenses. Available at:
http://www.urban.org/Template.cfm?NavMenuID=24&template=/TaggedContent/ViewP
ublication.cfm&PublicationID=8257. Accessed: July 16, 2003.

Trowbridge, M. & Witte, A. (2004a). Estimated Federal Expenditures on ECE, 1961-
2002. Working papers, Department of Economics, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.

Trowbridge, M. & Witte, A. (2004b). Pre-K Programs in the US. Working papers,
Department of Economics, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Percentage distribution of public expenditure on
education. Available at:
(http://stats.uis.unesco.org/eng/ReportFolders/Rfview/explorerp.asp. Accessed on
7/15/03.

US. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2004). Consumer Price Index.
Available at: ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt. Accessed on 6/04.

Postsecondary Education Opportunity. (2004). State and Local Tax Fund Allocations for
Higher Education. Available at:
http://www.postsecondary.org/archives/Excel/PWTaxApprops.xls. Accessed on 6/04.

Watson, J. & West, J. (2004). Full-Day and Half-Day Kindergarten in the Unites States.
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.

Witte, A. & Queralt, M. (2003). Take-Up Rates and Trade Offs after the Age of
Entitlement: Some Thoughts and Empirical evidence for Child Care Subsidies. NBER
working paper 8886. Available at www.nber.org/papers/w8886. Accessed 7/2/2004.

Witte, A. & Queralt, M. (2003). Impacts of Eligibility Expansions and Provider
Reimbursement Rate Increases on Child Care Subsidy Take-Up Rates, Welfare Use and
Work. NBER working paper 9693. Available at www.nber.org/papers/w9693. Accessed
7/2/2004.




                                                                                        32
Zigler, E. Finn-Stevenson, M. and Marsland, K. (1995). Child Day Care in the Schools:
The School of the 21st Century. Child Welfare, 74, n6, 1301-26.




                                                                                    33
