                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SOME ASPECTS OF THE TAXATION OF CAPITAL GAINS




                         Joseph E. Stiglitz




                       Working Paper No. 1O91




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138


                             March 1983


 Paper presented to the International Seminar in Public Economics,
 Paris, June 1981. Earlier versions of parts of this paper were
presented to meetings of the National Bureau of Economic Research
Tax Program, in February and July, 1980, and to a seminar at the
United States Treasury. I wish to thank the participants i these
seminars for their helpful comments. I am
                                            particularly indebted to
Roger Gordon, Russ Krelove, and Barry Nalebuff for their comments
and suggestions. The research reported here is
                                                 part of the NBER'S
research program in Taxation. This research was supported by a
contract with the Office of Tax Analysis. The views presented do
not necessarily represent the view of the OTA, the Treasury, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Financial support from the
National Science Foundation is also gratefully acknowledged.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1094
                                                      March   1983


                 SOME ASPECTS OF THE TAXATION OF CAPITAL GAINS

                             Joseph E. Stiglitz
                            Princeton University


                                   ABSTRACT


       The analysis of the effects of
                                       capital gains taxation requires
  modelling both of the details of the tax code and the imperfections a  careful
                                                                       in the
  capital market. Under the standard
  and under the standard idealizations assumptions concerning perfect capital markets
                                        of the tax code, there are several strategies
  by which rational investors can avoid
                                         not only all taxes on their capital income;
  these strategies leave individuals
 and at each date unchanged from      consumption and bequests in each state of nature
                                  what they would have been in the absence of taxes.
 Although certain detailed provisions of
                                           the tax code may limit the extent to which
 rational investors can avail themselves of these tax avoidance
 are ways, in a perfect capital                                   activities, there
                                 market, by which the effects of these restrictions
 can be ameliorated. Accordingly,
                                    any analysis of the effects of capital taxation
 must focus on imperfect capital market.

       If individuals face limitations
  if there are limitations             on the amounts which they can borrow and/or
                           on short sales, then under some circumstances there is a
  locked—in effect (individuals do
                                   not sell securities which they would have sold in
  the absence of taxation); but
                                under other circumstances individuals
 sell securities that they otherwise                                  are induced to
                                      would have held, in order to take advantage of
 the asymmetric treatment of short term losses and long term
 realizing gains as soon as they become                       gains. A policy of
                                         eligible for long term treatment dominates
 the policy of Postponing the realization  of capital gains, provided the gains are
 not too large.

    A simple general equilibrium model is constructed within which
that the taxation of capital                                        it is shown
                              gains
and lead individuals not to trade   may increase the volatility of
                                                                   asset prices,
casts doubt on the significance ofwhen  they otherwise would. While the analysis
                                   the welfare losses resulting from these exchange
inefficiencies, there are circumstances in which the tax leads to production in-
efficiencies, e.g. terminating projects at other than the socially
                                                                   optimal date.
     Finally, we argue that the focus of
revenue impact of a decrease in the       some recent policy debates on the short run
                                     tax rate on capital gains is misplaced: even
when the short run revenue
                           impact is positive, consumption may increase (thus exacer-
bating inflationary pressures) and
lower level of investment in the    private savings may decrease (thus leading to a
sumption that the long run revenue impact sector).
                                 private            Moreover, there is some pre-
                                           is negative.

     Our analysis has some important
                                      implications for empirical research. In par-
ticular, it suggests that the impact of the tax is not adequately
single number, such as the "effective                              summarized by a
                                       tax rate" representing the average ratio of
tax payments to capital gains.
                                Moreover, the impact of the tax cannot be assessed
by looking only at reported capital gains and losses.


                                                    Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                                    Department of Economics
                                                    Dickinson Hall
                                                    Princeton University
                                                    Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                    (609) 452—4014
                    SOME ASPECTS OF THE TAXATION OF CAPITAL GAINS*

                                                by

                                   Joseph E. Stiglitz



        Thispaper is concerned with the economic effects of capital gains taxation.
  The tax on capital gains is one of several taxes imposed on the
                                                                  returns to capital.
  We are concerned with those effects which arise out of the
                                                                   distinguishing features of
  capital gains taxation —— in particular, from the facts that the tax is
                                                                          levied only
  upon realization of the   gains and   that   the tax imposed is a function of the length of
  time that the aset has been held and the circumstances
                                                               upon which the gain is realized.
       We began our analysis by asking how would rational investors,
                                                                          facing an idealized
 fo of the U.S. capital
                          tax structure, behave in a perfect capital market. We
 obtained a set of results, which were perhaps less
                                                          surprising to those in the investment
 community than to the evidently
                                   poorer academic economists who have
                                                                           previously analyzed
 the effects of capita].
                         gains taxation: with the U.S. tax structure there are a variety
 of ways by which (with a perfect capital market) a rational
                                                              investor may avoid not only
 all taxes on capital, but also
                                 taxes on labor income as well. Since taxes may be
avoided, taxes are non—distortionary; and
                                            since there are a variety of ways by which
taxes can be avoided, there is
                                not a single optimal tax reduction
                                                                    investment strategy.
      The conclusion that all rational investors can avoid all
                                                                taxation in a peifect
capital market has an easily testable
                                       implication: the government should collect no
tax revenues from such individuals.
                                      The fact that the government does in fact collect
a considerable amount of revenue
                                  implies that either (a) most individuals are not
rational, well informed investors; (b)
                                           capital markets are not perfect; or (c) in the
modeling of the tax structure, I have
                                         ignored some important details, which limit the
extent of applicability of the tax avoidance schemes. There is
                                                                undoubtedly some truth
in each of these explanations
                                i argue, however, that while a number of the detailed
provisions of the tax code make it
                                  niore difficult for individuals to engage in these
tax avoidance schemes, and impose a slightly higher order of
                                                             cleverness on the would
                                           —2—


                                                       is still far lower than that
he tax avoider, the level of sophistication required

typically assumed in the modern finance literature.    Imperfections in the capital

market (limitations' on individuals ability to borrow and to sell securities short)are,

I suspect, crucial.1 Part II of the paper is thus concerned with the implications for

investment strategies of capital gains taxation in an imperfect capital market, in

which investors are limited in the amount which they can borrow (and/or sell short)

while part III discusses the welfare implications of capital gains taxation. Part IV

discusses briefly the macro—economic consequences of changes in the capital gains tax

rate.

                                          Part I

1.      Tax Avoidance In Perfect ita1_Narkets

        In this section, we show that with perfect capital markets, no restrictions on

loss offsets or wash sales, there are at least four alternative investment strategies,

all of which yield equivalent results: the individual is able to avoid completely

paying any taxes, not only on his investment income, but also on his wage income.

Consumption of the individual in each state of nature is identical to what it would

have been the absence of taxation. All that the tax system does is to induce a set of

essentially meaningless financial transactions, but these transactions, though intended
                                       conventional "real transactions" (of the kind that
to avoid taxes, look very much like

one would observe in the absence of taxation).

        The four strategies entail

        (1) Postponement of the realization of all long term gains:    the "locked'in"

             strategy. We shall refer to this policy as the policy of postponed realization,

             or the "locked in" policy.

        (2) Realization of all losses while they are short term, and of all gains as
                                                          treatment. We shall refer to this
             soon as they become eligible for long term

             as the policy of immediate realization.

         (3) Borrowing to purchase assets which are increasing in value; we shall refer
                                                    —3.-



                 to  this as the indebtedness strategy.
             (4) Buying and selling highly correlated.securitjes so that at the end
                                                                                     of the
                 year, one is in a position to realize losses to offset income from other
                 sources. In SUCCOSSIVe years, one engages in similar transactions to offset
                 both the gains realized from previous transactions of this
                                                                            sort and current
                 wage income. (This is what straddles on the commodity narket
                                                                               are designed
                 to do.) We     shall refer to this strategy as the lossroli—over
                                                                                  strategy.
         Although, with perfect capital markets, these four strategies are
                                                                           equivalent, with
  imperfect     capital markets they are not.

         There are three critical
                                       properties of perfect capItal markets required by our
  analysis:

         (1) There are no restrictions on
                                                  borrowing;      there is a singe tVsafetl rate of
 interest (which is the same for
                                         borrowing and landing).
         (2) There are no restrictions
                                              on short sales; and when an individual sells a
 security short, he receives the current value of the security as
                                                                                    payment.2
      (3)  There are no transactiors costs.
 In addition, we make use in our analysis of six properties of
                                                               a tax system.3'
      (i) There is no tax on capital gains realized at death.

       (ii) There are no restrjctioiis on wash sales.

      (iii) There are no restrictions
                                              on the ability to use capital losses to offset
               ordinary income.

      (iv) There are no restrictions on interest deduction18.

       (v) Capital gains are taxed at lower rates than ordinary income.

      (vi)    Long—term capital gains are taxed at lower
                                                         rates than short ten.
1.1
                            of Postponed Realization        We now establish
Projtjonl             If   capital markets are perfect (satisfy conditions (1) —
                                                                                           (3) and
the tax system satisfies Conditions (I) —
                                                    (iii)   ,   then with rational investors
                                                                                             pursuing
an extreme 'Tlocked in"
                              strategy (but   hedging   the associated risk) the tax system
leaves   unaffected iiidividnja1;'    consumption   and bequests      in   each   state of nature and
                                                   —4—


                          5
raises no revenue.

         Assume   the individual has taxable wage income at                time t f       We show how


with     only one           the individual may manage his portfolio in such a way
                       risky security

as tc eliminate all tax liabilities. For simplicity, we use discrete time, with the
period     of analysis corresponding        to that for the payment of taxes (a year).           We

                                                          in the no—tax situation, and with a caret
denote with an asterick values of variables

the values in the tax avoidance portfolio strategy.

         We assume at the beginning of the period he has outstanding debts of Bt and

outstanding holdings of the risky asset of At.                      (If there are many risky assets,

then At is to be treated as a vector.) We assume the rate of interest for the
                                                                                                 =    0,
period is                and that all debt is short term. For simplicity, assume B0

     =   0.    Assume the individual would have had an optimal investment strategy in the
A0
absence of taxation denoted by {A(S) ,                 B(S)    }   where   S   denotes the "state" of


nature at time t

(a complete description of the history of the economy up to that date).

The individual's consumption profile is thus described by

                c(S) =        y   —
                                      rti(St1)BSt_l)      + {B(St) -        B1(S1)}
                                                   -
                                  -
                                      p(S)(S)
                                                               th period. For simplicity, we have
where         Pt is the price of the asset in the
 assumed risky assets pay no dividends.6 (The modifications required if firms pay

 dividends are straightforward.)

          Assume that with probability one

                  p(S) pi(Si)                  for all {S, Si}
 and, for simplicity, we assume that

                  mm              -            =
                                                   (Si)         > 0.

 Assume the first period the individual sets

                  MS0) A(S0) +          y1/9
 but     simultaneously sells short y1I91              units   of the   asset, so the net position
                                                 —5—


   remains A .         Then, at the end of the period, the individual
                                                                              will have made a loss
   either on the asset or on the short sales. If
                                                 p1 >          p0, he closes out the short
   sale     for a net loss of


  so
                 (P1 — PU)
                             y1
                he will have no tax
                                       liability, lie then again sells short
                                                                                    y1/ units of      the
  asset, so he again carries forwards a net position of A.

        He then    purchases an additional amount
                A3 -A+2,
                             12
  selling     short an additioial amount         8
                                                       Following the   same   procedure as the
                                            12
 previous     period, he then more than eliminates all
                                                            the tax liabilities he has accrued
 that period,

        The process continues until at death, all shares are realized.
                                                                                   Since all gains
 are assumed to escape taxation
                                       upon death, this procedure has enabled the individual
 to avoid completely all income and
                                    capital taxation, and to leave his consumption and
 bequests identical to what they would
                                       have been (in every state of nature) in the
 absence of taxation, (The procedure we have outlined is, of
                                                              course, not the only
 procedure that would have worked; in
                                            particular, it is not the procedure which minimizes
 the number of transactions,sjnce
                                        no account is taken of the previous
                                                                                  positions taken,
and the prices at which the
                           securities were purchased at earlier dates.)
1.2 An Alternative Pro cedur for
                                 Avoiding Taxation: The Optfmalityof Immediate
       Realization

       In   this section,    we show how there is an equally effective way of avoiding
taxation     when there is a differential
                                             tax rate on long and short term gains and
losses. We assume            the capital market is perfect (in the sense defined above);
but now, we assume the tax system has the additional critical
                                                            property                  that long—
term gains are taxed at z times the rate on short—term gains.

     Throughout the analysis, e assume a "flexible" timeperiod: the individual
                                                                                 can
realize a gain or loss just L     or after the end of the period, thus
                                                                       recording
                                                      —6—




either a short term loss or a long term gain.
       We employ exactly the same model and notation as
                                                                   in the previous subsection. We

                                                              decisions as in               the
assume that the individual tkos precisely the same investment
previous madel        at the      O period. AL the end of the first period, if
                                end   of the

there is a decline in price, the individual rclizes the loss, just as
                                                                      he did earlier.
But now he sells his entire long" position. This implies that during the first period,
the individual will have no tax liability, and will have a tax loss carry over of

               Tp0-p1){A+j _y
(where T is the tax rate)
       At the beginning of the next period, he closes out his short position, incurring
a long—term tax liability of
               (p0 - p1)zi l.

His   net tax liability at that juncture is
                           o-     - l)y1/1 - AI
If    z is small, L1 will frequently be negativcJ0

        Similarly, if there is a rise in            price he closes out his short position just
short   of a year, eliminating his             tax liability and establishing a lOSS ccrry forward   of

                          \Yl —
                       — P0ii         Y1

At    the beginning of the next period, he closes out           his long position, incurring a
long    term   tax   liability of

                       —
                           p0)[A      + l]
Now, his net liability on the capital account is

               L1 {(p
                            -   p0)((z
                                           — 1)Y1   + zA)   +

        Again, at the beginning of the period, the individual re—establishes his position,
now setting
                                  +
                           + y2
               A3 =   A
                                                 —7--


  and selling short y2÷L1' units of the
                                        risky asset.              This ensures that at the end

  of the period, he will have sufficient losses not only to eliminate
                                                                      any outstanding
  tax
        liability on capital account, hut also to eliminate any tax liability on his wage
  income.
         The procedure   continues, until the individual dies, in which
                                                                        case any outstanding
 liabilities  are escaped. Note that         again, in this procedure, consumption in each
 stale is the same as it was without         taxation,   and the individual's net position in
 each state was identjcal to what it         would   have been without taxation.
        We have thus established
 Proposition     2. With   perfect capital   markets (satisfying conditions (1) — (3)) and a
 tax system satisfying conditions (i) —        (iii)    and (vi), then, with rational investors,
 realizing all losses as soon as they
                                             occur, and all gains as soon as they become
 eligible for long term treatment,
                                         accompanied by the appropriate hedging strategy,
 consumption and bequests of the individual in every state of nature will
                                                                                   be the same
as   it would be without taxation and the tax system raises no revenues.

1.3 A Third Procedure for the Avoidance
                                                 of Taxation: The Optimality of Indebtedness
        There is           another               procedure for the avoidance of taxation,
if there is an asset yielding
                                     a sure capital gain at the rate r*, if interest is
deductible. For the individual simply borrows



at date t    —
                 1, so that his interest the t period is
                    yt
            r1
He will thus have no tax
                             liability. With the proceeds, he purchases the asset yielding
the sure capital gain, postponing the realization of the capital gain until
                                                                            death, at
which point he repays the debt.U Note that if the individual uses the asset
                                                                            as a
collateral for the loan, the lender incurs no risk in the transaction.
                                                —8—


       This, again, s onl one of several possible ways to avoid taxation. If there

                                             gains,   the individual could just as well have
is favorable treatment of long term

avoided   taxes by realizing his capital gain as soon as it becomes eligible for long
term   treatment. Then he will have a tax liability on the gain of (assume r=r*, all t)
                           =
            z.    r—4-

Hethen borrows enough to offset this as well as his wage income next period.
The tth period, the individualts indebtedness will be
                 t—l
                  E y t-i.z

       Similar    results obtain if there is some asset whose minimal return is positive.

Assume Pt't—l >          ' and   assume the individual sells an option to buy the security at


price               at a price              With the proceeds of this and a loan of a dollars,
           t—1'
he purchases shares of the security. His net position at the end of the period is


                                        -         — (1 +   r)a       where   p is the realization of Pt.
                       (a+1- {                                   ,




This is a pure arbitrage operation, provided

                       =


and

            a(l + r)

                                                            for long term treatment,
 Then, if the option can be held long enough to be eligible
                                                                     to offset all of his tax liabilities.
 the individual can use the deductibility of interest

        We summarize the results of this subsection in

 Proposition3a. If there is a perfect capital market (conditions (1) to (3) are
                                                                      and, in addition,
 satisfied) ,    and the tax system satisfies assumptions (i) to (iv)
                                                                        gain, then there exists an
 there exists an asset yielding a perfectly safe capital.
                                                                                    the safe asset,
 optimal investment strategy with individuals borrowing to invest

 and postponing ie realization of capital gains until death. .
                                                                                     is   investment
                                                  —9--



   strategy, consumption and bequests are identical
                                                               to what they would be in every state
   of nature in the absence of
                                       taxation, and no revenue is collected by the tax.'2
   Proposition 3h. [Judr the
                                      conditions of Proposition 3a, if     in addition, there is
  favorable    treatment    of long te capital gains (tax
                                                                 condition (v)), then there exists
  an optimal investment
                              strategy with individuals borrowing        to invest in   the safe asset,
  and realizing capital gains on the safe asset as soon
                                                                   as they become eligible for
  long term treatment, which leaves
                                            consumption andquests unchanged and the tax raises
  no revenue.

  Proposition Jc         Assume the   Conditions of   PropoSJtion 3 a,   except now, assume (a)
  there   exists   no safe asset, but there exists a risky asset with a minimal positive

 return; and (b) there exists an
                                         options market for the asset (with zero transactions
 costs),    with a maturity of one      year (So it is eligible for long term treatment if
 held to maturity). Then, there exists an optimal investment
                                                              strategy with individuals
 borrowing, selling options, and buying the security with minimal
                                                                               positive return.
 This investment strategy leaves
                                         consumptiond bequests unchanged and the tax raises no
 revenue.

 1.4 The Optima lity of       Ro11-OversStrj
     The fourth strategy for avoiding taxation is similar to the
                                                                 second, with one
major difference. It does not
                               require that there by any advantageous treatment of
long term capital gains. All that is required is that gains and
                                                                losses be taxed only
upon realization (what we identified as one of the distinctive properties of
                                                                                            capital
gains taxation).

     The individual buys and sells short a sufficient amount of the
                                                                    risky asset, so
that, with probability one, at the end of the
                                              year, he has a loss on one side of the
transaction large enough to offset his other sources of income, i.e. he
                                                                        sets
                     =
                         A(S0) +
At the end of the year, he realizes
                                    that        part     of the transaction on which he has
                                             —10--



made a loss, e.g. if P1         P0, he sells the security, recording a loss of


                      p1)y1R1   y1
He thus carries forward into the next tax year a loss of
          (p0 - p1 21)y1/.Q1
                         —




At the beginning of the next period, he closes out his position, so that at the
beginning of the year, he has an accrued tax liability of -ry1 (where T is the
tax   rate). The next year, he       buys and sells short enough of the security to enable
him   to offset both his income and his accrued tax liability; he purchases

              A1(S1) =   A(S1) +(y1 + y2)R2
of the asset, while selling short

              (y1   + y2)/2,
                                                                            itself, so that
so    his net speculative position is unchanged. The process repeats

in the tth year, he sets

               A(St) =   A(S)
                                 t+l
                                + .
                                 1=1
                                       y/i
and sells short an amount

               t+l




of the asset.

        This process thus enables him to postpone all of his tax liabilities until

 death. We thus have established

 Proposition4. With a perfect capital market (satisfying. properties (1) —           (3))   and


 a tax system satisfying properties (i) —        (iii),   then the roll—over strategy is

                                                                                 their
 optimal. Individuals are able by using this strategy to avoid all taxation, and

 consumption in each state of nature is unaffected by the tax.

 2. Avoiding Tax Restrictions

         In   the previous analysis, we made two important, and unrealistic, assumptions

 concerning the tax code: we assumed that there were no restrictions on wash sales and

 full loss offsets. In this section, we show how these restrictions ma be avoided.
                                               —11--



     2.1 Perfect_Capital_NarketithRcstrictionssiies
           In this section, we show that the restrictions on wash sales need not be
                                                                                    binding.
     It is widely believed that by buying a sufficicnt]y large number of
                                                                                 randomly Chosen
  securities, one can obtain a portfolio (it is often argued that only 25 are in fact
  required) which is virtually perfectly correlated with the market
                                                                       a whale. This
  is an implication of both the capital asset pr:Lcing model and the
                                                                               arbitrage model.
 If this assumption is not true, then the capital markets cannot be
                                                                    perfectly competitive
 (and the market equilibrium will not, in general, be Pareto optimal. See
                                                                           Stiglitz
 (1981).) We shall refer to a capital market which satisfies, in addition
                                                                           to condition
 (1) to (3), conditcn (4) below
         (4) There are at least to assets (or portfolios of assets) with
                                                                         perfectly
 correlated returns.
        We asse that the restrictions on wash sales take the fori that the ndivldual
 cannot simultaneously (or within a hort Lime span —— here taken to be the next
 period) purchase and sell the same. asset. We focus our discussion on ProposI Lion
                                                                                                 2,
where the individual does this to take advantage of the favcrable treatment of
                                                                               long—
term gai ns. Now instead of selling short y1/2.1 units of asset "e he sells short
y1/11    units of asset ''.'     If
                              p1 > p0, at the end of the period, he realizes the loss
on his tgU position, and at the beginning of the next
                                                      period (as soon as the asset
becomes eligible for long term treatment) he sells his             +           units of 'ta".
                                                                       y1/11
He then goes "long" in      in the amount                    and   short in a • in the amount
y2fL1
hi   2.     .   The   procedure contimmes as before; each period the individual "reverses"


More generally, we can establish

posftion5. With a perfect capital market, satisfying conditions (1)
                                                                                      (4), tax
restrictions on wash sales need never be binding; any consumption—bequest plan which
could be achieved in the absence of the provsjons relating to the tax treatment of
                                           —12—


wash sales can be achieved witb the wash sale provisions; in particular gains are realized

as soon   as they become eligible for long—term treatment.
                                                            There    exist portfolio policies

implementing the tax avoidance strategies described by propositions l-4 in which

the provisions relating to the tax treatment of wash sales are irrelevant)3

2.2 RestrictIons on Loss Offsets

        In the previous analysis we allowed the individual to use capital losses to

offset ordinary income. In fact, of course, only $3,000 of capital losses can be used

within any year to offset ordinary income. If Lhis constraint were an important one,

one   should observe most individuals operating against it.         There arc. however, a


variety    of ways by which the   impact of this constraint may be reduced.

        The   simplest method entails taking advantage of the deductibility of interest
payments, by borrowing, and purchasing a sale asset which yields its returns in the
form of capital gains.
    Even if there does not exist a perfectly safe asset, the individual can
                                                                                     obtain

equivalent results if there exists a security with a minimal positive capital gain,

by selling an option on the security, as described in section 1.3. Alternatively,

the individual can "lend" money to the      stock market   through   the options market attain-
                                                                                       •




ing a safe return in the form of capital gains. To do this, assume the current price
of the asset is p. The individual buys one unit of the security, buys a put for
   with a striking price exceeding the current price (so his teturn next period is
"s' °,          —
                    +l    and sells an optIon for q0 with the; same striking price, so
                                                     Thus his net income next period is
hia return       next   period is mm [0, '  —




 just    p3, and in equilibrium.
           — (1 4 r*)[p + c—
        p5                       ci0]
 where r* is the safe rate of interest. Since his return is perfectly safe, it must

 be equal to the safe rate.of interest.
                                                —13—


          There are, however, alternative methods which are
                                                          commonly employed. An
   individual can purchase an asset with borrowed funds for
                                                            which the depreciatjo
   allowance exceed the true economic depreciatjo•
                                                     If the dcpreciat:jon allowances
  plus interest on the loan exceed the flow of quasi—rents from
                                                                  the asset, then there
  will be an ordinary income loss, with a subsequent capital
                                                              gain.
       An individual can sell short a security shortly before
                                                               a dividend is due.
  Following the paent of the dividend, the price
                                                   of the security will decline, and
  he will experience a capital
                                   gain; this is offset by the dividend
                                                                            payment which he
  must make, but the latter is
                                   deductible against ordinary
                                                                 income. (See Allen, 1982)
        The 1981 tax law imposed
                                    restrictions on several of the devices
                                                                               for converting
  capital losses into ordinary income
                                            losses, and thereby evading the restrictions on
  loss offsets. These include
                                  taking advantage of the provisions related to the tax

 treatment of Treasury Bills, Cash and Carry Transactions, and
                                                               the tax treatment of
 traders.

 2.3    i cations of Wash Sale      and
                                      lo__O p
        The restrictions on wash sales and loss offsets are
                                                            Particularly important for
 the   investment strategy   which we have called that of Immediate
                                                                    Realization. But the
 restriction on wash sales also has
                                          implications for the first
                                                                       strategy, that which
we have referred to as the
                           postponement strategy. For if individuals are to postpone
their tax liability, without at the same time increasing their
                                                                position in the security
beyond the desired level, then the
                                   individual must hedge his
                                                             position (e.g. by selling
the security short). But if he does this within a
                                                   year of purchase, although he may
be able to postpone the
                        tax, the transaction will not be eligible for long—terpi
treatment.

       If the restrictions
                             imply that the individual cannot
                                                                use the special treatment of
capital gains to reduce the tax
                                   liability on ordinary income (by more than the $3,000
loss offset plus the interest on the amount which the individual
                                                                        can borrow) he can
still ue these provisions
                              to eliminate any tax liability on his capital income.
                                            —14—



  2.4 Further Comnents on the Implications of Special_Provisions
       There are several other special provisions of the tax code relating to the treat-
                                                                              the tax
  ment of c'pita1 :incc,me which impinge on individual's ability to implement
  avoidance strategies described earlier.
                                                                the treatment of short
      We referred, for instance, to the provisions concerning
                                                                               which
  term capital losses in the presense of long tent capital gains. The methods
  we descri bed above of converting ordinary income        into short term capital gains.
                                                     of losses, may be used to vitiate the
  to   avoid the limitations on the deductahilitY

   effects of these provisions as well.
                                                   of interest which can be deducted are
         The provisions restricting the amount

relevant for the indebtedness strategy described in Proposition
                                                                   3. Empirically, this

   restriction does not seem to he binding (See Feenberg 1981) which suggests that there

                                            can be avoided, e.g. taking advantage of the
   are easy ways by which the restriction
                                                                                    used
   peculiarities in the definition of those kinds of investment income which can be
                                                                                    tax
   to increase the amount of interest which can be deducted and/or that the present
                                            effective ways by which taxes can be avoided
   code provides alternative and equally

   (as our analysis has already suggested ).
                                                            make tax avoidance easier. For
         Some of the special provisions of the tax code
                                                                             in the value of the
                             if a bond were sold below par, the increase
   instance,

   bond between the purchase date and the maturity date is not treated as a capital
                                                                                scheme.) Prior
   gain, but as interest income (closing what would be an obvious tax avoidance
                                                                        to the owner of bond
to 1982 a T year bond, 1/T of the capital gainns imputed as income

    and l/T Was deductible as an interest expense by the seller. For simplicity, assume

    the interest rate is fixed. In the absence of taxation, an individual or firm which
                                                                 to buy a T period coupon bond,
    sold a T period zero coupon bond, and used the proceeds
                                                                                     able at
    investing the interest payments at the same safe rate of interest, was
                                                       off the holders of the zero coupon bonds.
    the end of T periods with the proceeds to pay
                                               —15—


   He would be indifferent to
                             undertaking the transaction. With taxation, however, there
  is every year a tax reduction in the amount of 14


            T
              T   fi-e        rTe   rT}

  which he can use to offset either
                                          ordinary or capital income)5


       Here, as elsewhere, we have ignored the
                                                      general equilibrium aspects of tax
  avoidance ;              the arithmetic imputation scheme increases the tax liability of

  the individual purchasing the bond.       If there was no tax exempt Institutions or

  individuals facing a zero marginal tax      rate,   this should be reflected in the price
 which a buyer is willing to pay for such a bond. So long, however,
                                                                            as there are tax
 exempt institutions, they should be willing to buy the zero coupon bonds and seil

 the coupon bonds; in equilibriums
                                   one dollar T period zero coupon bond should
           —rT
 sell for e

                                           Part II

 3. Imperfect Capital Markets

      The analysis of Part I        made the kinds of "perfect market"
                                                                          assumptions
 conventional in the finance literature, and
                                                  the simplifications in the tax code that
 we employed in   our    analysis were again of the kind that are frequently found, both

in textbook expositions and in analytical discussions in the public finance
                                                                            literature.
Yet the results which
                      emerge were clearly unrealistic: individuals do pay taxes, and
the taxes surely do affect both the real investment decisions and
                                                                  consumption decisions
of individuals.

     Thus, an analysis of the impact of the
                                                 capital gains tax must focus on the
imperfections of the capital market and on at least some of the detailed provisions of

the tax code.

     In the previous section, we showed how those provisions of the tax code
                                                                                which,
It is commonly argued, restrict individuals'abiljtjes to avoid taxes in the
                                                                               way that
we described in propositions 1—4
                                 would not, in a perfectly competitive capital market,
                                         —16—


be binding. More generally, it is our contention that even if the detailed provisions

of the tax code put some limits on the extent to which individuals can avoid taxes,

if investors were rational and if capital markets were perfect, there would be much

                                                     the remainder of this paper is
morc tax avoidance than is presently observed. Thus,
devoted to the analysis of the consequences of capital gains taxation with imperfect

capital markets.

     Not   surprisingly, the consequences depend critically on precisely what constraints
are binding, e.g. whether there is a borrowing constraint or a short sale constraint.
Although   the four policies we outlined in the previous section are all equivalent in

a perfect market —— they all succeed in eliminating all tax liabilities —-- they
                                                                                   involve

quite   different transactions (and transactions costs). For instance, the policy of

postponed realization (the locked in strategy) may require large amounts of short sales,

and, under present institutional arrangements (where a short sale is not just the

negative of a purchase) this may entail significant amounts of borrowing. Similarly,
                                                         short sales over time. Borrowing
the roll—over strategy requires increasing amounts of

constraints are obviously critical for the third strategy.     In contrast, borrowing

                                                                Limitations on loss
is not so critical for the policy of iimnediate realization.

offsets are, however, critical for this strategy, as well as for the policy of post-

poned realization and the roll—over strategy.     In the subsequent section, we

detail the effects of capital gains taxation under a variety of imperfect capital

market conditions.

4. The Basic Intertemporal Trade—offs in the Timing of          al Gains

        The central feature of the capital gains tax upon which we focus is that investors

 can time their realization of gains and losses, and by doing so affect their tax

 liabilities. We shall show that paying careful attention to this aspect of investment

 strategy may, in fact, yield far higher after—tax returns than paying a corresponding

 amount of attention to the choice of alternative assets (particularly if one believes

 in the random walk hypothesis).
                                                   —17--


       When an individual decides
                                        to realize a gain today rather than at some later date,
he affects not only his tax
                            liability today, but also his tax liability at that later
date. Thus, the impact o.f the capital gains tax can only be
                                                             assessed within an
intertemporal model. There are three
                                                basic effects, which we refer to as the rate
effect,    the    PDV effect, and the risk               effect.
       (a) TheRate         feet   The timing of the realjzatioj of a gain or loss affects
the   tax rate which is imposed:16

            (1) by postponing realization, a short—tcrn gain
                                                             may be converted into a
                    long—term gain; or Conversely.

           (ii) by realizing a loss early, it may be treated as short
                                                                      term, rather than
                    long term.

          (iii)    by Postponing realizatioi until
                                                           death, the capital gains tax may be
                   avoided entirely.

          (iv) Consider an asset purchased
                                                      at t0     Assume that the individual
                   realizes a loss at date
                                                   t1 , and reinvests the proceeds in a similar
                   asset. Assume at           an   event occurs which necessitates that
                                        t2

                   individual selling his asset. If 1 + t0 <               <    1              then
                                                                      t2            + t1   ,          this
                   change in value between
                                                t1 and t2 is treated as short term, while
                   if the individual had not realized his loss at
                                                                               t1 ,   it would have
                  been treated as long term. If there is a large gain between
                                                                                  t1 and
                  t2 ,   the individual is worse off; if there
                                                               is a loss, he is better
                  off. This argument
                                        assumes an imperfect capital market; as we argue
                  below,    if the individual could borrow or sell short an essentially

                  equivalent security, then he would not need to sell his asset, even

                  if a contingency arose which
                                                     required the expenditure of a significant
                  fraction of his net worth. 17

          (v) The realization of
                                       a large capital gain in one particular year may
                  result (because of the
                                             progressivity of the tax structure             and the
                                                —1 8—




                   imperfect    provisions for averaging) in the individual facing a heavier
                   tax liability    than if the asset were sold gradually over a number of

                   years. At the same time, the          ability to time    the realization of capital


                    gains   and losses may enhance the effective degree of averaging associated
                   with the income tax structure.1
      Equally important, if the individual has a realized (short term or long term)
loss exceeding the limitations on loss offsets, then the effective current marginal
tax   rate    on any realized gains is zero.
        (b)    The PDV effect

       By postponing the realization of a gain, the present discounted value of the

tax, liability on the gain is reduced (if the rate of interest is positive); conversely,

by realizing a loss as soon as it occurs, the present discounted value of the implicit

tax   reduction    is increased.

                  if there were no inflation, but the real rate of interest were
        Conversely,

negative, the individual would lower his tax liability by realizing gains as soon
as    they occur and postponing tax losses. Effectively, the government borrows money

paying a zero rate of interest, while all other borrowers pay negative interest rates,

and hence the individual         prefers to lend to the      government   by realizing only gains and

postponing      all losses.

(c)     Risk                    Effects
                                                                 for the individual to
        The realization of a gain this year may make it possible
                                                                          would not be able to realize.
realize a loss next period which the individual otherwise

Of course, if the individual were sure that the asset were                 going to decrease in value,
then he would clearly not keep the asset (in the absence
                                                                      of taxation). But if there

is some chance that it will decrease in value, and if there is differential treatment

of long term gains          and short term   losses     it may pay the individual to realize the
 gain    today. Assume, for instance, that the individual purchased an asset at a price
                                                              —19—


 p0 , and its present price is                   p1 .       Assume there is some probability that the

 price will fall back to p0 and some probability that it will rise to p2 .
                                                                                                         By
 realizing       the ga.[n   today, the individual increases his tax liabiU ty by
                                                                                                     zr (p1—p0)
 whei:e      is the tax on long term capital gains. If the price falls to p0 his
           Z-r


 tax liability next period will be reduced T(p1—p0) , where T is the tax on short
 term capital gains. If the price rises, assume he sells the asset at some date t
 periods later, the same as lie had planned to do originally. We assume this date is
 sufficiently far in the future that any gain will be eligible for treatment as long
 term. His tax liability at this date is increased by zT(p1—p0) . The change in the
 expected present discounted            value of his tax             liability is
                 T(p1-p0) [ z-(-— + (l—r)z
                                IF
                                                              ]
                                    (l+r)
where     i      is   the probability of the price                falling, and r is the interest rate.
Note that if r = 0               but   z <   1        the
                             ,                    ,         policy of immediate realization has a lower
PDV, while if z = 1              and r > 0            the
                                                  ,         policy of postponed realization has a lower
PDV.

       The individual is effectively giving money to the government at date t —                           I
for the "right" to obtain money from it at date t ,                         if   the price of the security
goes down.

       This way of putting the problem makes it clear that the right to realize a

short term loss and receive an offset against other income is like a put: the

value of the option increases the lower the price of the security and is greater the

greater is T .           Moreover, the put "expires" in a year. The price paid for the
option is the increase in tax liability, at date                         t — 1   ,   from realizing the capital
gain. It is lower the lower is z and higher the higher is the price relative to

the original purchase price. Finally, since the loss will occur in the future, while

he has to pay for the right to take the loss today, the value of this option depends

on the rate of discount.
                                                 —20—


        This risk effect will play an important role in our subsequent analysis. If

individuals are risk averse, this effect, arising out of the             stochastic   nature of

assets, is even greater.

4.1 Risk Aversion

        The PDV effect, which we discussed earlier, reflects the fact that a dollar

today   is not equivalent to a dollar tomorrow. Present dollars are worth more              than

future   dollars.       In addition, income in some events (states of nature) may be worth

more than income in other event:s (states of nature). If there were perfect insurance

markets, then    the    individual would have equated the marginal utility of income in

all states. 19 But there are not perfect insurance markets, and hence the marginal
utility of income in some states may exceed that in others, Thus, let us return
to our example of an individual who has an asset which has increased in value from
p0 to p1 .      There      is some chance that next year will be a recession in which case
his wage will be lower (but not sufficiently lower to reduce his marginal tax bracket).
The individual would like to insure against this event, but cannot obtain insurance
in the market. He may, however, be able to obtain some insurance through the tax

system. Assume that if there is a recession the price will fall back to p0 . We

noted    earlier that by realizing the gain today, he increases his current tax liability

by r(p1 — p0)       .   But then, if the recession occurs, he will be able to reduce his

tax liability by T(p1 —                If the marginal utility of income in the recession is
                                p0).
sufficiently high, he will be willing to purchase this "insurance" even though the

expected present discounted value of his tax liabilities is thereby increased.
                                                                                             2021

        The mathematical models that we present in the subsequent sections

            help to clarify the nature of the important intertemporal trade—offs that we

have identified in this section.

5, Optimal_Investme_                   yor a Short-Term Investor
        In this section we     analyze   the   optimal   investment strategy for a short—term

investor. We assume that he knows that at the end of, say, two periods, he will
                                                                —21--



  wish to cash in his investments. His
                                                              objective then is simply to maximize the expected
  value of his terminal wealth at the end of two periods. His initial
                                                                       wealth is W
  The probability distribution of the
                                      percentage increase in the price of the asset
  is   given by F(p/p1) and is the same for all t                            . We choose our units so that
 initially the individual has one unit of wealth, and purchases one unit of the
                                                                                                               asset,
 with p =        1   .       At   the end of the first period, the asset is worth
                                                                                                p1   .   The   individual
 can    either sell his asset,
                                             repurchasiig an identical asst, paying out or receiving
 from  the governnent a capital gains tax (short— or long—term, as the
                                                                       individual times
 his sales on the 365th or 366th day);
                                        or he can retain his asset. The second period,
 the individual will sell his asset. If he retained his asset
                                                                the preceding period,
 it    will be subjected to long—term
                                   taxation; otherwise, it will be subjected to long—
 term or short—term taxation at the
                                    individual's discretion. Straightfo calculations
 establish that

 Proposition_6            Thereexistsarcai                                                       , such that
 for p-< p the individual sells his asset while for p >
                                                                                 p       the individual retains
 his asset.
 Further, it can be shown that
             p =                                  - z)g(l - F(l))
                     (1           ZT)(? -   (1
where

             F(l)        =   fraction of time that a loss occurs,

             g           .I(p —    l)dF/(l    -
                                                  F(l))   =
                                                              percentage mean value of a gain,
                      1
                                                              conditional on a gain Occurring.
and

            y    is the average             rate of return on       the asset.
     From this, we can easily calculate the fraction of the time
                                                                 that individuals do
not turn over their securities at the end of the year, F()
                                                                  is clear what p    .   It
depends on:

       (1) If                1, i.e. full         txaLion ol     capital gains, then p        1, the individual
                                            —22—


           realizes all losses, but postpones all gains.

           As z3, p-
           if = 0, the individual        realizes all losses as short term,         and all gains
     (2)

           as   soon as they become eligible
                                                  for long—term treatment. The reason for
                                                         reinvested in the same asset. Hence,
           this   is that, in this model, funds are

           the effective discount rate is zero and there is no advantage to postponing

           capital gains.

     (3) The      larger   the mean return, the smaller ,     while   the larger the expected

           value of the loss, conditional c:-n a loss occurring, the larger p. Moreover,

           the smaller z, the larger the advantages-to be had from the asymmetric

           treatment of gains and losses,        and therefore the    larger    .
6.   Long—Term Investors
      Similar   conditions can he used to show that long term investors too may find it

optimal to realize their capital gains as soon as they become eligible for long term
                                            considerably more complicated. We focus on the
treatment. The analysis is, however,
                                                                  stationary2
case where the stochastic process describing the asset's price is

Assume we buy an asset at p = 1, and let the minimum holding period for long—term
                                                     norma1izatior.) There is a constant
treatment be one period. (These are just
                                                                                                23
probability 1 > 0          that the individual   will have to realize the asset at date
Then the optimal policy may be simply described as follows:

      There is a critical price p(t) such that if p(t) <              p(t)     the loss should be

realized. The costs of realization at date t are              (i) there is a chance that

                                                      "forced" realization, which will be
in the interval (1, 1 + t), there will be a
                                                        be treated as long term; and (ii)
 treated as short term, which, otherwise, would
                                                         date, the price must fall still further.
 to take advantage of a tax loss at a subsequent
                                                   think of the right to obtain a tax loss as
      Earlier, we suggested that one could
                                                                               whenever
 a put, with a fixed termination date of a year. But unlike conventional puts,

 the put is exercised, it is replaced by a new put, somewhat less attractive in
                                                                                             its
                                                —23—


  striking price than the original put but with a longer maturity. The benefit

  (if p < 1), is the tax rebate.

        Consider first the case where the probability of a forced realization is

  zero. Clearly, p > 1 for 0 < t          < 1. For if the price ever returns
                                                                             to its original
 level, the individual can replace the "old" put            with   a new put, at no cost. The return
 from doing so increases with t.          The old put and the new puts are
                                                                           identical, at
 t   = 0, and hence there is no benefit to
                                                  replacing one with the other. Hence, (O) =          1.
        This result may     be seen in a slightly different way. Assume at         t   = 1,
 (t)    =    1, i.e. the investor always retains assets on which he has earned a long—term

 capital gain. Assime the individual will not sell the asset (for consumption
                                                                                              purposes)
 for an extended period of time (more than a year). Then, there is a finite
                                                                            probability
 within a year if p is near unity that the price will become less than
                                                                       unity (as p
 approaches unity, this probability increases.)            If p does become less than unity,
 there is a finite gain to being in
                                          a position to realize the loss as a short—term
loss. Since as p -*        1,   the cost of being in this position goes to zero, it is clear
that          must exceed one.

       With forced realizations, we need to ask, would an individual be willing
                                                                                to pay
a positive price for a contract which gave the individual an additional amount of
      —            if
                Pt < p1, but where he would have to pay an additional amount of

T(p —
            p1) (l—z) if   Pt > p1. if he sells the asset within a year, knowing that there
is some probability that he will involuntarily have to sell the asset during that

interval. From what we said earlier, if
                                                the probability is zero, the price of this
contract is positive; while if the
                                         probability is large enough, the probability of
a gain is significant enough, and z is small enough, then the price of
                                                                                         contract
is negative. We shall limit ourselves to the case where the probabilit-
                                                                                         a forced
realization is sufficiently small that the price of this contract is pos ive.

      There is a discontinuity in          at t   =   1.   Once the asset has become long term,
the price paid for realization is
                                        much reduced; and given our stationarity assumptions,
                                                               —24—




after       t =   1,   both the     beflefits     and costs remain unchanged.

        Finally, we note the effect of the differential taxes on long—term and short—

                             If   long—term and          short—term gains are taxed at the same                    rate,
term gains on .
                         forail t

For assume (t) > 1. The only reason that we argued that there is an advantage to
realizing a gain was that it put us in a position to realize a short—term loss. Assume
                                                  — p. If we had simply waited until
that subsequently at t we realized a loss of
p,   the PDV of our tax liabilities would have been T(p
                                                                                            —
                                                                                                l)ert    rather than
        —   l)e —rt      + (p —   p)e
                                        —rt
                                              ]. Conver;ely,           if     p(t) < 1.
        Consider now the other limiting case, where z
                                                                                   =   0,   i.e. there is no long—term
capital gains tax. Then, just after t                            realize his gain;
                                                                   =   1,   the individual would

                                                       assumptions,, if the rate of
there is no cost to obtaining the "put" and (under our
                                                             immediately follows that,
forced realizations is low enough) considerable benefit:. lt
                                    24 for 0 <       t   <    1.
once again,              p(t) = 1

        We can summarize this discussion in

                            There is a critical (t)                         such that if p(t) <         p(t),   the individual


sells his asset.                  satisfies the following propertieS

         (a) p(0)=l
         (b) p'(t) >0 for t > 1

         (c) urn i(t) < Urn
                  tAl.              tl         p(t)>l


                  urn j(t) =        lirn       (t)       1     for 0 <         t <1
                  z-*0              z-+l


                  urn (t) =                for   t   >1
                  z-*0


                  lim p(t) =        1      for t > 1
                  z+l

                  dp < 0                   for t     >   1.
                  dz
                                                                                    investment
            Although in this and the preceding section we have analyzed the optimal
                                               —25—


  strategy of an investor under rather particulas
                                                          assumptions, elsewhere we have     explored
 alternative formulations. The result that,
                                                      provided the capital gain is not too large,
 it is desirable     to realize gains as soon   as they become eligible for long term        treat—
 ment, appears to be robust. 25,26,27



                                           Part III

 The Welfare Analysis of Capital Gains Taxation

 7. Exchans Efficiency, Production Efficiency, and the Locked in Effect

        There   has been considerable   concern over the Pistortionary     effects of capital
gains   taxation, in particular, over the locked in effect. The analysis of the preceding
sect ioos has raised two important      points: in     a perfect capital market, there are no
real   consequemees of capital gains taxation; while in
                                                        an imperfect capital market,
there may or may not be a locked in effect.           The fact that distortionary effects
only occur in markets with some capital market
                                                        imperfection makes any welfare analysis
tenuous: we cannot rely on the Fundamental Theorem of Welfare economics to
                                                                             say that
in the absence of taxation, the market
                                       equilibruin would have been pareto optimal (rae

Stiglitz (1981)). What is required is a second best analysis, which would take us beyond

the scope of this paper. We can, however, attempt to identify the kinds of distortions

introduced by the capital gains tax, in particular, those arising from the locked in

effect, when it occurs. The locked in effect has two consequences:

       (a) The ecoy_l], no longer have, the           property   of "exchange" efficienc1.
    There are transfers of ownership of assets which could make both parties to the

    transfer better off, which, because of the tax,          will   not take place. There is
    some question, however, concerning the magnitude of the associated welfare loss.

    In particular, the importance that one ascribes to the locked in effeat on the

    stock market depends on one's view of the role of the stock market in allocating

    real resources (as opposed to providing a convenient gambling casino for wealthy

    individuals). (See Stiglitz (1982)).
                                       —26—


     (b) The capital gains tax interferes with the"PrOdUCtiVe" efficiency of the economI.

There are at least three ways that capital gains taxation may interfere with the

productive efficiency of the economy. First, there is a widespread belief that the

locked in effect gives rise to greater volatility of asset prices, and this greater price

volatility makes investments in equities less attractive. Secondly, in those situations

where ownership of assets affects the uses to which they are put, the impediments to

the transfer of ownership of assets to those who can best manage them may result in

significant productive losses to the economy.28 Thirdly, when the return to an

investment project is realized in the form of a capital gain, then the date of

termination of the project affects the present value of the tax liability, and hence

the project may be terminated at a date different from when it would have otherwise

have been terminated.

     In the following sections, we construct simple models examining some aspects of

these distortions associated with capital gains taxation.

8. The Locked in Effect and Price Instabiliy

     In the preceding section, we noted that there was a widespread belief that because

the locked in effect results in thinner markets, prices are likely to be more volatile.

To assess this allegation, one needs to construct a general equilibrium model. It

is not, for instance, obvious that thinner markets result in greater price volatility;

the locked in effect might reduce the supply of assets and the demand for it proportion-

ately (owners of firm A are "locked in" and so do not offer it for sale; but owners

of other firms are also "locked in" and so do not offer to buy.) 2

     The present section provides the simplest dynamic general equilibrium model,

which shows that the capital gains tax may indeed result in greater price
                                                                          volatilitY.30

                                                     otherwise would have occurred not
We also show that it may result in exchanges which

occurring (but it may not necessarily do so.)

     There are two groups in the population, two states of nature, one risky security

 to be traded, and no short sales. In state 0, the dividend is ,     in   state 1 it is
                                                              —27--


    .     Welet a. and .                   denote the     after
    the eCofleay is in state
                                                                   tax dividends received by group i .
                                                                                                                   cn
                                           0 the probability that it will be in state 0
                                                                                                            next period
   in    the judgement of indivdua3s              of type i is
                                                        Similarly when it s in state J,
   the Probability that it will he in state 1 next period is
                                                                    The co groups may
  differ in their judgments abeut the transition
                                                  prohabjlitie5 (equivalently since what
  we will be interested in is the marginal utility of
                                                       income in each state times the
  probability that product will differ between the two groups
                                                               even when, with rational
  expectations they agree on the transition
                                              probabilities)
          In each state, the
                                       security will be held by the group which values it most
  highly.       The valuation         of the security
                                                      depends, of course, on what they believe
                                                                                                                   they
  can sell the security for, if
                                              they desired to sell it. For
                                                                                            simplicity, we shall
  focus on the case where
                                       group A holds the security in            state           0, group B holds the
                                 31
 security in state 1.

 Then

 (8.1)
                V0      6IxA[CA + V0] + (1 —
                                                   rA)[A +         V1 —
                                                                          zTA(Vl
                                                                                     —
                                                                                         V0)J]
 (8.2)          V1 6BICB + VU — ZT(V0                 —
                                                          V1)J + (1 -      xB)[B     +
where

        V. = value of security in state I

           = discount factor

        z = ratio of capital gains tax              to      tax   on   ordinary income
               tax on ordinary income of group i
                A                -    B
               x00, 1       71B -


Solving   (8.1) and (8.2)
                                     simultaneously, we obtain

                                      —
                            +             mA)dB         /
(8.3)
               VU-
                        A
                                                    /                       - ink)
                                                                               ___       &flB
                                lóflIA
                                                  /                     lom 1—o(l-)
                                                                   —28--



                                    mB                                /
                      5d        +

           V111                                        A
                                                               //
whe

            d. =
             1
                      ct
                           iiTI. +(l        —
                                                11
                                                -
            mA        71A +

                  =                 —
            ThE       •TTB(1            zTB)

We are interested in the effect of taxation on price volatility.                                   Hence, we calculate

                                                —           + 6[dB —
(8.4)       V0 — dA+5[niBdA                         mAdB]                  dA]
            V1 dB +S[mBdA - lnAdBJ

                  — 1       +       (dA_dB)(l_)
                                d+ ó[ndA -                 mAdBJ

 From this, we can easily calculate the effect of any change of taxation on price

 volatility. We examine one special case, leaving other cases to the reader. We

 assume that the probability of a transition from state 0 to 1 is equal to the probability

 of a transition from state 1 to state O in the judgment of the individual holding the
                                                                                                                 Hence
 security (which differs in the two states). We assume moreover that TA = TB•



            V1
                                                 + a_71B)+ "                     —    z   'r   —


            dV0/V1                      —              —                 —

              dzt                               (aTr               (tA       w)

 From (8.4) V0/V1                   1 as                                 0; hence an increase in the capital gains tax

 thcreass volatility if and only if ct1 >

                                           that the capital gains tax may result in
        We can also use this model to show

 exchanges which would have taken place in the absence of capital gains taxation not

 occurring. To see this, we recall that for (8.1) and (8.2) to describe the equilibrium,

  the valuation of the risky security in state 0 must be higher for group A than

  for group B. Assume individual B initially owns the shares. We can calculate
                                                —29—


    how    much he receives, after paying   capital gains tax, if he sells. (at A will
   be willing to pay depends, as we have already noted, on how much tax
                                                                         A will have to
   pay when, subsequently, he resells back to B) . Siuilarlv, we can cal cui ate hc much
   it is worth to B to retain the asset permanently. If the capital
                                                                    gains tax rate
   is high enough, the latter is greater than the foiirer and no transaction
                                                                             occurs.
        There is, as we have noted, some debate about the welfare signifi canoe of the
   reduced trading and increased price volatility in the stock market. If
                                                                            the stock
   market is not hing more than a rich man's gambling casino, then perhaps one should
                                                                                      not
   be too concerned. On the other hand, if ownership and control are
                                                                       lin1ed, tbe locked
  in effect may result in the asset being ownecl—nd thus
                                                          controlled——by an individual,
  when some other individual would be able to put the asset to better use.
  9.      Real Investments and Capital Gains Taxation
       In this section, we focus on the real effects of capital gains xation:
  the impact it has on the kinds of investment projects 'ndertakcn.
                                                                                       this,   we
  employ    the   standard Austrian capital model; in Stiglirz (1981) I show
                                                                                       t (i) there
  was some tendency for projects to be terminated too early, not too 1
                                                                                       nd   (ii) if
  one could not infer
                      unambiguously from observed average returns what                marginal
  returns    were, then there was no method of constructive realization wi ch was pn—
  distortionary.
          Here,   I wish both to gereralize and tO   qualify this   first   result: to show that
  there    is a general class of problems for which
                                                        the techniques employed there can be
used to show that the first result is valid,
                                               but, at the same time, that there are other
 important classes of problems for which the
                                                     "conventional" wisdom, that projects
 will be terminated too late, is true.

       We assume an investment of a dollar yields, after a period of T years, a
                                                                                return
 of f(T). The question posed is, at what date (or for what
                                                                      size   tttree1) should
 the project be terminated. While in the portfolio mode)s considered in
                                                                          earlier
 sections, we assumed the (expected) perc:cntage
                                                 return was constant over time (although
                                                       —30—


this was not essential for some of the results), here we assume that there is

diminishing returns.

        The impact of taxation will, be shown to depend on two critical factors: (1)

whether the project is treated in isolation, or is one of a sequence of related
projects; e.g. if, whether when the
                                    tree is cut down, it will be repaced by another
tree; and (2) the extent to which the rate of discount (after tax) is affected by the
capital gains tax (i.e. the extent to which there is effective shifting of the capital gai--

tax).

9.1 Isolated Prolects. The individual seeks to
                                                 —rT —
             max [f(T)(l — 'u) +           Tie         1


where,    as before, T            tax rate and r =         after   tax rate of interest.

The   solution to this is
(9.1)'       f' =   [f        +   T
                                      Ti

There are two effects: r, the after tax rate of interest, may well be below its

before tax rate. This leads to T being larger than without taxation. on the other

hand, clearly

               + i1       T
                              >
and this leads to T being smaller than it                      otherwise would be. If there is no
change    in the before tax real rate of interest, so

             r =    r(l   —

then T is greater than it would be without taxation. On the other hand, if there is
no change in the after tax real rate of interest, T is smaller than it otherwise would

be (a negative locked in effect).

9.2 Replacement. Assume now that there is a fixed piece of land, on which a single

tree could grow. Again, we ask, what is the optimal size at which to terminate the

project (cut the tree down). We let V be the optimal value of the sequen                        of
investment projects; because of the time invariance assumption, we can write
                                                                 —31—


                 =   erT[f(T)(l            -   T) + T - 1 + V3

 so
                     e        [f(fl -      1)(1   -       T)]
                                   -
                               1 — e

 It is immediate that T only affects the optimal value of T                             through its effect on
 . Straightforward difforentiation shows that so long as an increase in the tax
 rate reduces the after tax return, an increase in the tax will result in an increase
 in the cutting size, i.e. trees will be cut down later than they otherwise would be.
 Stochastic Growth. Following our earlier analysis (Stiglitz (1981)) and uing the
 techniques employed in Brock, Rothschild, and Stiglitz (1982), we can easily extend
this analysis to the case of trees with uncertain growth. Under quite general conditions,
it can be sho.m that if the stochastic process describing growth is stationary the
optimal policy can be expressed in terms of an optimal cutting size (termnnion size
for the project, X*) . The expected present discounted value of the project is thus
             Ee —rT [(1 — T) + T] —                   1

where T is the first time the tree reaches size X. Let                                H(T,X) be the distribution

of the first passage time to the size X, and let J(X,r) be the moment
                                                                                                 generating
function    of the first passage time:

             M(X,r) =         1
                                           dIi(T,x)
                              0

Then our maximization problem can be reformulated as

             max M(X,r)[X(l — T) + Ti — 1

The optimal value of X satisfies


                                                                =0
so


                         (1   -   X)   -   i + -fx(i - t)            + TJMX   + (1 - T)M}
If r remains unchanged, the tax always reduces the cutting size (as in the                            non—
                                                —32—



stochastic case), but th& magnitude of the change, as well as the direction, in             the

case where r changes, will depend on the nature of the stochastic process.
      Finally, the same arguments show        that   with replacement, the firms maximization

problem is
            max   XM. -i) -   1,

where   the only effect of T       on    X is   through   its effect on r, just as in the non—
stochastic   case.

9.3 Other Provisions. The analysis of the preceding subsection ignored the impact of

a large number of provisions of the tax code, which can significantly affect the outcorue.

For instance, if there is a step up of the basis at death, then an individual expecting

to die in the near future may postpone the realization of a capital gain (cutting

down the tree), eve.n when the real rate of return is much less than the rate of

interest (or even r(l —       T)).      Similarly, for many assets, the choice of durability

is affected not only by the capital gains tax, but equally importantly by
                                                                                     the   relation-

ship between the true economic rate of depreciation, and the maximum allowable

depreciation rate.

9.4 Production and Exchange. Our earlier analysis should make it evident that, in

the case where there    is no differential treatment between (short term) gains and
(long   term) losses, it never pays to exchange an asset on which there is a capital

gain prior to the termination of the project (again assuming a perfect capital market).

By the same token, when growth is stochastic, it always pays to exchange an asset
                                                                    33
when its usizett is smaller than at the time of purchase.

        When, however, there are individuals at different tax brackets, then there will

be transfers of ownership prior to the project termination.              For instance, assume

there is some tax exempt individual, and the solution to (9.1), T, (the date of

termination of the project for the taxed individual) is less then T", the solution

 to
                                            —33—


             f' (T)    r f(T.*)

 (the termination date without taxes) .     Then the value of this tree at T is not
                       r(Tx - T)
 f(T), but f(I*)e                  > f(T)

      We commented in our earlier discussion that there may be an important link
 between production and exchange, when ownership and control are linked together, and
 when there are significant differences in different individuals' ability to manage
 particular assets. It should be noted that what we have referred to as the termination
of a project does not necessarily correspond to "chopping down a tree." It may,
instead, represent a transfer of management of the tree. The tree with a new manager
is a different project (in our terminology) than the tree with the old manager. The
social loss then in a delay in the termination of a project is simply the difference
between   what the growth would have been, under the   new management and what it was
under   the old; similarly, for an early termination of a project.

       Not all realizations result in a change in control; an investor may be induced

by tax considerations to sell some shares at a different date than he otherwise would,

but so long as the number of shares is small, there need not be a change in the management

(and hence in the productive uses to which the assets are put). In that case, the

only inefficiency arising out of the capital gains tax is an exchange inefficiency.

If the assets which would have otherwise been exchanged but are not, are not too dissimilar,

the consumer surplus lost as a result of this exchange irfficiency may be relatively

small, even though the amount of trade impeded in the market may be very large.

10. Macro—economic Effects

     Revenue effects

     We showed in our earlier analysis that there was some possibility that a lowering

of the tax rate on long—term capital gains would lead to increased realization of

longterm gains. In the very short run, this would increase government revenue; in

the long run, however, it.is likely to decrease government revenue for three reasons:
                                           —34—




      (1)   The individual is choosing to pay a tax today which he would have had to

            pay at some date in the future. The increase in tax revenue is largely

            simply a change in timing.

      (2)   If, as we have argued, one of the motivations tor the realization of long—

            term gains is for the individual to be in a position to take advantage of

            the ability to write off short—term losses at full rates, then there will
                                                                            35
            be, as a result, a negative cash flow from the treasury.

      (3) The shorL—run increase in government revenues is partly the effect of

            moving from one steady state to another. Within the new steady state,

            there are three effects that have to be reckoned with: Given that the economy

            is growing, a shorter holding period will be associated with more recent

            investments, and therefore with a larger base; on the other hand, the fact

            that   the investments are terminated earlier means that each will have
            experienced a smaller level of capital gains; and since a lower tax rate
            is   imposed, the tax revenues generated will be even smaller.

      To see this heuristically, assume the average tax rate on realizations, when

the ratio of the tax rate on long term capital gains to that on ordinary income is

z,    is r'z), with t >0; when z is lowered,              T is lowered, both because of the

direct effect      of the lower z, and the indirect effect of the greater opportunity to
take advantage of losses. Thus t'Z                Assume   that investments are   growing at

the rate g, and the average capital gain on investments (per dollar invested)
realized after T years is f(T) — 1. Thus, the steady state flow of tax revenue
is proportional      to                               -




                          - 1)

Differentiating logarithmically with respect to z, we obtain

                           f'    dT T       -               r       f      dT
                                                   -.35-.


  tf,now,we assume that    the interest rate is not less than the rate of growth, and if lowcrjne

  the tax rate lowers the holding period, the steady state flow of tax revenues is

 reduced. 36

        This long r'an effect is markedly different from the short run effect. In the

 transition from one steady state, with            say T     T1 to another steady state with
 T —
       T2    (where T is the average holding period), all those assets invested in the
 interval between t        —
                               T1
                                    and   t — T2   are sold, (where t     is   the date of the (unanticipat::.
 tAx change) i..e. there is a one time sale proportional to

              e
               C1 —e
                   g
 Cldarly, if the transition sales occur rapidly enough, there will be a short—term

 increase in tax revenues accompanied by a long—run decrease in tax revenues. Offsetting

 these effects there are positive effects from any increased efficiency in the economy

 (resdlting from the reduction in a distortion) and from any increased savings.

       There is., however, no reason to believe that the government should take either

the extremely     short sighted view       of looking at    current tax   revenues, or the extreme
long   run view   of looking only at steady state revenues.          Indeed, in other contexts,
we   have   learned that focusing on steady        states, ignoring transitions, may be extremely
misleading.
       A more reasonable view for the government to take is to ask, what is the effect
of the change in the long term capital gains tax rate on (a) the present discounted
value of tax revenues; (b) the current level of consumption; and (c) the level of
private savings and the pattern of its allocation.
     It is clearly possible that (even apart from the direct effect of the
lowering of the tax rate) the change in
                                        timing may reduce the present discounted
value of tax revenues. To see this most simply, we return to a modified version
of the two period model of Section 3, where an individua] has experienced a
capital gain of     p1 —   1.
                          The tax rate on capital gains this period is z1r and next
period it is expected to be z2r, z2> z1 Consider the individual who is indifferent
                                                    —36—


between terminating the project, and reinvesting the proceeds in a one period project

which  will yield a rate of return of g2, so his after tax terminal wealth is
(10.1)     [(p1 - l)(l - zT) + l](l + g2(l - zr))
and    keeping his       funds       project, which will, over the next period,
                                 in the   current

increase in value at a rate g1, so his after tax terminal wealth is
(10.2)      p1(l + g1)(l - zT) + ZT
 In the first case, the government's present discounted value of revenue is
(10.3)       i[p1 - 1 +
                         g2
                                         l-
                                     l)(1 - ZT) +           )}
while    in the second it is

                                  — 11
(10.4)       zT(p1(1 + g1)
                     1+r

Equating (10.1) and (10.2), solving for g2, substituting into (10.3), and simplifying,

we obtain that the difference in the government revenues is


              T(p1
                     —
                         1)
                1 + r         {rz1 + z1 —    z2)

 Hence, provided that the government's discount rate is not too large, and

 provided z2 >>          z1, the   earlier   realization reduces the present discounted
 value of government revenue.

         If individuals' discount rates are higher than the governmen1s, then if the
 present discounted value of tax payments,             using the individual's discount rate, is

 the   same for an investment program involving shorter holding          period as it is for an

 investment program involving longer holding periods, then the present discounted

 value, of the government's revenue, using the lower, government discount rate, is

 higher with the longer holding period.

 EffecsinS. All of the analysis so far                       has assumed that when the individual

 realizes his capital gain, he will reinvest his after tax proceeds in a productive

 investment, and will not use the proceeds to increase his consumption.
                                          —37—


        Evex3 if consumption s unaffected, the earlier realization will lead to a

 reduction in the level of private savings, by an amount equal to the tax payment to

 the   government. The usual argument that the ability of individuals to postpone their
 taxes by postponing realization is equivalent to a loan from the government can be
 looked at in just the opposite way: it is a loan specifically directed at productive
 opportunities within the economy (although the critical rate of return on the invest-
 ment may be below the market rate of interest). The increase in government tax

 revenues   can, in this view, be thought of as coming directly out of private savings,

 rather than out of consumption.

       This is, of course, only a first order approximation. We now need to enquire

whether a lowering of the tax on long term capital gains, and the shortening of the

holding   period that might result, will lead to an increase in consumption, thus
further reducing the private savings available   for investment, or to a decrease in

consumption. Not surprisingly, either result is possible under not implausible

conditions.

       First, consider an individual who is almost indifferent between the two strategies,

of selling capital gains as soon as they become long term, and realizing only losses;

we can view a switch from the second strategy to the first as a mean utility preserving

reduction in the (after tax) riskiness of the investment. Such a change can be shown

to leave consumption unaffected if relative risk aversion is constant and if all income

comes from the risky asset; if relative risk aversion is decreasing then consumption

will increase. On the other hand, if the income from the risky asset is only a

fraction of the individual's total income, then even with constant relative risk

aversion, there will be some reduction in consumption.

       If individuals are constrained in their borrowing, there may also be a liquidity

effect leading individuals to increase their consumption upon the sale of their assets.

(See Stiglitz (1981)).
                                        —38—


     There is a third effect: If individuals are risk averse, they will not, in
general, pursue one policy to the exclusion of the other; changing z will affect
the proportion of one's capital gains that are realized. Noreover, individuals will
alter the proportions in which they invest in risky assets versus safe assets. 38
     The important conclusion of this section is that changes in capital gains tax
rates and tax revenues hive markedly different effects from those from other forms of
taxes. The short—run impact is primarily a transitional effect, representing the
change from one steady state level of ho ding periods to another. This has little
to do with the long—run effects, which may well be of the opposite sign. Nore important,
whether tax revenues increase or decrease, the income effect of a lowering of the
tax rate on capital gains is always positive, leading to an increase in consumption.
As usual, the substitution effect may offset this. But in addition to these two

standard effects, we have noted the possible existence of a third, liquidity effect,

which, to the extent that holding periods are shortened, may increase consumption.

     Equally important, we have argued, that to the first order of approximation,

changes in capital gains tax revenues can be thought of as coming directly out of

funds available for private investment, rather than out of consumption. Just as

social security represents an asset, the anticipation of which depresses private

savings and investment, the existence of the deferred tax liabilities associated

with longer holding periods represents a liability, which increases private savings

and investment.

     Within this perspective, it is difficult to know what significance should be

attached to the adniittedly controversial empirical studies of Feldstein, et. al., that

lowering the tax on long—term capital gains will increase (in the short run)

government tax revenue.
                                              —39—



  11.    Conclusions

         This   paper has shown that the analysis of the effects of capital gains taxation
 requires a careful modelling both of the details of the tax code and the imperfections
 in the capital market. Under the standard assumptions concerning perfect capital
 markets and under the standard idealizations of the tax code, there are several

 strategies by which     rational   investors can avoid not only all taxes on their capital

 income, but also all taxes on their wage income; these strategies leave individuals

 consumption     and bequests in each state of nature and at each date unchanged from what
 they would     have been in the absence of taxes. Although certain detailed
                                                                              provisions
 of the tax code may limit the extent to which rational investors can avail themselves

 of these tax avoidance activities, there are ways, in a perfect capital market, by

 which the effects of these restrictions can be ameliorated.        We have contended,

 accordingly, that any analysis of the effects of capital taxation must focus on

 imperfect capital markets.

        If individuals face limitations on the amounts which they can borrow and/or if

there are limitations on short sales, then we have shown that there are circumstances

where there is a locked in effect; but there are other circumstances where individuals

are induced to sell securities that they otherwise would have held, in order to take

advantage of the assymetric treatment of short term losses and long term gains. A

policy of realizing gains as soon as they become eligible for long term treatment

(provided the gains are not too large) dominates the policy of postponing the

realization of capital gains.

        While we have constructed a simple general equilibrium model, within which we

can confirm the widespread belief that the taxation of capital gains may increase

the volatility of asset prices, and lead individuals not to trade when they otherwise

would, we have cast come doubt on the significance of the welfare losses
                                                                               resulting
from these exchange inefficiencies. At the same time, we have seen that there are

circumstance.s in which the tax leads to production
                                                          inefficiencies, e.g. terminating
projects at other than the socially optimal       date.
                                         —40—



       Finally, we have argued that the focus of some recent policy debates on the
short run revenue impact of a decrease in   the   tax rate on capital gains is misplaced:
even   when the short run revenue impact is positive, consumption may increase (thus

exacerbating inflationary pressures) and private savings may decrease (thus leading

to   a lower level of investment in the private sector) .   Moreover, we have argued

that there is some presumption that the long run revenue impact is negative.
       Although our analysis has focused on the central theoretical issues involved
in capital gains taxation, it has some important implications for empirical research.
In particular, our analysis suggests that the impact of the tax is not adequately
summarized by a single number, such as the 'effect.ive tax rate" representing the

average   ratio of tax payments to capital gains. Moreover, the impact of the tax
cannot be assessed by looking only at reported capital gains and losses.
    Our analysis also has important policy implications for the reform of capital
gains taxation, but a dissussion of these must await another occasion.
                                                FOOTNOTES

               Even then, if all individuals were rational, well informed investors, I
                                                                                       suspect
               that one should observe more extensive use of the tax avoidance activities than
               one presently observes. And if capital markets
               large number of well informed brokers           were very competitive, with a
                                                     providing information concerning tax avoidance
               activities to potential investors, one would have expected that the transactions
               costs associated with many of these tax avoidance
                                                                 activities would be much lower
               than they presently are.
         2
              Thus a short sale is just like
                                             a loan, cept that    the amount to be paid back
              depends on the (random) price of the security (at   the time the "loan" is repaid).
              This assumption is made to simplify the analysis.   It obviously does not provide
              an accurate description of how short sales
                                                         occur.
              the conclusions we reach are discussed below.
                                                                  The implications of this for

              For a more extensive discussion of
                                                 the provisions of the U.S. tax code
              to the taxation of capital gains,                                      relating
                                                see Stiglitz (1981b)or Minarik (1981).
              In addition, we ignore the rules relating to the offsetting of long term
              with short term losses. But see below.                                   gains

              If capital gains are taxed upon death it is still optimal to postpone them
              until then. In that case, our analysis shows that the old adage, "There
                                                                                       are
              two things in life which cannot be avoided — death
                                                                 and taxes" needs to be modified
              to read "You can avoid either taxes or death, but not both."
     6
             As I pointed out in 1973, it is difficult
                                                       to explain why rational firms pay
             dividends. The subsequent literature trying to explain the "dividend paradox"
             has left me unconvinced,
                                      particularly with respect to the tax avoidance activities
             of closely held companies. For a further discussion, see Stiglitz (1982b).

             In Continuous time, all we would require is that within the year interval, the
             probability that the movement of price from the
                                                             original price exceeded        in
             absolute value was unity; this would be satisfied with any stochastic
             described by a diffusion equation with positive variance.             process
     8
             If At <
                       A,   he will need to purchase an additional
                                                                     amount of y2/2 and sell
             short an additional amount of   y2/2 + A — At to attain his desired position

             We also assume that long term gains are not used to offset short term losses
             a one to one basis. See below.                                               on

10
             We assume long—term gains and losses are taxed at the rate z* and simply added
             to the tax liability on short—term gains (losses).

         If along the no—tax optimal investment strategy, he would, in some state, have
         reduced his holdings of the risky asset (A+1 <
                                                          At), and if there would, as a
         result, be a capital gains tax      liability,
                                                   the individual must that period borrow
         an additional amount to offset this tax liability. If the sale results in a
         capital loss, the individual need borrow less.
12
         Again, as in the previous two strategies, there are several ways by which this
         basic policy may be implemented.
13   It should be noted that recent legislation attempting to restrict straddles in
     the commodity markets has included a set of provisions which, if enforced, might
     restrict the kinds of transactions just described. On the other hand, the enforcement
     would require a complicated analysis of the statistical properties of the securities
     purchased by each individual; if enforced, its effects on the securities market
     could be profound.
14
     A zero coupon bond projising to pay $1 in T periods sells for eT     today; the
     capital gain is l--e    and hence the inputed interest is l.erL.
                                                                   T
15
     Similar avoidance schemes can be implemented with uncertain interest rates, but
     they require more complicated portfolio strategies for the individual to be
     perfectly hedged.
     Though the substitution of exponential for arithmetic imputation schemes eliminates
     the use of this tax avoidance scheme when interest rates are not variable, when
     they are, a more complicated tax avoidance arbitrage scheme can be devised.
16   This list is not meant to be exhaustive; for instance, an individual who is
     planning to give a gift next year to a charitable foundation might be better off
     not realizing a capital gain this year, but rather giving the security directly
     to the foundation next year.
17   Restrictions on wash sales may still impede the individual's ability to realize
     the gain at favorable capital gains rates.




18   Differences in tax rates are important in understanding the impact of capital
     taxes within a general equilibrium context. See e.g. Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).
19   Nore accurately, the individual would have purchased complete insurance for all
     "individualistic" events, i.e. all events which the market can diversify out of.

20   This effect may be particularly pronounced if there are both incomplete risk
     markets and imperfect capital markets. If individuals could easily borrow (never
     faced credit constraints), then the individual could "smooth" the loss of income
     which occurs next period over an extended period of time. Thus the difference in
     his marginal utility of income might be relatively small. However, if there are
     borrowing constraints, the reduction in income next period may result in a marked
     decrease in consumption and a corresponding increase in the marginal utility of
     (current) income.
21   The "price" the individual pays for this "insurance" depends on the tax structure.
     If there is no favorable treatment of long term gains, then the price (in terms of
     the reduction in the expected present discounted value of his consumption) is just
           —      while if there is favorable treatment of long term gains, this
             p0),
     strategy may actually increase the expected present discounted value of his
     consumption, as we saw earlier.
     22
            The assumption of stationarity is important, as the analysis. of Stiglitz (198Th)
            shows.
     23
            Again, we are making use of the assumption of a binding
                                                                      borrowing constraint.
     24
           Assume (E) > 1, for some , 0       <   t
                                                < 1. As before, the only reason to sell is
           to take advantage of the provisions for tax losses, in the interval (t, t + 1.).
           Our earlier argument established that if the date of subsequent realization was
           within the period (0,1), no advantage was served by the earlier realization. On
           the other hand, if the realization was in the interval (1, 1 + t), again no
           advantage is served, since at worst the individual would have, at 1, realized his
           long—term capital gain without paying any taxes. Similar arguments show that
           p cannot be less than 1.
     25
           The analysis of this and the preceding section assumed that the binding constraint
           imposed on the individual is his ability to borrow. He would like to take a
           greater position in the risky asset, but cannot. In Stiglitz (l981b)we consider
           another polar case; the individual keeps his level of holdings of the risky asset
           fixed. As he realizes his losses, the tax rebates
                                                          are added to consumption; when he
           realizes a gain, he pays for the taxes by reducing consumption. We calculate the
           expected present discounted value of tax liabilities associated with alternative
           portfolio strategies, and show, once again, that the policy of realizing gains
           as soon as they become eligible for long term treatment may be the preferable
           policy.
 26
          In Stiglitz (l981b),we also consider a discrete time, dynamic programming formulation.
          Note that a risk averse individual is more likely to take the policy of realizing
          capital gains as soon as they become eligible for long—term treatment than a risk
          neutral individual; for such a policy yields a positive "tax" return to the
          individual in precisely those states of nature when the value of the security has
          decreased. Thus, this strategy provides a kind of insurance against losses.
27 In our analysis we have ignored transactionscosts. For wealthy
                                                                           individuals,
          transactions costs are not significant, relative to the possible gains to be had.
          For instance, with the present tax law, with long—term gains being taxed at 40%
          of short—term gains, a security with a two—point
                                                           istribution {g,—2,} with equal prob-
          abilities generates an expected tax cash flow of
                                                           - r(2. — .4g) if the individual
          pursues the policy of always realizing gains. Hence, if     g > 2. > .4g it is
          clear that this cash flow can be positive while the expected return to the asset
          is also positive. For high variance securities, this cash flow can exceed any
          reasonable estimate of transaction costs.
28
          The importance of the relationship between ownership and control has long been
          recognized, see, e.g.Knight (1921). It has been stressed in the more recent
          literature on principal—agent relationships.
29
          These arguments implicitly assume a kind of imperfection in the capital market;
          gambles on the price of a security are not restricted to the number of shares
          outstanding; and individuals' demands for securities need not be restricted
          by their reluctance to sell their present holdings, if they can borrow against
          these or sell these (or equivalent) securities short.
30
          We suspect that the likelihood that the capital gains tax leads to greater
          price volatility is even greater then our simplified model suggests. Assume, for
          instance, that there are two groups in the population, one of which has volatile
          beliefs about the return on the risky security, the other of which has very
          stable beliefs. In the absence of capital gains taxation, the stable group sells
                                                          (Footnote continued on next page)
     to the volatile group when the latter is optimistic, dampening out the price
     fluctuations from what they would be if only members of the volatile group
     traded with each other. The locked in effect may remove the stable group from
     the market (particularly in inflationary periods); since those who are very
     optimistic about the return on some security are willing to sell their present
     assets, and. pay a capital gains tax, to buy the security about which they have
     become optimistic, the members of the more volatile group will not be locked in
     to the same extent that members of the stable group are. With only the more
     volatile individuals remaining in the market, the price variability will more
     fully reflect the volatility of their expectations.

     The restrictions on the parameters which must be satisfied for this to be a
     consistent solution are set forth in Stiglitz (1981b).
32
     See also Stiglitz (1973) and Dasgupta, Heal, and Stiglitz (1980). In the latter
     we explore the effects of capital gains taxation on a particular class of
     productive assets —— exhaustible natural resources.

     This plays an important role in oil leasing. When exploration reveals that there
     is (in an expected value sense) less oil than had originally been thought, there
     is a decrease in the value of the lease. In some cases, it may be profitable
     simply to terminate the project, to obtain the tax write—off, even though. in the
     absence of taxation, the project might be continued.

     Similar inefficiencies arise in the estate tax, in the presence of an imperfect
     capital market. Estates with large tax liabilities often must sell ongoing
     establishments to raise the capital to pay the tax. Note that if capital markets
     were perfect, and if the existing management in fact represented the best use of
     the resources, then the individuals could borrow to pay the estate duty.

     This negative cash flow will not, however, be reflected in the returns recorded
     on schedule D because of the restrictions on the deductibility of losses; it will,
     however, be reflected in the deductions for interest payments and losses on
     ordinary income.
36
     Even if the after tax rate of interest is less than the rate of growth, (as, for
     instance, Gordon has recently argued) the steady state effect may well be
     negative.
     in the discussion so far, we have assumed that the realization of an asset
     corresponded to its termination (the chopping down of a tree). Similar results
     obtain, however, if a realization simply represents a change in ownership. For
     simplicity, let us assume that all assets grow at the market rate of interest
     r, and all realizations occur after T periods of ownership. At any date,
     then, there are gT units of assets which were invested T years ago being
     realized, each of which now has increased in size by an amount erT — 1.
     Similarly, there are -2gT units of assets which were invested 2T years ago
     being realized, each of which now has increased in size to e2rT, etc. The
     total capital gains tax liability is proportional to (provided g >      r)
          (erT 1){_T + _2gTrT + _3gT2rT            =   rT — 1)   1 —
                                                                         — g)
                                                                       e(r

     For r near g, the derivative of this with respect to T is positive: reducing
     the holding period will reduce the steady state flow of government revenues. On
     the other hand, for g >>  r    the derivative of this with respect to T is
                                                   (Footnote continued on next page)
     negative: reducing the holding period will increase the steady flow of revenues.
38
     Again, a slight reduction in z, which induces a change to a shorter mean holding
     period, can be thought of as inducing a mean utility
                                                          preserving reduction in the
     riskiness of the risky security. It is known that if there is decreasing absolute
     risk aversion and increasing relative risk aversion, this will lead to a decrease
     in the value of holdings of the safe asset.
                                               -Ri-



REFERENCES
                                                  of Tax Code Provisions" University of
Allen, F. "On the Importance of Interaction

   Pennsylvania rnirneo ,l982

Atkinson, A. and J.E. Stiglitz,l98O, Lectures on Public
                                                        Econoimics, McGraw—Hill Co.:

   New York and London
                                             and Income Taxation," in: Arnold C.
Bailey, Martin J., 1969,"Capital Gains

   Harberger and N.J. Bailey,eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital (The Brookings

   Institution, Washington,D.C.) 11—49
                                                      1979, "Notes on Stochastic Capital
Brock, W., N. Rothschild and J. E. Stiglitz,

   Theory", paper prepared for a symposium on Insurance and Uncertainty in Economic

   Theory in honor of Karl Borch, Bergen, Norway, April
                                                                Liquidation of Assets in the
Constantinides, C. M. and N. S. Ccholes, 1981, "Optimal

   Presence of Personal Tax: Implications for Asset Pricing, "Journal of

   Papers    and Proceedings
Constantinides, G. N.,    1980,   "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax",
   University of Chicago mimeo, February
Dasgupta, P., G. Heal, and J.      E.   Stiglitz, 1980, "The Taxation of Exhaustible
   Resources", in: G. A. Hughes and G. N.       Heal,    eds., Public Policy and, the Tax
   ystem (George Allen &        Unwin, London) 150—172

David, M., 1968, A1ernativeApppchS.
                                               to Capital Gains Taxation, (The BrookingS

    Institute,   Washington, P. C.)
                                             Taxation of Capital Gains: A Response to
Feldstein, N., 1978, "The Appropriate

    John Yinger",    Tax Notes, October 30
 Feldstein, N., J.    Slemrod,   and S. Yitzhaki, 1980, "The Effects of Taxation on     the


    Selling of Corporate Stock      and the Realization of Capital Gains",

    Journal   of Economics 94     777—91

                                                 Interest Limitation Explain the Existance
 Feenberg, Dan, 1981, "Does the Investment

    of Dividends?" Financial EconomicS 99 2&5269
                                           -R2--




 Holt, C. C. and J. P. Shelton, 1962, "The Lock—in Effect of
                                                                  the Capital Gains Tax",
    National   Tax Journal 15, 337—52
 Minarik, J. J., 1981, "Capital Gains", in: H.J.   Aaron and J.   A. Pechman, eds.,
    How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior (The
                                              Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.)
    241—277

Stiglitz,   J. E., 1973, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of

   Capital",   Journal of Public Economics 2, February, 1—34
Stiglitz, J. E., 1981, "On the Almost Neutrality of Inflation: Notes on Taxation
   and the Welfare Costs of Inflation", in: J. June Flanders and Assaf
                                                                       Razin, eds.,
   Development in an Inflationary World, (Academic Press: New York and London) 420—260

Stiglitz, J. E., 1981b, "Modelling the Effects of Capital Gains Taxes on the

   Accrual and Realization of Capital Gains", report submitted to the Office of

   Tax Analysis, United States Treasury, (October)

Stiglitz, J. E., 1982a, "Information and the Capital Market", in: Financial

   Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, William F. Sharpe and Cathryn Cootner,

   eds., (Prentice Hall,Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1982)

Stiglitz, J. E., 1982b, "Ownership,Control, and Efficient Markets: Some Paradoxes

  in the Theory of Capital Markets", in: Economic Regulation: Essays in Honor of

  James R. Nelson, M. K. P. Boyer and W. C. Sheperds, eds., Michigan State

  University Press, An Arbor, 1980
