  FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, GROWTH
AND VOLATILITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

              Eswar Prasad
             Kenneth Rogoff
             Shang-Jin Wei
             M. Ayhan Kose

           Working Paper 10942
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, GROWTH
                       AND VOLATILITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                              Eswar Prasad
                                             Kenneth Rogoff
                                             Shang-Jin Wei
                                             M. Ayhan Kose

                                         Working Paper 10942
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10942


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Globalization and Poverty Conference,
September 10-12, 2004. We would like to thank Ann Harrison, Susan Collins, and the conference participants
for their helpful suggestions. This paper is based on our earlier paper, entitled The Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence, International Monetary Fund Occasional
Paper 220, 2003. This paper should not be reported as representing the views of the IMF or the NBER.The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Globalization, Growth and Volatility in Developing Countries
Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose
NBER Working Paper No. 10942
December 2004
JEL No. F15, F36, F41, F43

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper provides a comprehensive assessment of empirical evidence about the impact of financial

globalization on growth and volatility in developing countries. The results suggest that it is difficult

to establish a robust causal relationship between financial integration and economic growth.

Furthermore, there is little evidence that developing countries have been consistently successful in

using financial integration to stabilize fluctuations in consumption growth. However, we do find that

financial globalization can be beneficial under the right circumstances. Empirically, good institutions

and quality of governance are crucial in helping developing countries derive the benefits of

globalization. Similarly, macroeconomic stability appears to be an important prerequisite for

ensuring that financial globalization is beneficial for developing countries. Finally, countries that

employ relatively flexible exchange rate regimes and succeed in maintaining fiscal discipline are

more likely to enjoy the potential growth and stabilization benefits of financial globalization.

Eswar S. Prasad                                         Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund                             International Monetary Fund
19th Street, NW                                         Room 10-700
Washington, DC 20433                                    19th Street, NW
eprasad@imf.org                                         Washington, DC 20433
                                                        and NBER
Kenneth S. Rogoff                                       swei@imf.org
Economics Department
Harvard University                                      M. Ayhan Kose
Littauer Center 232                                     International Monetary Fund
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001                                19th Street, NW
and NBER                                                Washington, DC 20433
krogoff@harvard.edu                                     akose@imf.org
                                                                                                       2


                               I. INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

        The recent wave of financial globalization since the mid-1980s has been marked by a
surge in capital flows among industrial countries and, more notably, between industrial and
developing countries. While these capital flows have been associated with high growth rates in
some developing countries, a number of countries have experienced episodic collapses in growth
rates and significant financial crises over the same period, crises that have exacted a serious toll
in terms of macroeconomic and social costs. As a result, an intense debate has emerged in both
academic and policy circles about the effects of financial integration on developing economies.
But much of the debate has been based on only casual and limited empirical evidence.

        The objective of this paper is to provide an assessment of empirical evidence on the
effects of financial globalization for developing economies. The paper will focus on a couple of
related questions: (i) does financial globalization promote economic growth in developing
countries? (ii) what is its impact on macroeconomic volatility in these countries?

         While this paper does not deal directly with poverty issues, its main subject - the effects
of financial globalization on economic growth and volatility - has important indirect effects.
First, economic growth has been the most reliable source of poverty reduction. Second, holding
level of income constant, an increase in volatility reduces the well-being of most households,
especially those of the poor as they are least able to protect themselves.

        The principal conclusions that emerge from the analysis are sobering, but in many ways
informative from a policy perspective. It is true that many developing economies with a high
degree of financial integration have also experienced higher growth rates. It is also true that, in
theory, there are many channels by which financial openness could enhance growth. However, a
systematic examination of the evidence suggests that it is difficult to establish a robust causal
relationship between the degree of financial integration and output growth performance.
Furthermore, from the perspective of macroeconomic stability, consumption is regarded as a
better measure of well-being than output; fluctuations in consumption are therefore regarded as
having a negative impact on economic welfare. There is little evidence that financial integration
has helped developing countries to better stabilize fluctuations in consumption growth,
notwithstanding the theoretically large benefits that could accrue to developing countries in this
respect. In fact, new evidence presented in this paper suggests that low to moderate levels of
financial integration may have made some countries subject to even greater volatility of
consumption relative to that of output. Thus, while there is no proof in the data that financial
globalization has benefited growth, there is evidence that some developing countries may have
experienced greater consumption volatility as a result.

        One must be careful, however, not to draw the inference from these results that financial
globalization is inherently too risky, and that developing countries should retreat into stronger
forms of capital controls. First, as we analyze in an earlier extended version of this paper
(Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose, 2003), empirical evidence supports the view that countries are
considerably more likely to benefit from financial globalization when they take simultaneous
                                                                                                     3
steps-- sometimes even modest ones--to improve governance, transparency and financial sector
regulation. Second, it is almost surely the case that excessive reliance on fixed exchange rate
regimes has been a major contributory factor to financial crises in emerging market countries
over the past fifteen years. Moving to more flexible exchange rate regimes is therefore likely to
considerably alleviate some of the risks countries must endure as they become more financially
globalized (for countries that are not financially globalized, fixed exchange rate regimes may be
a perfectly good choice, as the empirical results in Rogoff et. al. 2004, suggest). Third, countries
that consistently face problems associated with government debt (referred to as “serial
defaulters” by Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004b), are more likely to benefit from financial
globalization if their governments simultaneously take measures to avoid an excessive buildup of
debt.

        It is also important to note that much of the analysis in this paper focuses on de facto
rather than de jure financial globalization. This makes sense in an empirical paper since capital
controls come in so many flavors, and enforcement varies so widely across countries, that cross-
country empirical comparisons based on measures of de jure capital controls are extremely
difficult to interpret. By contrast, de facto financial integration is not a variable that a country’s
government can easily regulate. Although many countries have tight capital controls on paper,
their degree of de facto financial globalization is nevertheless high because these controls can be
easily evaded in practice. This problem is almost surely exacerbated by the kind of domestic
financial liberalizations that many countries have chosen to undergo over the past two decades in
an effort to channel savings more efficiently and thereby spur growth. At the same time, some
poor countries have few impediments to capital flows, but their level of de facto financial
globalization is still very low, even when measured relative to national income.

        This paper does not look directly at how financial globalization affects absolute or
relative measures of poverty. The effects could easily go in opposite directions. On the one hand,
sustained high growth is the most consistently successful policy for alleviating absolute poverty,
as China and India have succeeded in doing over the past two decades. On the other hand,
periods of high growth are often associated with higher income inequality and, therefore, relative
measures of poverty may easily rise. Increased macroeconomic volatility, however, probably
increases both absolute and relative measures of poverty, particularly in the case of financial
crises that lead to sharp rises in unemployment. The evidence presented in this paper suggests
that a detailed study of the link between financial globalization and poverty is likely to yield
ambiguous results for emerging market countries, albeit with the same caveats: Countries that
work simultaneously to improve institutions, and ones that avoid overly fixed exchange rate
regimes, have a much better chance of seeing financial globalization lead to poverty reduction, at
least by absolute measures.

        The remainder of this section provides an overview of the structure of the paper. In brief,
Section II begins with a documentation of some salient features of global financial integration
from the perspective of developing countries. Sections III and IV analyze the evidence on the
effects of financial globalization on growth and volatility, respectively, in developing countries.
Section V concludes.
                                                                                                    4
                            A. Definitions and Basic Stylized Facts

        Financial globalization and financial integration are, in principle different concepts.
Financial globalization is an aggregate concept that refers to rising global linkages through cross-
border financial flows. Financial integration refers to an individual country’s linkages to
international capital markets. Clearly, these concepts are closely related. For instance, increasing
financial globalization is perforce associated with rising financial integration on average. In this
paper, the two terms are used interchangeably.

         Of more relevance for the purposes of this paper is the distinction between de jure
financial integration, which is associated with policies on capital account liberalization, and
actual capital flows. For example, indicator measures of the extent of government restrictions on
capital flows across national borders have been used extensively in the literature. By this
measure, many countries in Latin America would be considered closed to financial flows. On the
other hand, the volume of capital actually crossing the borders of these countries has been large
relative to the average volume of flows across all developing countries. Therefore, on a de facto
basis, these countries are quite open to global financial flows. By contrast, some countries in
Africa have few formal restrictions on capital account transactions but have not experienced
significant capital flows. The analysis in this paper will focus largely on de facto measures of
financial integration, as it is virtually impossible to compare the efficacy of various complex
restrictions across countries. In the end, what matters most is the actual degree of openness.
However, the paper will also consider the relationship between de jure and de facto measures.

        As discussed in section II, a few salient features of global capital flows are relevant for
the central themes of the paper. First, the volume of cross-border capital flows has risen
substantially in the last decade. Not only has there been a much greater volume of flows among
industrial countries but there has also been a surge in flows between industrial and developing
countries. Second, this surge in international capital flows to developing countries is the outcome
of both “pull” and “push” factors. “Pull factors” arise from changes in policies and other aspects
of opening up by developing countries. These include liberalization of capital accounts and
domestic stock markets, and large-scale privatization programs. “Push factors” include business
cycle conditions and macroeconomic policy changes in industrial countries. From a longer-term
perspective, this latter set of factors includes the rise in the importance of institutional investors
in industrial countries and demographic changes (e.g., relative aging of the population in
industrial countries). The importance of these factors suggests that, notwithstanding temporary
interruptions in crisis periods or during global business cycle downturns, the past twenty years
have been characterized by secular pressures for rising global capital flows to the developing
world.

        Another important feature of international capital flows is that the components of these
flows differ markedly in terms of volatility. In particular, bank borrowing and portfolio flows are
substantially more volatile than foreign direct investment. In spite of a caveat that accurate
classification of capital flows is not easy, evidence suggests that the composition of capital flows
can have a significant influence on a country’s vulnerability to financial crises.
                                                                                                       5
        B. Does Financial Globalization Promote Growth in Developing Countries?

         Section III will summarize the theoretical benefits of financial globalization for economic
growth and then review the empirical evidence. Financial globalization could, in principle, help
to raise the growth rate in developing countries through a number of channels. Some of these
directly affect the determinants of economic growth (augmentation of domestic savings,
reduction in the cost of capital, transfer of technology from advanced to developing countries,
and development of domestic financial sectors). Indirect channels, which in some cases could be
even more important than the direct ones, include increased production specialization due to
better risk management, and improvements in both macroeconomic policies and institutions
induced by the competitive pressures or the “discipline effect” of globalization.

        How much of the advertised benefits for economic growth have actually materialized in
the developing world? As documented in this paper, the average income per capita for the group
of more financially open (developing) economies does grow at a more favorable rate than that of
the group of less financially open economies. However, whether this actually reflects a causal
relationship and whether this correlation is robust to controlling for other factors remain
unresolved questions. The literature on this subject, voluminous as it is, does not present a
conclusive picture. A few papers find a positive effect of financial integration on growth.
However, the majority find no effect or at best a mixed effect. Thus, an objective reading of the
vast research effort to date suggests that there is no strong, robust and uniform support for the
theoretical argument that financial globalization per se delivers a higher rate of economic
growth.

         Perhaps this is not surprising. As noted by several authors, most of the cross-country
differences in per capita incomes stem not from differences in the capital-labor ratio, but from
differences in total factor productivity, which could be explained by “soft” factors like
governance and rule of law. In this case, while embracing financial globalization may result in
higher capital inflows, it is unlikely to cause faster growth by itself. In addition, some of the
countries with capital account liberalization have experienced output collapses related to costly
banking or currency crises. This is elaborated below. An alternative possibility, as noted earlier,
is that financial globalization fosters better institutions and domestic policies but that these
indirect channels can not be captured in standard regression frameworks.

        In short, while financial globalization can, in theory, help to promote economic growth
through various channels, there is as yet no robust empirical evidence that this causal
relationship is quantitatively very important. This points to an interesting contrast between
financial openness and trade openness, since an overwhelming majority of research papers have
found a positive effect of the latter on economic growth.

     C. What Is the Impact of Financial Globalization on Macroeconomic Volatility?

       In theory, financial globalization can help developing countries to better manage output
and consumption volatility. Indeed, a variety of theories implies that the volatility of
consumption relative to that of output should go down as the degree of financial integration
increases; the essence of global financial diversification is that a country is able to offload some
                                                                                                       6
of its income risk in world markets. Since most developing countries are rather specialized in
their output and factor endowment structures, they can, in theory, obtain even bigger gains than
developed countries through international consumption risk sharing, that is, by effectively selling
off a stake in their domestic output in return for a stake in global output.

         How much of the potential benefits in terms of better management of consumption
volatility has actually been realized? This question is particularly relevant in terms of
understanding whether, despite the output volatility experienced by developing countries that
have undergone financial crises, financial integration has protected them from consumption
volatility. New research presented in section IV paints a troubling picture. Specifically, while the
volatility of output growth has, on average, declined in the 1990s relative to the three earlier
decades, the volatility of consumption growth relative to that of income growth has on average
increased for the emerging market economies in the 1990s, which was precisely the period of a
rapid increase in financial globalization. In other words, as argued in more detail later in the
paper, procyclical access to international capital markets appears to have had a perverse effect on
the relative volatility of consumption for financially integrated developing economies.

        Interestingly, a more nuanced look at the data suggests the possible presence of a
threshold effect. At low levels of financial integration, an increment in financial integration is
associated with an increase in the relative volatility of consumption. However, once the level of
financial integration crosses a threshold, the association becomes negative. In other words, for
countries that are sufficiently open financially, relative consumption volatility starts to decline.
This finding is potentially consistent with the view that international financial integration can
help to promote domestic financial sector development, which in turn can help to moderate
domestic macroeconomic volatility. However, thus far these benefits of financial integration
appear to have accrued primarily to industrial countries.

        In this vein, the proliferation of financial and currency crises among developing
economies is often viewed as a natural consequence of the “growing pains” associated with
financial globalization. These can take various forms. First, international investors have a
tendency to engage in momentum trading and herding, which can be destabilizing for developing
economies. Second, international investors may (together with domestic residents) engage in
speculative attacks on developing countries currencies, thereby causing instability that is not
warranted based on the economic and policy fundamentals of these countries. Third, the risk of
contagion presents a major threat to otherwise healthy countries since international investors
could withdraw capital from these countries for reasons unrelated to domestic factors. Fourth, a
government, even if democratically elected, may not give sufficient weight to the interest of
future generations. This becomes a problem when the interests of future and current generations
diverge, causing the government to incur excessive amounts of debt. Financial globalization, by
making it easier for governments to incur debt, might aggravate this “over-borrowing” problem.
These four hypotheses are not necessarily independent, and can reinforce each other.

       There is some empirical support for these hypothesized effects. For example, there is
evidence that international investors do engage in herding and momentum trading in emerging
markets, more so than in developed countries. Recent research also suggests the presence of
                                                                                                       7
contagion in international financial markets. In addition, some developing countries that open
their capital markets do appear to accumulate unsustainably high levels of external debt.

         To summarize, one of the theoretical benefits of financial globalization, other than to
enhance growth, is to allow developing countries to better manage macroeconomic volatility,
especially by reducing consumption volatility relative to output volatility. The evidence suggests
that, instead, countries that are in the early stages of financial integration have been exposed to
significant risks in terms of higher volatility of both output and consumption.

         D. The Role of Institutions and Governance in the Effects of Globalization

        While it is difficult to find a simple relationship between financial globalization and
growth or consumption volatility, there is some evidence of nonlinearities or threshold effects in
the relationship. That is, financial globalization, in combination with good macroeconomic
policies and good domestic governance, appears to be conducive to growth (see Prasad et. al.,
2003). For example, countries with good human capital and governance tend to do better at
attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), which is especially conducive to growth. More
specifically, recent research shows that corruption has a strongly negative effect on FDI inflows.
Similarly, transparency of government operations, which is another dimension of good
governance, has a strong positive effect on investment inflows from international mutual funds.

        The vulnerability of a developing country to the “risk factors” associated with financial
globalization is also not independent from the quality of macroeconomic policies and domestic
governance. For example, research has demonstrated that an overvalued exchange rate and an
overextended domestic lending boom often precede a currency crisis. In addition, lack of
transparency has been shown to be associated with more herding behavior by international
investors that can destabilize a developing country’s financial markets. Finally, evidence shows
that a high degree of corruption may affect the composition of a country’s capital inflows in a
manner that makes it more vulnerable to the risks of speculative attacks and contagion effects.

        Thus, the ability of a developing country to derive benefits from financial globalization
and its relative vulnerability to the volatility of international capital flows can be significantly
affected by the quality of both its macroeconomic framework and institutions.

                                           E. Summary

        The objective of the paper is not so much to derive new policy propositions as it is to
inform the debate on the potential and actual benefit-risk tradeoffs associated with financial
globalization by reviewing the available empirical evidence and country experiences. The main
conclusions are that, so far, it has proven difficult to find robust evidence in support of the
proposition that financial integration helps developing countries to improve growth and to reduce
macroeconomic volatility.

        Of course, the absence of robust evidence on these dimensions does not necessarily mean
that financial globalization has no benefits and carries only great risks. Indeed, most countries
that have initiated financial integration have continued along this path, despite temporary
                                                                                                     8
setbacks. This observation is consistent with the notion that the indirect benefits of financial
integration, which may be difficult to pick up in regression analysis, could be quite important.
Also, the long run gains, in some cases yet unrealized, may far offset the short term costs. For
instance, the European Monetary Union experienced severe and costly crises in the early 1990s
as part of the transition to a single currency throughout much of Europe today.

         While it is difficult to distill new and innovative policy messages from the review of the
evidence, there appears to be empirical support for some general propositions. Empirically, good
institutions and quality of governance are important not only in their own right, but in helping
developing countries derive the benefits of globalization. Similarly, macroeconomic stability
appears to be an important prerequisite for ensuring that financial integration is beneficial for
developing countries. These points may already be generally accepted; the contribution of this
paper is to show that there is some systematic empirical evidence to support them. In addition,
the analysis suggests that financial globalization should be approached cautiously and with good
institutions and macroeconomic frameworks viewed as preconditions.

                                   II. BASIC STYLIZED FACTS

        De jure restrictions on capital flows and actual capital flows across national borders are
two ways of measuring the extent of a country’s financial integration with the global economy.
The differences between these two measures are important for understanding the effects of
financial integration. By either measure, developing countries’ financial linkages with the global
economy have risen in recent years.1 However, a relatively small group of developing countries
has garnered a lion’s share of private capital flows from industrial to developing countries, which
surged in the 1990s. Structural factors, including demographic shifts in industrial countries, are
likely to provide an impetus to these “North-South” flows over the medium and long term.

                             A. Measuring Financial Integration

        Capital account liberalization is typically considered an important precursor to financial
integration. Most formal empirical work analyzing the effects of capital account liberalization
has used a measure based on the official restrictions on capital flows as reported to the IMF by
national authorities. However, this binary indicator directly measures capital controls but does
not capture differences in the intensity of these controls.2 A more direct measure of financial
openness is based on the estimated gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities as a share of
GDP. The stock data constitutes a better indication of integration, for our purposes, than the




1
  Eichengreen and Bordo (2002), Obtfeld and Taylor (2002), and Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh (2002)
examine historical roots of international financial integration.
2
 The restriction measure is available until 1995, when a new and more refined measure—not backward
compatible—was introduced. The earlier data were extended through 1998 by Mody and Murshid (2002).
                                                                                                           9
underlying flows since they are less volatile from year to year and are less prone to measurement
error (assuming that such errors are not correlated over time).3, 4

         While these two measures of financial integration are related, they denote two distinct
aspects. The capital account restrictions measure reflects the existence of de jure restrictions on
capital flows while the financial openness measure captures de facto financial integration in
terms of realized capital flows. This distinction is of considerable importance for the analysis in
this paper and implies a 2x2 set of combinations of these two aspects of integration. Many
industrial countries have attained a high degree of financial integration in terms of both
measures. Some developing countries with capital account restrictions have found these
restrictions ineffective in controlling actual capital flows. Episodes of capital flight from some
Latin American countries in the 1970s and 1980s are examples of such involuntary de facto
financial integration in economies that are de jure closed to financial flows (i.e., integration
without capital account liberalization). On the other hand, some countries in Africa have few
capital account restrictions but have experienced only minimal levels of capital flows (i.e.,
liberalization without integration).5 And, of course, it is not difficult to find examples of
countries with closed capital accounts that are also effectively closed in terms of capital flows.

        How has financial integration evolved over time for different groups of countries based
on alternative measures?6 By either measure, the difference in financial openness between
industrial and developing countries is quite stark. Industrial economies have had an enormous
increase in financial openness, particularly in the 1990s. While this measure also increased for
developing economies in that decade, the level remains far below that of industrial economies.

        For industrial countries, unweighted cross-country averages of the two measures are
mirror images and jointly confirm that these countries have undergone rapid financial integration
3
  These stock data were constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001). Operationally, this measure
involves calculating the gross levels of FDI and portfolio assets and liabilities via the accumulation of the
corresponding inflows and outflows, and making relevant valuation adjustments. A similar measure using
the same underlying stock data has been considered by Chanda (2000) and O’Donnell (2001).
4
  Other measures of capital market integration include saving-investment correlations and various interest
parity conditions (Frankel, 1992). These measures are difficult to operationalize for the extended time
period and large number of countries in the data sample for this paper.
5
  An analogy from the literature on international trade may be relevant here. Some countries, due to their
remoteness from major world markets or other unfavorable geographical attributes, have low trade flows
despite having minimal barriers to trade even after controlling for various other factors. Similarly, certain
countries, due to their remoteness from major financial centers, in terms of either physical distance or
historical relationships, may experience limited capital flows despite having relatively open capital
accounts, (see Loungani, Mody, and Razin (2003)).
6
  The dataset used in this paper consists of 76 industrial and developing countries (except where otherwise
indicated) and covers the period 1960–99. Given the long sample period, several countries currently
defined as industrial (e.g., Korea and Singapore) are included in the developing country group. The
following were excluded from the dataset: most of the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (which mostly
receive official flows), the transition economies of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union (due to
lack of data), very small economies (population less than 1.5 million) and oil-exporting countries in the
Middle East. See the Data Appendix for a list of countries and further details on the dataset.
                                                                                                       10
since the mid-1980s (Figure 1).7 For developing countries, the average restriction measure
indicates that, after a period of liberalization in the 1970s, the trend toward openness reversed in
the 1980s. Liberalization resumed in the early 1990s but at a slow pace. On the other hand, the
average financial openness measure for these countries, based on actual flows, shows a modest
increase in the 1980s, followed by a sharp rise in the 1990s. The increase in the financial
openness measure for developing economies reflects a more rapid de facto integration than is
captured by the relatively crude measure of capital account restrictions.

         However, the effects of financial integration in terms of increased capital flows have been
spread very unevenly across developing countries.8 For examining the extent of these disparities,
it is useful to begin with a very coarse classification of the developing countries in the sample
into two groups based on a ranking according to the average of the financial openness measure
over the last four decades (as well as an assessment of other indicators of financial integration).

        The first group, which comprises 22 countries, is henceforth labeled as the set of More
Financially Integrated (MFI) countries and the latter, which includes 33 countries, as the Less
Financially Integrated (LFI) countries.9 This distinction must be interpreted with some care at
this stage. In particular, it is worth repeating that the criterion is a measure of de facto integration
based on actual capital flows rather than a measure of the strength of policies designed to
promote financial integration. Indeed, a few of the countries in the MFI group do have relatively
closed capital accounts in a de jure sense. In general, as argued below, policy choices do
determine the degree and nature of financial integration. Nevertheless, for the analysis in this
paper, the degree of financial openness based on actual capital flows is a more relevant measure.

        It should be noted that the main conclusions of this paper are not crucially dependent on
the particulars of the classification of developing countries into the MFI and LFI groups. This
classification is obviously a static one and does not account for differences across countries in
the timing and degree of financial integration. It is used for some of the descriptive analysis
presented below but only in order to illustrate the conclusions from the more detailed
econometric studies that are surveyed in the paper. The areas where this classification yields
results different from those obtained from more formal econometric analysis will be clearly
highlighted in the paper. The regression results reported in this paper are based on the gross
capital flows measure described earlier which does capture differences across countries and
changes over time in the degree of financial integration.

       Figure 2 shows that the vast majority of international private gross capital flows of
developing countries, especially in the 1990s, are accounted for by the relatively small group of

7
  A particularly rapid decline in controls occurred during the 1980s, when the members of the European
Community, now the European Union, liberalized capital controls. A surge in cross-border capital flows
followed.
8
 Ishii and others (2002) examine in detail the experiences of a number of developing countries.
9
 Not surprisingly, this classification results in a set of MFI economies that roughly correspond to those
included in the MSCI emerging markets stock index. The main differences are that we drop the transition
economies because of limited data availability and add Hong Kong SAR and Singapore.
                                                                                                            11
MFI economies.10 By contrast, private capital flows to and from the LFI economies have
remained very small over the last decade and, for certain types of flows, have even fallen relative
to the late 1970s.

                                    B. North-South Capital Flows

        One of the key features of global financial integration over the last decade has been the
dramatic increase in net private capital flows from industrial countries (the “North”) to
developing countries (the “South”). Figure 3 breaks down the levels of these flows into the four
main constituent categories. The main increase has been in terms of FDI and portfolio flows,
while the relative importance of bank lending has declined somewhat. In fact, net bank lending
turned negative for a few years during the time of the Asian crisis.

The bulk of the surge in net FDI flows from the advanced economies has gone to
MFI economies, with only a small fraction going to LFI economies (Figure 3, lower panels). Net
portfolio flows show a similar pattern, although both types of flows to MFI economies fell
sharply following the Asian crisis and have remained relatively flat since then. LFI economies
have been much more dependent on bank lending (and, although not shown here, on official
flows including loans and grants). There were surges in bank lending to this group of countries in
the late 1970s and early 1990s.

         Another important feature of these flows is that they differ substantially in terms of
volatility. Table 1 shows the volatility of FDI, portfolio flows and bank lending to developing
economies. FDI flows are the least volatile of the different categories of private capital flows to
developing economies, which is not surprising given their long-term and relatively fixed nature.
Portfolio flows tend to be far more volatile and prone to abrupt reversals than FDI. These
patterns hold when the MFI and LFI economies are examined separately. Even in the case of
LFIs, the volatility of FDI flows is much lower than that of other types of flows.11 This
difference in the relative volatility of different categories has important implications that will be
examined in more detail later.

                 C. Factors Underlying the Rise in North-South Capital Flows

        The surge in net private capital flows to MFIs, as well as the shifts in the composition of
these flows, can be broken down into “pull” and “push” factors (Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart
(1993)). These are related to, respectively, (i) policies and other developments in the MFIs and
(ii) changes in global financial markets. The first category includes factors such as stock market

10
  Note that the scale of the upper graph is twice as big as the lower one.
11
  Consistent with these results, Taylor and Sarno (1999) find that FDI flows are more persistent than other
types of flows. Hausmann and Fernandez-Arias (2000) find weaker confirmation of this result and also
note that, although the volatility of FDI flows has been rising over time, it remains lower than that of
other types of flows. In interpreting these results, there is a valid concern about potential misclassification
of the different types of capital flows. Since most of the studies cited here use similar data sources, this is
not a problem that can be easily resolved by examining the conclusions of multiple studies.
                                                                                                          12
liberalizations and privatization of state-owned companies that have stimulated foreign inflows.
The second category includes the growing importance of depositary receipts and cross-listings
and the emergence of institutional investors as key players driving international capital flows to
emerging markets.

        The investment opportunities afforded by stock market liberalizations, which have
typically included the provision of access to foreign investors, have enhanced capital flows
to MFIs. How much have restrictions on foreign investors’ access to local stock markets in MFIs
changed over time? To answer this question, it is useful to examine a new measure of stock
market liberalization that captures restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic equities. This
measure, constructed by Edison and Warnock (2001), is obviously just one component of capital
controls, but an appropriate one for modeling equity flows. Figure 4 shows that stock market
liberalizations in MFI economies in different regions have proceeded rapidly, in terms of both
intensity and speed.12

       Mergers and acquisitions, especially those resulting from the privatization of state-owned
companies, were an important factor underlying the increase in FDI flows to MFIs during the
1990s. The easing of restrictions on foreign participation in the financial sector in MFIs has also
provided a strong impetus to this factor.13

        Institutional investors in the industrial countries—including mutual funds, pension funds,
hedge funds, and insurance companies—have assumed an important role in channeling capital
flows from industrial to developing economies. They have helped individual investors overcome
the information and transaction cost barriers that previously limited portfolio allocations to
emerging markets. Mutual funds, in particular, have served as an important instrument for
individuals to diversify their portfolios into developing country holdings.14 Although
international institutional investors devote only a small fraction of their portfolios to holdings in

12
   The stock market liberalization index is based on two indices constructed by the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) for each country—the Global Index (IFCG) and the Investable Index (IFCI). The IFCG
represents the full market while the IFCI represents the portion of the market available to foreign
investors, where availability is determined by the IFC based on legal and liquidity criteria. Edison and
Warnock (2001) propose using the ratio of the market capitalization of the IFCG to that of the IFCI as a
measure of stock market liberalization. This ratio provides a quantitative measure of the degree of access
that foreign investors have to a particular country’s equity markets; one minus this ratio can be interpreted
a measure of the intensity of capital controls in this dimension.
13
   The World Bank’s Global Development Finance Report 2001 notes that FDI in Latin America’s
financial sector has come about through the purchases of privately-owned domestic banks, driving up the
share of banking assets under foreign control from 8 percent in 1994 to 25 percent in 1999. In East Asia,
foreign investors have purchased local banks in financial distress, leading to an increase in the share of
banking assets under foreign control from 2 percent in 1994 to 6 percent in 1999.
14
  The presence of mutual funds in MFIs has grown substantially during the 1990s. For example, dedicated
emerging market equity funds held $21 billion in Latin American stocks by end-1995. By end-1997, their
holdings had increased to $40 billion. While mutual funds’ growth in Asia has been less pronounced, the
presence of mutual funds is still important in many countries in that region. See Eichengreen and
Mathieson (1998) for a detailed study on hedge funds.
                                                                                                           13
MFIs, they have an important presence in these economies, given the relatively small size of
their capital markets. Funds dedicated to emerging markets alone hold on average 5–15 percent
of the Asian, Latin American, and transition economies’ market capitalization.

        Notwithstanding the moderation of North-South capital flows following recent emerging
market crises, certain structural forces are likely to lead to a revival of these flows over the
medium and long term. Demographic shifts, in particular, constitute an important driving force
for these flows. Projected increases in old-age dependency ratios reflect the major changes in
demographic profiles that are underway in industrial countries. This trend is likely to intensify
further in the coming decades, fueled both by advances in medical technology that have
increased average life spans and the decline in fertility rates. Financing the post-retirement
consumption needs of a rapidly aging population will require increases in current saving rates,
both national and private, in these economies. However, if such increases in saving rates do
materialize, they are likely to result in a declining rate of return on capital in advanced
economies, especially relative to that in the capital-poor countries of the South. This will lead to
natural tendencies for capital to flow to countries where it has a potentially higher return.

        All of these forces imply that, despite the recent sharp reversals in North-South capital
flows, developing countries will eventually once again face the delicate balance of opportunities
and risks afforded by financial globalization. Are the benefits derived from financial integration
sufficient to offset the costs of increased exposure to the vagaries of international capital flows?
The paper now turns to an examination of the evidence on this question.

                     III. FINANCIAL INTEGRATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

        Theoretical models have identified a number of channels through which international
financial integration can help to promote economic growth in the developing world. However, it
has proven difficult to empirically identify a strong and robust causal relationship between
financial integration and growth.

                   A. Potential Benefits of Financial Globalization in Theory

        In theory, there are a number of direct and indirect channels through which embracing
financial globalization can help enhance growth in developing countries. Figure 5 provides a
schematic summary of these possible channels. These channels are inter-related in some ways,
but this delineation is useful for reviewing the empirical evidence on the quantitative importance
of each channel. 15



15
  Some of these channels are also in play in transmitting the beneficial effects of globalization to the
poor. For example, augmentation of domestic savings, reduction in the cost of capital, transfer of
technological know-how, and stimulation of domestic financial sector development could all provide
direct growth benefits which in turn help reduce poverty. Agenor (2003), Easterly (2004) and Goldberg
and Pavcnik (2004) discuss various theoretical channels through which globalization affects poverty.
                                                                                                     14
Direct Channels

Augmentation of domestic savings

       North-South capital flows in principle benefit both groups. They allow for increased
investment in capital-poor countries while they provide a higher return on capital than is
available in capital-rich countries. This effectively reduces the risk-free rate in the developing
countries.

Reduction in the cost of capital through better global allocation of risk

        International asset pricing models predict that stock market liberalization improves the
allocation of risk (Henry (2000), and Stulz (1999a,b)). First, increased risk sharing opportunities
between foreign and domestic investors might help to diversify risks. This ability to diversify in
turn encourages firms to take on more total investment, thereby enhancing growth. Third, as
capital flows increase, the domestic stock market becomes more liquid, which could further
reduce the equity risk premium, thereby lowering the cost of raising capital for investment.



Transfer of technological and managerial know-how

        Financially integrated economies seem to attract a disproportionately large share of FDI
inflows, which have the potential to generate technology spillovers and to serve as a conduit for
passing on better management practices. These spillovers can raise aggregate productivity and, in
turn, boost economic growth (Borensztein, De Gregorio, and Lee (1998), and Grossman and
Helpman (1991a, 1991b)).

Stimulation of domestic financial sector development

        It has already been noted that international portfolio flows can increase the liquidity of
domestic stock markets. Increased foreign ownership of domestic banks can also generate a
variety of other benefits (Levine (1996); Caprio and Honohan (1999)). First, foreign bank
participation can facilitate access to international financial markets. Second, it can help improve
the regulatory and supervisory framework of the domestic banking industry. Third, foreign banks
often introduce a variety of new financial instruments and techniques and also foster
technological improvements in domestic markets. The entry of foreign banks tends to increase
competition which, in turn, can improve the quality of domestic financial services as well as
allocative efficiency.

Indirect Channels

Promotion of specialization

        The notion that specialization in production may increase productivity and growth is
intuitive. However, without any mechanism for risk management, a highly specialized
                                                                                                  15
production structure will produce high output volatility and, hence, high consumption volatility.
Concerns about exposure to such increases in volatility may discourage countries from taking up
growth-enhancing specialization activities; the higher volatility will also generally imply lower
overall savings and investment rates. In principle, financial globalization could play a useful role
by helping countries to engage in international risk sharing and thereby reduce consumption
volatility. This point will be taken up again in the next section. Here, it should just be noted that
risk sharing would indirectly encourage specialization, which in turn would raise the growth rate.
This logic is explained by Brainard and Cooper (1968), Kemp and Liviatan (1973), Ruffin
(1974), and Imbs and Wacziarg (2003). Among developed countries and across regions within
given developed countries, there is indeed some evidence that better risk sharing is associated
with higher specialization (Kalemi-Ozcan, Sorensen, and Yosha (2001)).

Commitment to better economic policies

        International financial integration could increase productivity in an economy through its
impact on the government’s ability to credibly commit to a future course of policies. More
specifically, the disciplining role of financial integration could change the dynamics of domestic
investment in an economy to the extent that it leads to a reallocation of capital towards more
productive activities in response to changes in macroeconomic policies. National governments
are occasionally tempted to institute predatory tax policies on physical capital. The prospect of
such policies tends to discourage investment and reduce growth. Financial opening can be self-
sustaining and constrains the government from engaging in such predatory policies in the future
since the negative consequences of such actions are far more severe under financial integration.
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003) illustrate this point in a theoretical model.

Signaling

         A country’s willingness to undertake financial integration could be interpreted as a signal
that it is going to practice more friendly policies towards foreign investment in the future.
Bartolini and Drazen (1997a) suggest that the removal of restrictions on capital outflows can,
though its signaling role, lead to an increase in capital inflows. Many countries, including
Colombia, Egypt, Italy, New Zealand, Mexico, Spain, Uruguay, and the United Kingdom have
received significant capital inflows after removing restrictions on capital outflows.16

                                     B. Empirical Evidence

        On the surface, there seems to be a positive association between embracing financial
globalization and the level of economic development. Industrial countries in general are more
financially integrated with the global economy than developing countries. So embracing
globalization is apparently part of being economically advanced.

      Within the developing world, it is also the case that more financially integrated (MFI)
economies grew faster than less financially integrated (LFI) economies over the last three

16
 See Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez (1993) and Labán and Larrain (1997).
                                                                                                        16
decades. From 1970 to 1999, average output per capita rose almost threefold in the group of MFI
developing economies, almost six times greater than the corresponding increase for
LFI economies. This pattern of higher growth for the former group applies over each of the three
decades and also to consumption and investment growth.

        However, there are two problems with concluding a positive effect of financial
integration on growth from this data pattern. First, this pattern may be fragile upon closer
scrutiny. Second, these observations only reflect an association between international financial
integration and economic performance rather than necessarily a causal relationship. In other
words, these observations do not rule out the possibility that there is reverse causation: countries
that manage to enjoy a robust growth may also choose to engage in financial integration even if
financial globalization does not directly contribute to faster growth in a quantitatively significant
way.

        To obtain an intuitive impression of the relationship between financial openness and
growth, Table 2 presents a list of the fastest growing developing economies during 1980–2000
and a list of the slowest growing (or fastest declining) economies during the same period. Some
countries have undergone financial integration during this period, especially in the latter half of
the 1990s.17 Therefore, any result based on total changes over this long period should be
interpreted with caution. Nonetheless, several features of the table are noteworthy.

        An obvious observation that can be made from the table is that financial integration is not
a necessary condition for achieving a high growth rate. China and India have achieved high
growth rates despite somewhat limited and selective capital account liberalization. For example,
while China became substantially more open to foreign direct investment, it was not particularly
open to most other types of cross-border capital flows. Mauritius and Botswana have managed to
achieve very strong growth rates during the period, although they are relatively closed to
financial flows.

        The second observation that can be made is that financial integration is not a sufficient
condition for a fast economic growth rate either. For example, Jordan and Peru had become
relatively open to foreign capital flows during the period; yet, their economies suffered a decline
rather than enjoying positive growth during the period. On the other hand, Table 2 also suggests
that declining economies are more likely to be financially closed, though the direction of
causality is not clear as explained before.

       This way of looking at country cases with extreme growth performance is only
informative up to a point; it needs to be supplemented by a comprehensive examination of the
experience of a broader set of countries using a more systematic approach to measuring financial
openness. To illustrate this relationship more broadly, Figure 6 presents a scatter plot of the
growth rate of real per capita GDP against the increase in financial integration over 1982–97.

17
  Table 2 reports the growth rates of real per capita GDP in constant local currency units. The exact
growth rates and country rankings may change if different measures such as per capita GDP in dollar
terms or on a PPP basis are used.
                                                                                                         17
There is essentially no association between these variables. Figure 7 presents a scatter plot of
these two variables after taking into account the effects of a country’s initial income, initial
schooling, average investment-to-GDP ratio, political instability and regional location. Again,
the figure does not suggest a positive association between financial integration and economic
growth. In fact, this finding is not unique to the particular choice of the time period or the
country coverage as reflected in a broad survey of other research papers on the subject.

        A number of empirical studies have tried to systematically examine whether financial
integration contributes to growth using various approaches to dealing with the difficult problem
of proving causation. Table 3 summarizes the 14 most recent studies on this subject.18 Three out
of the fourteen papers report a positive effect of financial integration on growth. However, the
majority of the papers tend to find no effect or a mixed effect for developing countries. This
suggests that, if financial integration has a positive effect on growth, it is probably not strong or
robust.19

        Of the papers summarized in Table 3, the one by Edison, Levine, Ricci, and Sløk (2002)
is perhaps the most thorough and comprehensive in terms of measures of financial integration
and in terms of empirical specifications. These authors measure a country’s degree of financial
integration both by the government’s restrictions on capital account transactions as recorded in
the IMF’s AREAER and by the observed size of capital flows crossing the border, normalized by
the size of the economy. The data set in that paper goes through 2000, the latest year analyzed in
any existing study on this subject. Furthermore, the authors also employ a statistical
methodology that allows them to deal with possible reverse causality—i.e., the possibility that
any observed association between financial integration and growth could result from the
mechanism that faster growing economies also more likely to choose to liberalize their capital
accounts. After a battery of statistical analyses, that paper concludes that, overall, there is no
robustly significant effect of financial integration on economic growth.

                                              C. Synthesis

        Why is it so difficult to find a strong and robust effect of financial integration on
economic growth for developing countries, when the theoretical basis for this result is apparently
so strong? Perhaps there is some logic to this outcome after all. A number of researchers have
now concluded that most of the differences in income per capita across countries stem not from
differences in capital-labor ratios, but from differences in total factor productivity, which, in
turn, could be explained by “soft” factors or “social infrastructure” like governance, rule of law,


18
   This extends the survey in World Economic Outlook, October 2001, and Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sløk
(2002).
19
  As discussed in Appendix I, there is some evidence that different types of capital flows may have
different effects on growth. Recent research suggests that FDI flows are positively associated with
domestic investment and output growth in a relatively consistent manner. For example, Bosworth and
Collins (1999) find that while the impact of portfolio flows on investment growth is quite minor, there is a
strong positive relationship between FDI flows and investment growth. In particular, their findings
suggest that there exists an almost one-for-one relationship between FDI flows and domestic investment.
                                                                                                           18
and respect for property rights.20 In this case, while financial integration may open the door for
additional capital to come in from abroad, it is unlikely to offer a major boost to growth by itself.
In fact, if domestic governance is sufficiently weak, financial integration could cause an exodus
of domestic capital and, hence, lower the growth rate of an economy.

        This logic can be illustrated using the results reported in Senhadji (2000). Over the period
1960 to 1994, the average growth rate of per capita output for the group of countries in sub-
Saharan Africa was the lowest among regional groupings of developing countries. The difference
in physical and human capital accumulation is only part of the story for why growth rates differ
across countries. The gap in total factor productivity is the major element in explaining the
difference in the growth rates.

         Another possible explanation for why it is difficult to detect a causal effect of financial
integration on growth is the costly banking crises that some developing countries have
experienced in the process of financial integration. The results in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999)
suggest that a flawed sequencing of domestic financial liberalization, when accompanied by
capital account liberalization, increases the chance of domestic banking crises and/or exchange
rate crises. These crises are often accompanied by output collapses. As a result, the benefits from
financial integration may not be evident in the data.21

         It is interesting to contrast the empirical literature on the effects of financial integration
with that on the effects of trade integration. There is a large literature suggesting that openness to
trade has a positive impact on growth (e.g., Sachs and Warner, 1995; Frankel and Romer, 1999;
Dollar and Kraay, 2002; and Wacziarg and Welch, 2003), although some of the findings in this
literature have been challenged by Rodriquez and Rodrik (2000), who raise questions about the
measures of trade openness and the econometric methods employed in these studies.
Nevertheless, an overwhelming majority of empirical papers employing various techniques,
including country case studies as well as cross-country regressions, find that trade openness
helps to promote economic growth. In a recent paper that surveys all the prominent empirical
research on the subject, Berg and Krueger (2002) conclude that “[v]aried evidence supports the
view that trade openness contributes greatly to growth.” Furthermore, “[c]ross-country



20
   See Hall and Jones (1999), Senhadji (2000), Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), Easterly and
Levine (2001), and Rogoff (2002) on the role of productivity difference in explaining cross-country
difference in income. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003) is the only paper that has made a direct comparision
between gains from international financial integration and those from a rise in productivity. In a
calibrated model, they show that the welfare gain from perfect financial integration is roughly equivalent
to a one percent permanent increase in consumption for the typical non-OECD economy. By contrast, a
productivity increase of the order of magnitude experienced in post-war Korea yields a welfare benefit
that is more than one hundred times larger. The low gains from international financial integration comes
from the fact that less developed countries are on average not very far from their potential level of capital.
Non-OECD countries are less developed not primarily because they are capital-scarce, but because
productivity is constrained by quality of institutions, economic policies and other factors.
21
   See Ishii et. al. (2002) for country cases in this regard.
                                                                                                       19
regressions of the level of income on various determinants generally show that openness is the
most important policy variable.”22

         The differential effects between trade and financial integration are echoed in recent
empirical research (see Appendix II). As an alternative to examining the effect on economic
growth or level of income, one can examine the effects of trade and financial openness on a
society’s health status. Using data on 79 developing countries, Wei and Wu (2002a) report
several pieces of evidence suggesting that a faster increase in trade openness—especially when
measured by the reduction in tariff rates—is associated with a faster increase in life expectancy
and a faster reduction in infant mortality, even after one takes into account the effect of income,
institutions, and other factors. In contrast, higher financial integration is not associated with a
faster improvement in a society’s health status. This suggests that, in health dimension, as in the
growth literature, it is harder to find a beneficial role for financial integration compared to trade
integration for developing countries.23

        In related research, Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2004) analyze how trade and financial
integration affect the relationship between growth and volatility. Running various regression
models, first Ramey and Ramey (1995), then several other researchers (Martin and Rogers
(2000), Fatas (2003) and Hnatkovska and Loayza (2003)), document that volatility and growth
are negatively correlated. The results by Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2004) suggest that trade
and financial integration weaken the negative growth-volatility relationship. Specifically, in
regressions of growth on volatility and other control variables, they find that the estimated
coefficients on interactions between volatility and trade integration are significantly positive. In
other words, countries that are more open to trade appear to face a less severe tradeoff between
growth and volatility. They report a similar, although slightly less robust, result for the
interaction of financial integration with volatility.

        It is useful to note that there may be a complementary relationship between trade and
financial openness.24 For example, if a country has severe trade barriers protecting some
inefficient domestic industries, then capital inflows may end up being directed to those
industries, thereby exacerbating the existing misallocation of resources. Thus, there is a concrete


22
   Baldwin (2003), Winters (2004) and Tang and Harrison (2004) also provide surveys of the literature on
trade liberalization and economic growth. Winters (2004) concludes that “while there are serious
methodological challenges and disagreements about the strength of the evidence, the most plausible
conclusion is that liberalization generally induces a temporary (but possibly long-lived) increase in
growth.” Tang and Harrison (2004) argue that “while trade integration can strengthen an effective growth
strategy, it cannot ensure its effectiveness. Other elements are needed, such as sound macroeconomic
management, building trade-related infrastructure, and trade related institutions, economy-wide
investments in human capital and infrastructure, or building strong institutions.”
23
   The contrast between financial and trade openness may have important lessons for policies. While there
appear to be relatively few prerequisites for deriving benefits from trade openness, obtaining benefits
from financial integration requires several conditions to be in place (this is discussed in more detail in
Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose, 2003, Chapter V).
24
   This point is stressed in the September 2002 World Economic Outlook.
                                                                                                     20
channel through which financial openness without trade openness could lower a country’s level
of efficiency.

        Of course, the lack of a strong and robust effect of financial integration on economic
growth does not necessarily imply that theories that make this connection are wrong. One could
argue that the theories are about the long-run effects, and most theories abstract from the nitty-
gritty of institutional building, governance improvement, and other “soft” factors that are
necessary ingredients for the hypothesized channels to take effect. Indeed, developing countries
may have little choice but to strengthen their financial linkages eventually in order to improve
their growth potential in the long run. The problem is how to manage the short-run risks
apparently associated with financial globalization. Financial integration without a proper set of
preconditions might lead to few growth benefits and more output and consumption volatility in
the short run, a subject that is taken up in the next section.

        Since growth and poverty reduction are intimately related, then the question of how
financial globalization affects growth is closely linked to the question of how financial
globalization affects poverty. The fact that the evidence on growth is indecisive almost surely
implies that evidence on poverty reduction is as well. Recent research confirms this conclusion.
For example, Easterly (2004) documents that neither financial nor trade flows have any
significant impact on poverty. On the other hand, research by Dollar and Kraay (2002, 2004)
suggests that increased trade flows could lead to higher economic growth which in turn could
reduce poverty. Kraay (2004) provides strong evidence for the importance of economic growth
in poverty reduction as his analysis shows that most of the variation in changes in poverty during
the 1980s and 1990s is explained by growth in average income in developing countries. Agenor
(2003) finds that there is a nonlinear relationship between globalization and poverty. His
empirical results indicate that while globalization could reduce poverty in countries with a higher
degree of economic integration, it could have an adverse impact on the income levels of the poor
in countries with a lower degree of integration. 25 This nonlinearity stems from the fact that
globalization has a sizeable impact on the quality of institutions only beyond a certain level of
trade and financial integration and institutions (including an efficient social safety net) play a
major role in channeling the beneficial effects of globalization to the poor and shielding them
from its costs.

        Although there has been an intensive debate about the potentially adverse impact of
globalization on income inequality, there is no clear empirical evidence that globalization has
fostered a sharp rise in worldwide inequality. Several recent studies focus on the impact of
globalization on income inequality across countries, these studies have yet to provide a
conclusive answer. For example, globalization could accentuate the already substantial inequality
of national incomes and, in particular, lead to stagnation of incomes and living standards in
countries that do not participate in this process. Consistent with this view, Quah (1997) has
documented that there is evidence in cross-country data of a “twin peaks” phenomenon whereby
per capita incomes converge within each of two groups of countries (advanced countries and

25
  Agenor (2003) uses a weighted average of trade and financial openness indicators as a measure of
economic integration.
                                                                                                         21
globalizers) while average incomes continue to diverge across these two groups of countries. In
other words, advanced countries and globalizers converge in terms of per capita incomes and so
do non-globalizers, but these two groups diverge from each other in terms of their average
incomes. Sala-i-Martin (2002), on the other hand, argues that a more careful analysis, using
individuals rather than countries as the units of analysis, shows that global inequality has
declined during the recent wave of globalization.

       By the same token, if the institutional preconditions for financial globalization to benefit
growth are in place, then it is likely financial globalization will help to alleviate poverty as well.

             IV. FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION AND MACROECONOMIC VOLATILITY

        International financial integration should, in principle, help countries to reduce
macroeconomic volatility. The survey presented in this section, including some new evidence,
suggests that developing countries, in particular, have not attained this potential benefit. The
process of capital account liberalization has often been accompanied by increased vulnerability
to crises. Globalization has heightened these risks since financial linkages have the potential of
amplifying the effects of both real and financial shocks.

        Holding growth constant, higher macroeconomic volatility would normally be associated
with an increase in inequality of income, and therefore measures of poverty based on inequality.
If the growth benefits are large – as indeed they may well be though the evidence is clearly very
mixed – then of course, increased financial integration may increase relative poverty measures in
the short run while reducing absolute (but not necessarily relative) poverty measures in the
longer run.26

                                   A. Macroeconomic Volatility27

         One of the potential benefits of globalization is that it should provide better opportunities
for reducing volatility by diversifying risks. Indeed, these benefits are presumably even greater
for developing countries that are intrinsically subject to higher volatility on account of their
being less diversified than industrial economies in terms of their production structures. However,
recent crises in some MFIs suggest that financial integration may in fact have increased
volatility.

         What is the overall evidence of the effect of globalization on macroeconomic volatility?
In addressing this question, it is important to make a distinction between output and consumption
volatility. In theoretical models, the direct effects of global integration on output volatility are
ambiguous. Financial integration provides access to capital that can help capital-poor developing
countries to diversify their production base. On the other hand, rising financial integration could
also lead to increasing specialization of production based on comparative advantage

26
   Mechanically, a rise in the volatility of consumption could lead to a decrease in the poverty head count.
However, the increase in the volatility of consumption adversely affects the poor households’ welfare.
27
  This subsection draws heavily on Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003a).
                                                                                                     22
considerations, thereby making economies more vulnerable to shocks that are specific to
industries (Razin and Rose (1994)).

        Irrespective of the effects on output volatility, theory suggests that financial integration
should reduce consumption volatility. The ability to reduce fluctuations in consumption is
regarded as an important determinant of economic welfare. Access to international financial
markets provides better opportunities for countries to share macroeconomic risk and, thereby,
smooth consumption. The basic idea here is that, since output fluctuations are not perfectly
correlated across countries, trade in financial assets can be used to delink national consumption
levels from the country-specific components of these output fluctuations (see Obstfeld and
Rogoff (1998), Chapter 5). Appendix III provides a detailed analytical examination of this issue
and shows that the gains from consumption smoothing are potentially very large for developing
economies.

         Notwithstanding the importance of this issue, the empirical evidence on the effects
of globalization on macroeconomic volatility is rather sparse and, in particular, the evidence
concerning the effects of financial integration on volatility is limited and inconclusive (see
Appendix IV). In addition, the existing literature has largely been devoted to analyzing the
effects of financial integration on output volatility, with little attention paid to consumption
volatility. Hence, this paper now provides some new evidence on this topic.

        Table 4 examines changes in volatility for different macroeconomic aggregates over the
last four decades. Consistent with evidence presented in the September 2002 World Economic
Outlook, MFI economies on average have lower output volatility than LFI economies.
Interestingly, there is a significant decline in average output volatility in the 1990s for both
industrial and LFI economies but a far more modest decline for MFI economies. The picture is
similar for a broader measure of income that includes factor income flows and terms of trade
effects, which are particularly important for developing countries. Figure 8 (top panel), which
shows the evolution of the average volatility of income growth for different groups of countries,
confirms these results and shows that they are not sensitive to the decade-wise breakdown of the
data, although there is a pick-up in volatility for MFIs towards the end of the sample.28

        The third panel of this table shows that average consumption volatility in the 1990s has
declined in line with output volatility for both industrial economies and LFI economies. By
contrast, for MFI economies, the volatility of private consumption has in fact risen in the 1990s
relative to the 1980s for MFI economies. It is possible that looking at the volatility of private
consumption is misleading as public consumption could be playing an important smoothing role,
especially in developing economies. It is true, as shown in the fourth panel of Table 4, that total
consumption is generally less volatile than private consumption. However, these results confirm
the pattern that, on average, consumption volatility for industrial and LFI economies declined in
the 1990s. By contrast, it increases for MFI economies over the same period. Figure 8 (lower
panel), which shows the evolution of the average volatility of total consumption growth over a

28
  The figure shows the median standard deviation of income growth for each country group, based on
standard deviations calculated for each country over a ten-year rolling window.
                                                                                                          23
ten-year rolling window, yields a similar picture. Could this simply be a consequence of higher
income volatility for MFI economies?

         Strikingly, for the group of MFI countries, the volatility of total consumption relative to
that of income has actually increased in the 1990s relative to earlier periods. The bottom panel of
Table 4 shows the median ratio of the volatility of total consumption growth to that of income
growth for each group of countries. For MFI economies, this ratio increases from 0.76 in the
1980s to 0.92 in the 1990s, while it remains essentially unchanged for the other two groups of
countries. Thus, the increase in the 1990s of the volatility of consumption relative to that of
income for the MFI economies suggests that financial integration has not provided better
consumption smoothing opportunities for these economies.29

        More formal econometric evidence is presented by Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003a),
who use measures of capital account restrictions as well as gross financial flows to capture
different aspects of financial integration, as well as differences in the degree of integration across
countries and over time. This analysis confirms the increase in the relative volatility of
consumption for countries that have larger financial flows, even after controlling for
macroeconomic variables as well as country characteristics such as trade openness and industrial
structure. However, these authors also identify an important threshold effect—beyond a
particular level, financial integration significantly reduces volatility. Most developing
economies, including MFI economies, are unfortunately well below this threshold.30

        Why has the relative volatility of consumption increased precisely in those developing
countries that are more open to financial flows? One explanation is that positive productivity and
output growth shocks during the late 1980s and early 1990s in these countries led to
consumption booms that were willingly financed by international investors. These consumption
booms were accentuated by the fact that many of these countries undertook domestic financial
liberalization at the same time that they opened up to international financial flows, thereby
loosening liquidity constraints at both the individual and national levels. When negative shocks
hit these economies, however, they rapidly lost access to international capital markets. For the
financial integration measure used in this paper, the threshold occurs at a ratio of about 50
percent of GDP. The countries in the sample that have a degree of financial integration above
this threshold are all industrial countries.

        Consistent with this explanation, a growing literature suggests that the procyclical nature
of capital flows appears to have had an adverse impact on consumption volatility in developing
economies.31 One manifestation of this procyclicality is the phenomenon of “sudden stops” of

29
   It should be noted that, despite the increase in the 1990s, the volatility of both private and total
consumption for the MFI economies is, on average, still lower than for LFI economies.
30
   For the financial integration measure used in this paper, the threshold occurs at a ratio of about 50
percent of GDP. The countries in the sample that have a degree of financial integration above this
threshold are all industrial countries.
31
  The notion of procylicality here is that capital inflows are positively correlated with domestic business
cycle conditions in these countries.
                                                                                                        24
capital inflows (see Calvo and Reinhart (1999)). More generally, access to international capital
markets has a procyclical element, which tends to generate higher output volatility as well as
excess consumption volatility (relative to that of income). Reinhart (2002), for instance, finds
that sovereign bond ratings are procyclical. Since the spreads on bonds of developing economies
are strongly influenced by these ratings, this implies that costs of borrowing on international
markets are procyclical as well. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2002) present more direct evidence on
the procyclical behavior of capital inflows.32

                              B. Crises as Special Cases of Volatility

        Crises can be regarded as particularly dramatic episodes of volatility. In fact, the
proliferation of financial crises is often viewed as one of the defining aspects of the
intensification of financial globalization over the last two decades. Furthermore, the fact that
recent crises have affected mainly MFI economies has led to these phenomena being regarded as
hallmarks of the unequal distribution of globalization’s benefits and risks. This raises a
challenging set of questions about whether the nature of crises has changed over time, what
factors increase vulnerability to crises, and whether such crises are an inevitable concomitant of
globalization.

         Some aspects of financial crises have indeed changed over time while, in other respects,
it is often déjà vu all over again. Calvo (1998) has referred to such episodes in the latter half of
the 1980s and 1990s as capital account crises, while earlier ones are referred to as current
account crises. Although this suggests differences in the mechanics of crises, it does not
necessarily imply differences in some of their fundamental causes. Kaminsky and Reinhart
(1999) discuss the phenomenon of “twin crises,” which involve balance-of-payments and
banking crises. These authors also make the important point that, in the episodes that they
analyze, banking sector problems typically precede a currency crisis and that the currency crisis
then deepens the banking crisis, activating a vicious spiral. In this vein, Krueger and Yoo (2002)
conclude that imprudent lending by the Korean banks in the early and mid-1990s, especially to
the Chaebols, played a significant role in the 1997 Korean currency crisis. Opening up to capital
markets can thus exacerbate such existing domestic distortions and lead to catastrophic
consequences (Aizenman (2002)).

        One key difference in the evolution of crises is that, while the 1970s and 1980s featured
crises that affected both industrial and developing economies, these have become almost
exclusively the preserve of developing economies since the mid 1990s.33 This suggests either
that advanced economies have been able to better protect themselves through improved policies
32
   The World Bank’s Global Development Finance Report (2001) also finds some evidence of such
procyclicality and notes that the response of capital inflows is typically twice as large when a developing
country faces an adverse shock to GDP growth as when it faces a favorable shock. This is attributed to the
fact that credit ratings are downgraded more rapidly during adverse shocks than they are upgraded during
favorable ones.
33
  In fact, in the 1990s, the ERM crisis is the only significant one among industrial countries. The
prolonged Japanese recession is in some sense a crisis although the protracted nature of Japan’s decline,
which has not featured any sudden falls in output, would not fit into a standard definition of a crisis.
                                                                                                         25
or that the fundamental causes of crises have changed over time, thereby increasing the relative
vulnerability of developing economies. In this context, it should be noted that, while capital
flows from advanced economies to MFI economies have increased sharply, these flows among
industrial economies have jumped even more sharply in recent years, as noted earlier. Thus, at
least in terms of volume of capital flows, it is not obvious that changes in financial integration
can by themselves be blamed for crises in MFI economies.

        Is it reasonable to accept crises as a natural feature of globalization, much as business
cycles are viewed as a natural occurrence in market economies? One key difference between
these phenomena is that the overall macroeconomic costs of financial crises are typically very
large and far more persistent. Calvo and Reinhart (2000, 2002) document that emerging market
currency crises, that are typically accompanied by sudden stops or reversals of external capital
inflows, are associated with significant negative output effects.34 Such recessions following
devaluations (or large depreciations) are also found to be much deeper in emerging markets than
in developed economies. In addition, the absence of well-functioning safety nets can greatly
exacerbate the social costs of crises, which typically have large distributional consequences (see,
e.g., Baldacci, de Mello, and Inchauste (2002)).35

         What is the impact on poverty of macroeconomic volatility associated with greater
openness to trade and financial flows on poverty? Mechanically, an increase in the volatility of
consumption could lead to a decrease in the poverty head count. However, the increase in the
volatility of consumption adversely affects the poor households’ welfare. Recent research
examines various implications of macroeconomic volatility and financial crises on the dynamics
of consumption and poverty in developing countries. For example, Duygan (2004) documents
that household expenditure decreased by 5 percent on average during financial crises in sixteen
developing countries. Some recent studies focus on the permanent impact of temporary negative
income shocks on poverty. For example, Lustig (2002) concludes that crises in Latin America
adversely affected the human capital of the poor and have had a permanent impact on poverty
and inequality by diminishing the potential of the poor to escape poverty. Agenor (2002) studies
the asymmetric effects of macroeconomic fluctuations and crises on poverty. He finds that while



34
   Currency crises can also affect firms directly and, by exacerbating the problems of the banking sector,
can lead to a broader credit crunch, even for productive and solvent firms. Mishkin (1999) argues that the
credit crunch resulting from sharp contractions in domestic bank credit following financial crises has been
instrumental in aggravating these crises and reducing investment and economic activity. Rodrik and
Velasco (2000) note that difficulties in rolling over short-term debt during crisis episodes rapidly squeeze
the availability of liquidity, with immediate effects on investment and output.
35
   Work by Wu and Wei (2001) using Chinese regional data shows that increases in trade openness are
negatively associated with changes in inequality. However, the process of financial and trade
liberalization can sometimes have negative distributional consequences within a country, especially in the
short run. Attempts to address these issues using ad hoc redistributive measures can often result in
distortions that adversely affect long-term growth. Nevertheless, given the vital need to maintain socio-
political stability while undertaking significant reforms and liberalization, there is a need for judicious
design and use of social safety nets to protect the economically vulnerable segments of the population.
                                                                                                                26
the effects of shocks to income on poverty are quite small during periods of crisis, these shocks
could decrease poverty during expansions.36



          C. Has Financial Globalization Intensified the Transmission of Volatility?

         What factors have led to the rising vulnerability of developing economies to financial
crises? The risk of sudden stops or reversals of global capital flows to developing countries has
increased in importance as many developing countries now rely heavily on borrowing from
foreign banks or portfolio investment by foreign investors. These capital flows are sensitive not
just to domestic conditions in the recipient countries but also to macroeconomic conditions in
industrial countries. For instance, Mody and Taylor (2002), using an explicit disequilibrium
econometric framework, detect instances of “international capital crunch”—where capital flows
to developing countries are curtailed by supply-side rationing that reflects industrial country
conditions.37 These North-South financial linkages, in addition to the real linkages described in
earlier sections, represent an additional channel through which business cycles and other shocks
that hit industrial countries can affect developing countries.

        The effects of industrial country macroeconomic conditions, including the stage of the
business cycle and interest rates, have different effects on various types of capital flows to
emerging markets. Reinhart and Reinhart (2001) document that net FDI flows to emerging
market economies are strongly positively correlated with U.S. business cycles. On the other
hand, bank lending to these economies is negatively correlated with U.S. cycles. Edison and
Warnock (2001) find that portfolio equity flows from the United States to major emerging
market countries are negatively correlated with both U.S. interest rates and U.S. output growth.
This result is particularly strong for flows to Latin America and less so for flows to Asia. Thus,
the sources of capital inflows for a particular MFI can greatly affect the nature of its vulnerability
to the volatility of capital flows arising from industrial country disturbances.38

        The increase in cross-country financial market correlations also indicates a risk
of emerging markets being caught up in financial market bubbles. The rise in comovement
across emerging and industrial country stock markets, especially during the stock market bubble
period of the late 1990s, points to the relevance of this concern. This is a particular risk for
relatively shallow and undiversified stock markets of some emerging economies. For instance, as
noted earlier, the strong correlations between emerging and industrial stock markets during the
bubble period reflects the preponderance of technology and telecommunication sectors stocks in

36
   Recent research also studies the adverse impact of macroeconomic volatility on food security and
hunger (see Barrett and Shan, 2001).
37
   This paper examines bond, equity and syndicated loan flows to Brazil, Mexico, Korea and Thailand
over the period 1990–2000.
38
  However, notwithstanding the differences in the types of sensitivities to industrial country business
cycle conditions, the fact still remains that FDI flows are generally less volatile and less sensitive to the
factors discussed here than either portfolio flows or bank lending.
                                                                                                        27
the former set of markets. It is, of course, difficult to say conclusively whether this phenomenon
would have occurred even in the absence of financial globalization, since stock market
liberalizations in these countries often went hand in hand with their opening up to capital flows.

        The increasing depth of stock markets in emerging economies could alleviate some
of these risks but, at the same time, could heighten the real effects of such financial shocks. In
this vein, Dellas and Hess (2002) find that a higher degree of financial development
makes emerging stock markets more susceptible to external influences (both financial and
macroeconomic) and that this effect remains important after controlling for capital controls and
trade linkages.39 Consequently, the effects of external shocks could be transmitted to domestic
real activity through the stock market channel.

        Even the effects of real shocks are often transmitted faster and amplified through
financial channels. There is a large literature showing how productivity, terms of trade, fiscal and
other real shocks are transmitted through trade channels.40 Cross-country investment flows, in
particular, have traditionally responded quite strongly to country-specific shocks.41 Financial
channels constitute an additional avenue through which the effects of such real shocks can be
transmitted. Furthermore, since transmission through financial channels is much quicker than
through real channels, both the speed and magnitude of international spillovers of real shocks are
considerably heightened by financial linkages.42

        Rising financial linkages have also resulted in contagion effects. Potential contagion
effects are likely to become more important over time as financial linkages increase and
investors in search of higher returns and better diversification opportunities increase their share
of international holdings and, due to declines in information and transaction costs, have access to
a broader array of cross-country investment opportunities.43

       There are two broad types of contagion identified in the literature—fundamentals-based
contagion and “pure” contagion. The former refers to the transmission of shocks across national
borders through real or financial linkages. In other words, while an economy may have weak
fundamentals, it could get tipped over into a financial crisis as a consequence of investors
reassessing the riskiness of investments in that country or attempting to rebalance their portfolios

39
   These authors use standard measures of financial sector development that are based on the competitive
structure and the size of the financial intermediation sector in each country.
40
   See Kouparitsas (1996); Blankenau, Kose, and Yi (2001); Kose and Riezman (2001); and Kose (2002).
41
   See Glick and Rogoff (1997) for an empirical analysis of how country-specific productivity shocks
affect national investment and the current account. These authors show how the responses to such shocks
depend crucially on the persistence of the shocks. Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2003) examine the impact
of world and country-specific factors in driving fluctuations in output, consumption, and investment.
42
   For instance, a shock to GDP growth in one country may be transmitted gradually through trade
channels but could far more quickly have an impact on economic activity in another country via
correlations in stock market fluctuations. If the two countries were perfectly integrated through trade and
financial linkages this outcome could, of course, simply reflect an optimal risk-sharing arrangement.
43
  Contagion effects aside, Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003b) find that increasing financial linkages have
only a small effect on cross-country output and consumption correlations.
                                                                                                      28
following a crisis in another country. Similarly, bank lending can lead to such contagion effects
when a crisis in one country to which a bank has significant exposure forces it to rebalance its
portfolio by readjusting its lending to other countries. This bank transmission channel,
documented in Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2000) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (2001), can be
particularly potent since a large fraction of bank lending to emerging markets is in the form of
short-maturity loans. While fundamentals-based contagion was once prevalent mainly at the
regional level, the Russian crisis demonstrated its much broader international reach (Kaminsky
and Reinhart (2002)).44

         Pure contagion, on the other hand, represents a different kind of risk since it can not
easily be influenced by domestic policies at least in the short run. There is a good deal of
evidence of sharp swings in international capital flows that are not obviously related to changes
in fundamentals. Investor behavior during these episodes, which is sometimes categorized as
herding or momentum trading, is difficult to explain in the context of optimizing models with
full and common information. Informational asymmetries, which are particularly rife in the
context of emerging markets, appear to play an important role in this phenomenon. A related
literature suggests that pure contagion may reflect investors’ shifting “appetite” for risk, but it is
no doubt difficult to disentangle such changes in risk appetite from shifts in underlying risks
themselves (Kumar and Persaud (2001)). Thus, in addition to “pure contagion,” financial
integration exposes developing economies to the risks associated with destabilizing investor
behavior that is not related to fundamentals.45

         D. Some Factors That Increase Vulnerability to the Risks of Globalization

        Empirical research indicates that the composition of capital inflows and the maturity
structure of external debt appear to be associated with higher vulnerability to the risks of
financial globalization. The relative importance of different sources of financing for domestic
investment, as proxied by the following three variables, has been shown to be positively
associated with the incidence and the severity of currency and financial crises: the ratio of bank
borrowing or other debt relative to foreign direct investment; the shortness of the term structure
of external debt; and the share of external debt denominated in foreign currencies.46 Detragiache
and Spilimbergo (2002) find strong evidence that debt crises are more likely to occur in countries
where external debt has a short maturity.47 However, the maturity structure may not entirely be a


44
   Kim, Kose, and Plummer (2001) examine the roles of fundamentals based contagion and pure
contagion during the Asian crisis.
45
   Claessens and Forbes (2001) contains a compilation of essays on the different dimensions of contagion
effects. Boyer, Gibson, and Loretan (1999), and Forbes and Rigobon (2001) argue that the evidence for
pure contagion against the alternative of fundamentals-based contagion is very weak. Corsetti and others
(2002) argue that, under more general assumptions, there is greater evidence of the former type of
contagion. Bayoumi and others (2003), find evidence of “positive” contagion related with herding
behavior of capital inflows to emerging markets.
46
   See, for example, Frankel and Rose (1996), Radelet and Sachs (1998), and Rodrik and Velasco (1999).
47
  Some authors have found that the currency composition of external debt also matters. Carlson and
Hernandez (2002) note that, during the Asian crisis, countries with more yen-denominated debt fared
                                                                                             (continued)
                                                                                                         29
matter of choice since, as argued by these authors, countries with weaker macroeconomic
fundamentals are often forced to borrow at shorter maturities since they do not have access to
longer-maturity loans.

        In addition to basic macroeconomic policies, other policy choices of a systemic nature
can also affect the vulnerability of MFIs. Recent currency crises have highlighted one of the
main risks in this context. Developing countries that attempt to maintain a relatively inflexible
exchange rate system often face the risk of attacks on their currencies. While various forms of
fully or partially fixed exchange rate regimes can have some advantages, the absence of
supportive domestic policies can often result in an abrupt unraveling of these regimes when
adverse shocks hit the economy.

        Financial integration can also aggravate the risks associated with imprudent fiscal
policies. Access to world capital markets could lead to excessive borrowing that is channeled
into unproductive government spending. The existence of large amounts of short-term debt
denominated in hard currencies then makes countries vulnerable to external shocks or changes in
investor sentiment. The experience of a number of MFI countries that have suffered the
consequences of such external debt accumulation points to the heightened risks of undisciplined
fiscal policies when the capital account is open.

        Premature opening of the capital account also poses serious risks when financial
regulation and supervision are inadequate.48 In the presence of weakly regulated banking systems
and other distortions in domestic capital markets, inflows of foreign capital could exacerbate the
existing inefficiencies in these economies. For example, if domestic financial institutions tend to
channel capital to firms with excessive risks or weak fundamentals, financial integration could
simply lead to an intensification of such flows.49 In turn, the effects of premature capital inflows
on the balance sheets of the government and corporate sectors could have negative repercussions
on the health of financial institutions in the event of adverse macroeconomic shocks.

                                           V. CONCLUSIONS

         The empirical evidence has not established a definitive proof that financial integration
has enhanced growth for developing countries. Furthermore, it may be associated with higher
consumption volatility. Therefore, there may be value for developing countries to experiment
with different paces and strategies in pursuing financial integration. Empirical evidence does
suggest that improving governance, in addition to sound macroeconomic frameworks and the
development of domestic financial markets, should be an important element of such strategies.
This conclusion does not necessarily imply that a country must develop a full set of sound
institutions matching the best practices in the world before embarking on financial integration.


significantly worse. These authors attribute this to the misalignment between the countries’ de facto
currency pegs and the denomination of their debt.
48
   See Ishii and Habermeier (2002) and Bakker and Chapple (2002).
49
   Krueger and Yoo (2002), discuss the interactions of crony capitalism and capital account liberalization
in setting the stage for the currency-financial crisis in Korea. See also, Mody (2002).
                                                                                                     30
As emphasized in Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003, chapter 5), as a country makes progress
on transparency, control of corruption, rule of law, and financial supervisory capacity, it will be
in an increasingly better position to benefit from financial globalization.

        Equally important is to avoid some of the recurrent traps that countries have fallen into as
they have moved to liberalize domestic financial markets and engineer increased financial
globalization. If, as appears to be the case, overly fixed exchange rates are a leading determinant
of financial crises in emerging markets, then moving to more flexible exchange rate regimes
should greatly improve a country’s chances of being a winner from financial globalization even
in the short term. Likewise, assuming a large external debt burden, especially if it is of a
relatively short maturity structure, can be a damaging way to undertake financial integration.

        It is also important to stress that financial integration is not necessarily a variable that can
be tightly controlled by policy. Capital controls, aside from coming in myriads of forms with
effects that are difficult to manage, are often ineffective. Even in counties where they are
relatively more effective, such controls tend to become less so over time as the rising
sophistication of international capital markets and investors, along with the global expansion of
trade, increase the opportunities for evading capital controls. Some of the most consistently
financially integrated countries based on our de facto measure--including, for example, many
Latin American countries--have often been ones where capital controls are quite stringent, at
least on paper. On the other hand, many countries in Africa offer unimpeded capital market
access, have not yet succeeded in achieving a significant degree of integration.

        Finally, given that we have not been able to draw strong conclusions about the empirical
links between financial globalization, growth and macroeconomic volatility, one must conclude
that there will almost surely be similar ambiguity in an investigation of the links between
financial globalization and poverty, although we have not directly examined those links in this
paper. Of course, in such an exercise one would ideally like to look at a broader range of human
development indicators and measures of poverty than just income (for example, even in some
countries such as Brazil that have experienced relatively slow income growth over the past
fifteen years, educational attainment levels have continued to rise).50

         In addition, to provide a comprehensive analysis of the complex relationship between
globalization and poverty, one has to acknowledge that poverty is fundamentally a relative
measure which would probably gain an entirely different meaning as the world economy become
more integrated (Rogoff, 2004). For example, if global growth continues at a rapid pace during
the next century, it is possible that emerging market economies, including China and India, could
attain income levels exceeding those of Americans today by the end of the century. This implies
that Malthusian notions of poverty are likely to become a distant memory in most parts of the
world as global income inexorably expands over the next century, and issues of inequality, rather
than subsistence, will increasingly take center stage in the poverty debate.


50
  Ravallion (2003) argues that differences in the concept and definitions of poverty could lead to
different conclusions about the impact of globalization on poverty and inequality.
                                                                                                   31
        The results that we have highlighted in this paper provide a framework in which to
examine the different channels through which the forces of financial globalization could affect
poverty and inequality outcomes. A great deal of additional work is clearly called for to gain a
better understanding of these dimensions of the effects of financial globalization.
                                                                                                                             32
Figure 1. Measures of Financial Integration

   1.0                                                Industrial Countries                                           1.5



                             Restriction Measure (left scale)         Openness Measure (right scale)

   0.8                                                                                                               1.2




   0.6                                                                                                               0.9




   0.4                                                                                                               0.6




   0.2                                                                                                               0.3




   0.0                                                                                                               0.0
         1970      1974            1978                1982             1986                1990       1994   1998


   1.0                                               Developing Countries                                             0.50


                            Restriction Measure (left scale)         Openness Measure (right scale)


   0.8                                                                                                                0.40




   0.6                                                                                                                0.30




   0.4                                                                                                                0.20




   0.2                                                                                                                0.10




   0.0                                                                                                                0.00
         1970       1974           1978                 1982             1986                1990      1994   1998

     Source: WEO, Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2003)
                                                                                                 33
                                           Figure 2. Gross Capital Flows

                                                  (Percent of GDP)


                                        More Financially Integrated Economies
10


                   Banks
                   Portfolio
7.5                FDI




 5




2.5




 0
  1970           1974            1978           1982          1986          1990   1994   1998




                                   Less Financially Integrated Economies

      5

                  Banks
                  Portfolio
                  FDI
3.75




 2.5




1.25




      0
      1970        1974           1978            1982         1986          1990   1994   1998


  Source: WEO, IFS

  Note that the left scales on the two panels are different
                                                                                                                                                34
                                              Figure 3. Net Private Capital Flows
                                                       (Billions of U.S. dollars)


                                                           All Developing Economies
180


160       Bank Lending
          Portfolio Flows
140       FDI


120


100


 80


 60


 40


 20


  0
  1970                      1975                     1980                    1985                    1990                      1995
-20
                                                                           Year




                   More Financially Integrated Economies                                         Less Financially Integrated Economies


180                                                                            9


          Bank Lending                                                         8         Bank Lending
160
          Portfolio Flows                                                                Portfolio Flows

          FDI                                                                  7         FDI
140

                                                                               6
120

                                                                               5
100
                                                                               4
 80
                                                                               3
 60
                                                                               2

 40
                                                                               1

 20
                                                                               0
                                                                                  1970    1975          1980        1985          1990   1995
  0                                                                           -1
  1970      1975            1980      1985         1990         1995
-20                                                                           -2
                                     Year                                                                          Year



  Source: WEO

  Note: Bank lending to the More Financially Integrated Economies was negative between 1997 and 1999.
                                                                                                           35
                      Figure 4. Foreign Ownership Restrictions
                 (More Financially Integrated Developing Economies)


                           Total                                                    Asia

1.0                                                      1.0




0.8                                                      0.8




0.6                                                      0.6




0.4                                                      0.4




0.2                                                      0.2




0.0                                                      0.0
1989M1 1991M1 1993M1 1995M1 1997M1 1999M1                 1989M1 1991M1 1993M1 1995M1 1997M1 1999M1




                    Western Hemisphere                                              Africa

1.0                                                      1.0



                                                         0.8
0.8


                                                         0.6
0.6

                                                         0.4

0.4
                                                         0.2


0.2
                                                         0.0



0.0                                                      -0.2
1989M1 1991M1   1993M1 1995M1 1997M1 1999M1               1989M1 1991M1 1993M1 1995M1 1997M1 1999M1



  Source: Edison and Warnock (2001).

  Note: This index measures the intensity of restrictions on the access that foreign investors have to a
  particular country'
                    s equity markets.
                                                                                          36

                      Figure 5. Channels Through Which Financial Integration Can

                                         Raise Economic Growth




                             International Financial Integration




            Direct Channels                                  Indirect Channels
• Augmentation of domestic savings                  • Promotion of specialization
• Lower cost of capital due to better risk          • Inducement for better policies
allocation                                          • Enhancement of capital inflows by
• Transfer of technology                            signaling better policies
• Development of financial sector




                                     Higher Economic Growth




                                             Lower Poverty
                                                                                                                             37
Figure 6. Increase in Financial Openness and Growth of Real Per Capita GDP

                                                                      Simple Correlation, 1982–97



                                                       coef = .002, (robust) se = .003, t = .67
                                                 1
             Growth rate of p.c. GDP: 1982-97




                                                .5




                                                 0




                                                -.5




                                                -1
                                                      -22.7                                                           65.5
                                                                        Change in capital account openness, 1982-97




Note: Capital account openness is measured as (gross private capital inflows + gross private capital
outflows) / GDP.

Source: Wei and Wu (2002b).
                                                                                                                          38
          Figure 7. Increase in Financial Openness and Growth of Real Per Capita GDP:
                               Conditional Relationship, 1982–1997



                  Conditioning on Initial Income, Initial Schooling, Average Investment/GDP,
                  Political Instability (Revolution and Coup), and Regional Dummies, 1982–97




                                                    coef = .006, (robust) se = .004, t = 1.42

                                               1
           Growth rate of p.c. GDP: 1982-97




                                              .5




                                               0




                                              -.5

                                                    -10.5                                                          18.0
                                                                     Change in capital account openness, 1982-97



Note: Capital account openness is measured by the (gross private capital inflows + gross private capital
outflows) / GDP.

Source: Wei and Wu (2002b).
                                                                                           39
              Figure 8. Volatility of Income and Consumption Growth

  (10-year rolling standard deviations; medians for each group of countries)



                                       Income

0.10
                                                              Industrial Countries
0.09
                                                              MFI Countries
0.08                                                          LFI Countries

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
       1970   1974    1978      1982           1986   1990         1994             1998
                                        Year




                             Total Consumption

0.10
                                                             Industrial Countries
0.09
                                                             MFI Countries
0.08                                                         LFI Countries

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
       1970   1974    1978      1982        1986      1990         1994         1998
                                        Year


Source: Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003a)
                                                                                                40
                   Table 1. Volatility of Different Types of Capital Inflows


                                       FDI/GDP            Loan/GDP         Portfolio/GDP

Standard deviations
(median for each group)
MFI economies                            0.007              0.032               0.009
LFI economies                            0.010              0.036               0.002

Coefficients of variation
(median for each group)
MFI economies                            0.696              1.245               1.751
LFI economies                            1.276              1.177               2.494

Coefficients of variation
for selected MFI economies
Indonesia                                0.820              0.717               1.722
Korea                                    0.591              2.039               1.338
Malaysia                                 0.490              4.397               3.544
Mexico                                   0.452              2.048               2.088
Philippines                              0.921              0.956               1.979
Thailand                                 0.571              0.629               1.137

 Source: Wei (2001). Computed over the period 1980–96. Only countries with at least eight
 non-missing observations during the period for all three variables and with a population
 greater than or equal to one million in 1995 are kept in the sample. Total inward FDI flows,
 total bank loans, and total inward portfolio investments are from the IMF’s Balance of
 Payments Statistics, various issues.
                                                                                                    41
                          Table 2. Fastest and Slowest Growing Economies

                     During 1980–2000 and Their Status of Financial Openness


                            Total                                              Total
       Fastest Growing                     More              Slowest Growing                  More
                            Percentage                                         Percentage
       Economies,                          Financially       Economies,                       Financially
                            Change in                                          Change in
       1980–2000                           Integrated?       1980–2000                        Integrated?
                            p.c. GDP                                           p.c. GDP


1      China                391.6          Yes/No            Haiti             -39.5          No

2      Korea                234.0          Yes               Niger             -37.8          No

3      Singapore            155.5          Yes               Nicaragua         -30.6          No

4      Thailand             151.1          Yes               Togo              -30.0          No

5      Mauritius            145.8          No                Cote d’Ivoire     -29.0          No

6      Botswana             135.4          No                Burundi           -20.2          No

7      Hong Kong SAR        114.5          Yes               Venezuela         -17.3          Yes/No

8      Malaysia             108.8          Yes               South Africa      -13.7          Yes

9      India                103.2          Yes/No            Jordan            -10.9          Yes

10     Chile                100.9          Yes               Paraguay          -9.5           No

11     Indonesia            97.6           Yes               Ecuador           -7.9           No

12     Sri Lanka            90.8           No                Peru              -7.8           Yes




Note: Growth rate of real per capita GDP, in constant local currency units.

Source: These calculations are based on the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI)
database.
                                                                                               42
        Table 3. Summary of Recent Research on Financial Integration and Economic Growth




Study                                         Number of    Years
                                              Countries   Covered          Effect on Growth

Alesina, Grilli, and Milesi-Ferretti (1994)      20        1950-89             No effect
Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995)                61        1966-89             No effect
Quinn (1997)                                     58        1975-89              Positive
Kraay (1998)                                    117        1985-97        No effect / mixed
Rodrik (1998)                                    95        1975-89             No effect
Klein and Olivei (2000)                       Up to 92     1986-95              Positive
Chanda (2001)                                   116        1976-95               Mixed
Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2001)        51-59       1973-92               Mixed
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001)            30         1981-97              Positive
Edwards (2001)                                  62          1980s     No effect for poor countries
O'Donnell (2001)                                94         1971-94    No effect, or at best mixed
Reisen and Soto (2001)                          44         1986-97               Mixed
Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sløk (2002)         Up to 89     1973-95               Mixed
Edison, Levine, Ricci, and Sløk (2002)          57        1980-2000            No effect
                                                                                                                   43
                   Table 4. Volatility of Annual Growth Rates of Selected Variables
                    (Percentage standard deviations, medians for each group of countries)

                                         Full Sample                             Decade
                                          1960–99           1960s        1970s            1980s     1990s

        Output (Y)
         Industrial countries                2.18            1.91         2.46          2.03         1.61
                                            (0.23)          (0.26)       (0.28)        (0.30)       (0.14)
          MFI economies                      3.84            3.31         3.22          4.05         3.59
                                            (0.20)          (0.42)       (0.37)        (0.44)       (0.62)
          LFI economies                      4.67            3.36         4.88          4.53         2.70
                                            (0.35)          (0.61)       (1.01)        (0.69)       (0.38)
        Income (Q)
         Industrial countries                2.73            2.18         2.99          2.54         1.91
                                            (0.34)          (0.33)       (0.40)        (0.29)       (0.30)
          MFI economies                      5.44            3.60         5.43          5.45         4.78
                                            (0.50)          (0.47)       (0.45)        (0.65)       (0.72)
          LFI economies                      7.25            4.42         9.64          7.56         4.59
                                            (0.84)          (0.53)       (1.24)        (1.23)       (0.54)
        Consumption ( C)
         Industrial countries                2.37            1.47         2.16          1.98         1.72
                                            (0.30)          (0.27)       (0.25)        (0.28)       (0.20)
          MFI economies                      5.18            4.57         4.52          4.09         4.66
                                            (0.51)          (0.49)       (1.04)        (0.94)       (0.46)
          LFI economies                      6.61            5.36         7.07          7.25         5.72
                                            (0.78)          (0.58)       (0.11)        (0.81)       (0.78)
        Total Consumption (C+G)
         Industrial countries                1.86            1.38         1.84          1.58         1.38
                                            (0.23)          (0.28)       (0.18)        (0.19)       (0.20)
          MFI economies                      4.34            3.95         4.19          3.43         4.10
                                            (0.47)          (0.51)       (0.54)        (0.84)       (0.53)
          LFI economies                      6.40            4.85         6.50          6.34         4.79
                                            (0.56)          (0.55)       (0.93)        (0.91)       (0.82)
        Ratio of Total Consumption (C+G)
        to Income (Q)
          Industrial countries          0.67                 0.75         0.56          0.61         0.58
                                       (0.02)               (0.09)       (0.03)        (0.06)       (0.06)
          MFI economies                      0.81            0.92         0.74          0.76         0.92
                                            (0.07)          (0.13)       (0.12)        (0.11)       (0.04)
          LFI economies                      0.80            0.95         0.68          0.82         0.84
                                            (0.08)          (0.06)       (0.10)        (0.51)       (0.14)

Notes: From the bottom panel, the ratio of total consumption growth volatility to that of income growth volatility is
first computed separately for each country. The reported numbers are the within-group medians of those ratios.
(Note that this is not the same as the ratio of the median of consumption growth volatility to the median of income
growth volatility.) Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                                                                                  44
Appendix I. The Effects of Different Types of Capital Flows on Growth

        The cumulative evidence from the literature does not offer a clear-cut and robust support
for the notion that capital flows generically provides a quantitatively big boost to economic
growth. However, there have been several studies that suggest that different types of capital
flows may have different effects.

       Using data for the 1980s, De Mello (1999) reports evidence that FDI flows appear to
promote economic growth in developing as well as OECD countries. Borenzstein, De Gregorio,
and Lee (1998) find that the positive effect of FDI can be detected when the recipient countries
have a sufficiently high level of human capital.

        FDI and other types of capital flows into developing countries started to pick up
momentum in the 1990s, making it highly desirable to look at the evidence based on more recent
data. Reisen and Soto (2001) examine six types of capital flows: foreign direct investment,
portfolio equity flows, portfolio bond flows, long-term bank credits, short term bank credits and
official flows. They employ a dynamic panel regression framework to deal with potential
endogeneity and missing variable problems and cover 44 countries over the period 1986–97. Of
the six types of capital flows, only two, namely FDI and portfolio equity flows, are positively
associated with subsequent economic growth rates.

        Other studies have looked into the effects of different types of capital flows on domestic
investment (and hence indirectly on growth). Bosworth and Collins (1999) analyzed such
relationships using data covering 1979–95, focusing on variations within countries over time
rather than variations across countries. These authors first removed the country means from the
data, and then regressed investment and savings shares on various forms of capital inflows
(relative to GDP). They found that more FDI and bank lending are positively associated with
increases in domestic investment. In contrast, the association between portfolio capital inflows
and domestic investment, while positive, is not statistically significant. These authors made an
attempt to deal with the possibility that capital flows are endogenous, meaning that capital flows
and domestic investment can both be determined simultaneously by a common third factor.

        The World Bank'   s report on Global Development Finance (2001) replicated the
Bosworth-Collins study using a data set with more countries and a longer time period (1972–98).
It found that the association between FDI (or other long term capital inflows or bank lending)
and domestic investment is stronger than between short-term debt and domestic investment. The
association between portfolio capital and domestic investment is not statistically significant.

        To summarize, across different recent studies surveyed here, FDI is one form of capital
inflows that tends to be found positively associated with domestic investment and domestic
growth in a relatively consistent manner. Other forms of capital inflows could also have a
positive relationship, but their effects tend to be less robust or less strong.
                                                                                                  45
Appendix II. Do Financial and Trade Integration Have Different Effects on Economic
Development? Evidence from Life Expectancy and Infant Mortality

       As an alternative to examining the effect of openness on economic growth, this appendix
asks: Do trade and financial openness help to raise life expectancy and reduce infant mortality in
developing countries? Are their effects different?

          There are three motivations for studying these questions (see Wei and Wu (2002b)). First,
as life expectancy and infant mortality are important dimensions of a society’s well-being, they
are interesting objects to look at in their own right. Second, data on income level or growth come
from national accounts. So all studies on economic growth have to make use of variations of the
similar data sources. In comparison, vital statistics come from an entirely different data source
(i.e., birth and death records) and are typically collected by different government agencies.
Therefore, they offer an independent and complementary check on the effect of openness on the
livelihood of people. Third, to compare income levels or growth rates across countries, it is
necessary to make certain purchasing power parity (PPP) adjustments to nominal income.
However, existing PPP adjustments may not be reliable (Deaton (2001)). In contrast, the
definitions of life and death are consistent across countries, so there is a higher degree of
comparability than the data on poverty, income or income distribution.

       Data on 79 developing countries over the period 1962–97 are examined. This data set
covers all developing countries for which the relevant data exist and for which changes in infant
mortality and life expectancy are not dominated by large-scale wars, genocides, famines, or
major outbursts of AIDS epidemics. Panel regressions with country fixed effects as well as
dynamic panel regressions are employed to account for other factors that may affect health and
to account for possible endogeneity of the openness variables.

         The results, summarized in Figure II.1, suggest that the effects of trade and financial
openness are different. There is no positive and robust association across developing countries
between faster increase in financial integration and faster improvement in a society’s health. By
comparison, there are several pieces of evidence suggesting that higher trade integration is
associated with a faster increase in life expectancy and a faster reduction in infant mortality. For
example, an 11 percentage point reduction in the average statutory tariff rate—approximately
equal to one standard deviation of the change in the statutory tariff rate over the 1962–97
period—is associated with between 3 to 6 less infants dying per thousand live births, even after
controlling for the effects of changes in per capita income, average female education and other
factors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     46


                                                      Figure II.1. Differential Effects of Financial and Trade Integration

                                                                          on Improvements in Health
A lower trade barrier is associated with a longer life expectancy, but higher financial integration is not.

                                     coef = -.090, se = .035, t = -2.58                                                                     coef = -.028, se = .081, t = -.35
                 .05
                                                                                                                                      .04
        Log life expectancy




                                                                                                                Log life expectancy
                                                                                                                                      .02




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                 -.02




             -.04                                                                                                               -.04

                              -.33                                                 .18                                                 -.13                                                    .13
                                                            Tariff rate                                                                                          Financial integration


Note: conditional on income per capita, years of                                                                                      Note: conditional on tariff rate, income per capita,
schooling, physicians per 1000 people, democracy,                                                                                     years of schooling, physicians per 1000 people,
and country fixed effects.                                                                                                            democracy, and country fixed effects.


A lower trade barrier is associated with lower infant mortality, but a rise in financial integration is not.


                                                                                                                                      coef = .019, se = .027, t = .7
                                coef = .045, se = .012, t = 3.9
              .02                                                                                     .02
   Infant mortality




                                                                                         Infant mortality




                                                                                                      .01




                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                   -.01
             -.02
                              -.33                                           .18                                               -.13                                                      .13
                                                          Tariff rate                                                                                        Financial integration
Note: conditional on income per capita, years of                                                            Note: conditional on tariff rate, income per capita,
schooling, physicians per 1000 people, democracy,                                                           years of schooling, physicians per 1000 people,
and country fixed effects.                                                                                  democracy, and country fixed effects.


Notes: On the vertical axises in the figures in the first row is log life expectancy at birth (in years). On the vertical
axises in the figures in the second row is infant mortality, defined as the number of infants who die before reaching
the first birthday per 1000 live births. Tariff rate refers to average statutory tariff rate. Financial integration is
measured by (gross private capital inflows + gross private capital outflows) / GDP.

Source: These calculations are based on Wei and Wu (2002b).
                                                                                                 47
Appendix III. The Effects of Globalization on Volatility: A Review of the Empirical
Evidence

       Unlike the rich empirical literature focusing on the impact of financial openness on
economic growth, there are only a limited number of studies analyzing the links between
openness and macroeconomic volatility. Moreover, existing studies have generally been unable
to document a clear empirical link between openness and macroeconomic volatility. Razin and
Rose (1994) study the impact of trade and financial openness on the volatility of output,
consumption, and investment for a sample of 138 countries over the period 1950–88. They find
no significant empirical link between openness and the volatility of these variables.

        Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001) explore the sources of output volatility using data for
a sample of 74 countries over the period 1960–97. They find that a higher level of development
of the domestic financial sector is associated with lower volatility. On the other hand, an increase
in the degree of trade openness leads to an increase in the volatility of output, especially in
developing countries. Their results indicate that neither financial openness nor the volatility of
capital flows has a significant impact on output volatility.

         Buch, Dopke, and Pierdzioch (2002) use data for 25 OECD countries to examine the link
between financial openness and output volatility. They report that there is no consistent empirical
relationship between financial openness and the volatility of output. Gavin and Hausmann (1996)
study the sources of output volatility in developing countries over the period 1970–92. They find
that there is a significant positive association between the volatility of capital flows and output
volatility. O’Donnell (2001) examines the effect of financial integration on the volatility of
output growth over the period 1971–94 using data for 93 countries. He finds that a higher degree
of financial integration is associated with lower (higher) output volatility in OECD (non-OECD)
countries. His results also suggest that countries with more developed financial sectors are able
to reduce output volatility through financial integration.

        Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2002) examine the impact of equity market liberalization
on the volatility of output and consumption during 1980–2000. They find that, following equity
market liberalizations, there is a significant decline in both output and consumption volatility.
Capital account openness reduces the volatility of output and consumption, but its impact is
smaller than that of equity market liberalization. However, they also report that capital account
openness increases the volatility of output and consumption in emerging market countries. The
September 2002 WEO provides some evidence indicating that financial openness is associated
with lower output volatility in developing countries.
                                                                                                 48
Appendix IV. Calculating the Potential Welfare Gains from International Risk Sharing

         International financial integration could result in potentially large welfare gains
as it allows domestic residents, firms, and countries to smooth fluctuations in their
consumption/revenue by diversifying away country-specific risks. For example, during
recessions, countries can borrow from international markets and mitigate the adverse impact of
declines in aggregate output on consumption and investment. During expansions, they can lend
to other countries and/or pay back the loans they borrow during the recessions. Domestic
residents and firms can also utilize international financial markets for consumption smoothing
and receive large welfare benefits as these markets significantly expand the set of available
financial instruments for international risk sharing purposes. Firms can invest in plants abroad to
protect themselves against shocks associated with domestic cost or productivity changes.

        Developing countries, in particular, can obtain large welfare gains through international
risk sharing considering the highly volatile nature of income and consumption dynamics in these
countries. Generally speaking, the scope for benefiting from international risk sharing tends to be
large when a country’s consumption growth is volatile, positively correlated with domestic
output growth, and not highly correlated with world consumption. Recent empirical studies
suggest that these features tend to characterize most developing countries. This is particularly the
case, on average for LFI economies, somewhat less so for MFI economies, and still less so for
advanced countries.

        The potential welfare gains from international risk sharing and the consequent reduction
in the volatility of consumption can be calculated using a simple model (see below for details).51
In brief, the model compares two scenarios. The first one has no additional risk sharing (relative
to what is already implied by observed consumption behavior) while, in the second one, there is
perfect risk-sharing so that each country consumes a (constant) fraction of total world
consumption. Since total world consumption tends to be less volatile than the consumption of
individual countries, the second scenario results in smoother national consumption patterns. The
model can be used to generate quantitative estimates of the consumption-equivalent increase in
welfare resulting from such reductions in consumption volatility.

        Figure IV.1 reports the median gains (in terms of per capita consumption) for each group
of economies. The gains are generally inversely proportional to the current degree of financial
integration with the world economy. Highly volatile consumption fluctuations faced by
LFI economies implies that the benefits to financial integration and consequent reductions in
consumption volatility would be very large for these economies. On average, these benefits
would have the same effect as about a 6 percent permanent increase in the level




51
 The calculations closely follow the methodology employed in van Wincoop (1994, 1999).
                                                                                                          49
                                         Figure IV.1. Welfare Gains from International Risk Sharing



                    7.0


                    6.0


                    5.0
Welfare Gains (%)




                    4.0


                    3.0


                    2.0


                    1.0


                    0.0

                                       LFI                               MFI         Advanced Countries
                                                                Country Groups
                    Note: Welfare gains measured in percent of consumption.
                                                                                                          50

of per capita consumption.52 Even for MFI economies, the potential gains from further
international risk-sharing are quite large.

                                              Methodology

        This subsection briefly explains the methodology underlying the welfare gain
calculations summarized above. During the past decade, a growing body of literature has
examined the welfare implications of international risk sharing. While some studies focus on the
welfare gains based upon consumption series, some others examine the gains from risk sharing
using stock returns data in this literature. In these studies, a consumer/investor is able to increase
her current welfare because she is able to reduce the volatility of her marginal utility of
consumption/wealth over her life time by pooling country specific risk associated with the
fluctuations in her consumption/wealth.

        Most studies in this literature employ dynamic representative agent models and consider
a variety of stochastic processes for consumption series.53 The standard approach in these studies
involves determining consumption allocations under two environments. Under the first
environment, there is no risk sharing and domestic consumption is equal to domestic output.
Under the second environment, there is often perfect consumption risk sharing as countries are
able to diversify away all country specific risk associated with fluctuations in domestic
consumption.54 Moving from the first environment to the second one, the volatility of
consumption in each country could go down, the pricing of the consumption streams of countries
might change, and the cross-country correlations of consumption series could increase. The
resulting welfare gains are associated with reductions in the volatility of consumption and/or
changes in the pricing of the consumption series. The welfare gain calculations generate a
welfare estimate which is equal to the permanent relative increase in the expected level of
consumption that would lead to the same welfare under international risk sharing.

        As with several earlier studies, standard practice is followed here and consumption
allocations under two environments are computed using a simple representative agent model
economy. In particular, the welfare gain calculations here closely follow the methodology
employed in van Wincoop (1994, 1999). In the model economy, there are N countries which can
trade in claims on their endowment streams when there is perfect consumption risk sharing.
Residents in each country have the same preferences and expected utility is equal to


52
  While the actual welfare estimates depend on the parameterization of the model, the general flavor of
these results is unaffected by the choice of parameter values.
53
  While the literature based upon consumption/output series employs general equilibrium models with
utility depends on the level of consumption, the literature based upon equity returns generally uses partial
equilibrium models with utility directly depends upon wealth. The approach using equity returns data
involves devising an optimum portfolio composed of domestic and foreign stocks that minimize variance
and maximize returns.
54
  Some studies also consider the welfare implications of imperfect risk sharing arrangements involving
transactions with risk-free bonds (see Kim and Kim (2003) and Kim, Kim, and Levin (2003)).
                                                                                                           51

                                          Ui = E e
                                                   H
                                                        − βt   (c )
                                                                  it
                                                                       1−γ

                                                                             dt
                                                    0
                                                                1− γ

where H is the horizon (number of years), γ denotes the rate of relative risk aversion, cit is
aggregate consumption by residents of country i.55 yit represents the endowment and follows a
random walk with drift:

                                          dy it = µy it dt + σ y it dη i

where η i is a standard Brownian motion. ρ = dη i dη k (i ≠ k ) represents the correlation
between the innovations of endowment growth across two different countries.

       In the first environment, there is no additional risk sharing relative to what is already
implied by observed consumption behavior and domestic consumption is equal to domestic
output, cit = y it . This consumption allocation generates the following expected utility

                                                1 − e − vT (ci 0 )1−γ
                                           Ui =
                                                    v       1− γ

where v = β + (γ − 1)( µ − 0.5γσ 2 ) .

        In the second environment, there is perfect consumption risk sharing as countries are able
to diversify away all country specific risk associated with domestic consumption. This implies
that consumption in each country is equal to the per capita world endowment, which is denoted
by y W . Aggregate consumption of a representative country in this case follows approximately a
random walk process with variance σ W2 = σ 2 ((1 / N ) + (1 − 1 / N ) ρ ) (see Lewis (2000)). The
measure of the welfare gain is the permanent percentage increase in the expected level of
consumption which produces an equivalent improvement in welfare. The approximate welfare
gain for the representative country is computed using the following formula

                                              0.5γdσ 2                          e − H ( r −µ )
                        Welfare Gain ≈ −                       1 − H (r − µ )
                                                r−µ                           1 − e −H (r −µ )




55
  It is assumed that all consumption goods are tradable. It is possible to consider a utility formulation with
separable tradable and non-tradable consumption goods. However, sharing of risk associated with the
fluctuations in non-tradables consumption is not possible and our dataset does not allow us to make a
distinction between tradable and non-tradable consumption.
                                                                                                        52
where µ = µ − 0.5γσ 2 denotes the risk adjusted growth rate, r = β + γµ represents the risk free
interest rate, and dσ 2 = σ W2 − σ 2 is the change in the variance of consumption growth.

        The main parameters of the model are also taken from van Wincoop (1999). In particular,
the risk-free real interest rate is assumed to be 0.85 percent and the coefficient of relative risk-
aversion is set at 3.56 For each country, the mean growth rate and variance of per capita domestic
consumption, and the correlation between the per capita domestic consumption growth and the
world consumption growth are estimated and these values are used in the calculations. Since the
dataset employed covers the 1970–97 period, these gains correspond to a horizon of 28 years. A
decrease in the risk free rate translates into larger welfare gains while a decrease in the risk
aversion coefficient is associated with smaller gains. The welfare gains get smaller with the
correlation between domestic consumption and the world consumption while they tend to
increase in the volatility of consumption series.

        The welfare gains reported in the main text of this paper are consistent with the estimates
found in some recent studies. While some of these studies report relatively small gains, a
majority of them finds that gains from risk sharing are quite large, especially for developing
countries as Table IV.1 displays. van Wincoop (1994) provides a detailed explanation of why
various studies report different results. There are four major parameters affecting the magnitude
of welfare gains in these studies: (1) the volatility of domestic output; (2) the rate of relative risk
aversion; (3) the risk-adjusted growth rate, and (4) the risk free interest rate. It is easy to
understand why some of the studies produce relatively low welfare gains: In some studies (Cole
and Obstfeld (1991) and Obstfeld (1994a)) the risk-free rate is quite high. Some studies assume
certain stationary processes for consumption or shock series, which generate low welfare gains
because of the low persistence or volatility associated with these processes (Tesar (1995) and
Mendoza (1995)).

        Some studies use the data of advanced countries and find large welfare gains through
international risk sharing.57 For example, van Wincoop (1999) finds that for the OECD countries
the potential welfare gains from international risk sharing are between 1.1 percent to 3.5 percent.
Several recent studies consider the implications of international risk sharing for developing

56
  Since these approximate calculations ignore the pricing problem of international claims, they do not
include the welfare changes associated with the pricing of countries’ endowment streams. In countries
with highly volatile consumption fluctuations, the welfare losses from price changes can be quite large.
However, as the volatility of consumption increases, the welfare gain from risk sharing rapidly rises and
outweighs the losses due to the pricing of consumption streams. van Wincoop (1994) provides an
extensive discussion of the gains associated with these price changes using the data of the OECD
countries.
57
  Calculations of the gains from international risk sharing based upon stock returns produce much larger
welfare gains estimates than those based upon international consumption data do. Lewis (1999) examines
this issue and finds that the major differences are due to the much higher volatility of stock returns and
the implied intertemporal substitution in marginal utility. Lewis (1999) reports that the gains to
international risk sharing based upon stock based upon stock returns are quite large, around 10 to 50
percent. Le Baron (2002) claims that these gains got smaller during the past 15 years.
                                                                                                  53
countries. Athanasoulis and van Wincoop (2000) calculate the estimates of the degree of
uncertainty associated with the growth potential of an economy at various horizons. They find
that the welfare gain from sharing of risk associated with the growth uncertainty is around 6.5
percent using the data of 49 developed and developing countries. Obstfeld (1995) finds that
elimination of consumption variability through risk sharing can result in much larger welfare
gains in developing countries and reports that these gains are between 0.54 percent and 5.31
percent for a selected group of developing economies. Pallage and Robe (2002) find that the
welfare gains associated with smoothing consumption fluctuations are much larger in African
countries than those in the United States, and depending on the parameterization of the model
economy these gains can easily exceed 10 percent for several African countries.
                                                                                 54
           Table IV.1. Summary of Studies on Welfare Gains
                    from International Risk Sharing



Study \ Countries Studied                                 Welfare Gains

Advanced Countries
Lucas (1987)                                                    Small
Cole and Obstfeld (1991)                                        Small
Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992)                               Small
Mendoza (1995)                                                  Small
Tesar (1995)                                                    Small
Kim, Kim, and Levine (2002)                                     Small
Obstfeld (1994a)                                                Large
van Wincoop (1994, 1996, 1999))                                 Large
Pallage and Robe (2002b)                                        Large
Epaulard and Pommeret (2001)                                    Large
Lewis (1996)                                                    Large
Shiller and Athanasoulis (2001)                                 Large
Auffret (2001)                                                  Large
Kim and Kim (2002)                                              Large


Advanced, MFI and LFI Countries
Obstfeld (1994b, 1995)                                          Large
Pallage and Robe (2002a)                                        Large
Athanasoulis and van Wincoop (1999)                             Large
De Ferranti et. al. (2000)                                      Large
Athanasoulis and Shiller (1995)                                 Large

Notes: "Small" refers to the studies which report welfare gains less than 0.5%
and "Large" refers to the studies which report welfare gains larger than 0.5%.
                                                                                                     55

Data Appendix

Unless indicated otherwise, the primary sources for the data used in this paper are the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The
basic data sample comprises 76 countries—21 industrial and 55 developing.58

Industrial countries

Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Canada (CAN), Denmark (DNK), Finland
(FIN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), Greece (GRC), Ireland (IRL), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN),
Netherlands (NLD), New Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP), Sweden
(SWE), Switzerland (CHE), United Kingdom (GBR), and United States (USA).

Developing countries

These are grouped into More Financially Integrated (22) and Less Financially Integrated (33)
countries.

MFIs

Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA), Chile (CHL), China (CHN), Colombia (COL), Egypt (EGY),
Hong Kong (HKG), India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Israel (ISR), Korea (KOR), Malaysia (MYS),
Mexico (MEX), Morocco (MAR), Pakistan (PAK), Peru (PER), Philippines (PHL), Singapore
(SGP), South Africa (ZAF), Thailand (THA), Turkey (TUR), and Venezuela (VEN).

LFIs

Algeria (DZA), Bangladesh (BGD), Benin (GEN), Bolivia (BOL), Botswana (BWA), Burkina
Faso (BFA), Burundi (BDI), Cameron (CMR), Costa Rica (CRI), Cote d’Ivoire (CIV),
Dominican Republic (DOM), Ecuador (ECU), El Salvador (SLV), Gabon (GAB), Ghana (GHA),
Guatemala (GTM), Haiti (HTI), Honduras (HND), Jamaica (JAM), Kenya (KEN), Mauritius
(MUS), Nicaragua (NIC), Niger (NER), Nigeria (NGA), Panama (PAN), Papua New Guinea
(PNG), Paraguay (PRY), Senegal (SEN), Sri Lanka (LKA), Syrian Arab Republic (SYR), Togo
(TGO), Tunisia (TUN), and Uruguay (URY).




58
  The following were excluded from the analysis: small countries (those with population below 1
million), transition economies, some oil producers, and other countries with incomplete or clearly
unreliable data.
                                                                                                  56
                                           References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “Reversal of Fortune:
     Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
     MIT Working Paper 01/38 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT, Department of Economics).

Agénor, Pierre-Richard, 2002, “Macroeconomic Adjustment and the Poor: Analytical Issues and
      Cross-Country Evidence,” World Bank Working Paper No. 2788 (Washington: World
      Bank).

———, 2002b, “Business Cycles, Economic Crises, and the Poor: Testing for Asymmetric
   Effects,” Journal of Policy Reform, Vol. 5, pp. 145–160.

———, 2003, “Does Globalization Hurt the Poor?,” WB Working Paper (Washington: World
   Bank).

Aizenman, Joshua, 2002, “Volatility, Employment, and the Patterns of FDI in Emerging
      Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 9397 (December).

Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1994, “The Political Economy
       of Capital Controls,” in Capital Mobility: The Impact on Consumption, Investment, and
       Growth, ed. by Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin (Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press for CEPR).

Arestis, Phillip, and Phillip Arestis, 2004, “Financial Liberalization and Poverty: Channels of
        Influence” The Levy Economics Institute Working Paper 411 (New York: The Levy
        Economics Institute).

Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz, 2001, “On the Growth Effects of
        Capital Account Liberalization” (unpublished; Berkeley: University of California).

Athanasoulis, Stefano, and Robert Shiller, 2001, “World Income Components: Measuring and
      Exploiting Risk-Sharing Opportunities,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4, pp.
      1031–54.

Athanasoulis, Stefano, and Eric van Wincoop, 2000, “Growth Uncertainty and Risksharing,”
      Journal of Monetary Economics, 45, 2000, 477-505.

Attanasio, Orazio, and Gianluca Violante, 2000, “The Demographic Transition in Closed and
       Open Economies: A Tale of Two Regions,” IADB Working Paper (Washington: Inter-
       American Development Bank).

Auffret, Philippe, 2001, “An Alternative Unifying Measure of Welfare Gains from Risk
       Sharing,” World Bank Working Paper 2676 (Washington: World Bank, September).
                                                                                               57
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, 1992, “International Real Business
      Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, pp. 745–775.

Bakker, Bas and Bryan Chapple, 2002, “Advanced Country Experiences with Capital Account
      Liberalization,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 214 (Washington: International Monetary
      Fund).

Barrett, Christopher B., and David E. Sahn, 2001, “Food Policy in Crisis Management,” Cornell
        University.

Baldacci, Emanuele, Luiz de Mello, and Gabriela Inchauste, 2002, “Financial Crises, Poverty,
       and Income Distribution,” Finance and Development, Vol. 39, No. 2 (June), pp. 24–27.

Bartolini, Leonardo, and Allan Drazen, 1997a, “Capital-Account Liberalization as a Signal,”
       American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 1 (March), pp. 138–54.

Bayoumi, Tamim, Giorgio Fazio, Manmohan Kumar and Ronald MacDonald, 2003, “Fatal
      Attraction: Unising Distance to Measure Contagion in Good Times As Well As Bad”.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2001, “Does Financial
       Liberalization Spur Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 8245 (Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

———, 2001b, “Emerging Equity Markets and Economic Development,” Journal of
   Development Economics, Vol. 66, pp. 465–504.

———, 2002, “Growth Volatility and Equity Market Liberalization,” Working Paper, (Duke
   University).

———, 2002b, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?” mimeo, Columbia University.

Berg, Andrew, and Anne O. Krueger, 2002, “Trade, Growth, and Poverty: A Selective Survey,”
       presented at the Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics in April.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, and Sunil Sharma, 2000, “Herd Behavior in Financial Markets,” IMF Staff
      Papers, Vol. 47, No. 3 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Blankenau, William, M. Ayhan Kose, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, “Can World Real Interest Rates
      Explain Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy?,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
      and Control, Vol. 25. pp. 867–889.

Bordo, Michael, and Barry Eichengreen, 2002, “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from the
       Last Era of Financial Globalization,” NBER Working Paper 8716 (Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
                                                                                                58
Borensztein, Eduardo, José De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee, 1998, “How Does Foreign Direct
      Investment Affect Growth?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 45 (June), pp.
      115–35.

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan Collins, 1999, “Capital Flows to Developing Economies:
      Implications for Saving and Investment,” Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, Vol. 1
      (Washington: Brookings Institution).

Boyer, Brian H., Michael S. Gibson, and Mico Loretan, 1999, “Pitfalls in Tests for Changes in
       Correlations.” Federal Reserve Board, IFS Discussion Paper No. 597R.

Brainard, William C. and Richard N. Cooper (1968), “Uncertainty and Diversification of
       International Trade,” Food Research Institute Studies in Agricultural Economics, Trade,
       and Development Vol. 8, pp. 257–285.

Buch, Claudia M., Jörg Döpke, and Christian Pierdzioch, 2002, “Financial Openness and
       Business Cycle Volatility,” Working Paper, Kiel Institute for World Economics.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows and Real
       Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” (with G.
       Calvo and L. Leiderman), Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 40 (March),
       pp. 108–151.

———, 1998, “Varities of Capital-Market Crises,” IEA Conference Volume, No. 118 (New
   York: St. Martin’s Press; London: Macmillan Press).

———, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “Capital Flow Reversals, the Exchange Rate Debate,
   and Dollarization,” Finance and Development, Vol. 36 (September), pp. 13–15.

———, 2000, “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy
   Options” in Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, ed. by
   P. Kenen and A. Swoboda, pp. 175–201 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

———, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 2 (May), pp.
   379–408.

Caprio, Gerard, and Patrick Honohan, 1999, “Restoring Banking Stability: Beyond Supervised
       Capital Requirements,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 4 (Fall), pp. 43–
       64.

Carlson, Mark A., and Leonardo Hernandez, 2002, “Determinants and Repercussions of the
       Composition of Capital Inflows,” IMF Working Paper 02/86 (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund).

Chanda, Areendam, 2001, “The Influence of Capital Controls on Long Run Growth: Where and
      How Much?” Working Paper, North Carolina State University.
                                                                                                59
Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, “Commodity Trade and International Risksharing:
       How Much do Financial Markets Matter?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 28, pp.
       3–24.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Marcello Pericoli, and Massimo Sbracia, 2002, “Some Contagion, Some
       Interdependence: More Pitfalls in Tests of Financial Contagion,” CEPR Discussion
       Paper, No. 3310 (April), pp. 1–28.

Deaton, Angus, 2001, “Counting the World’s Poor: Problems and Possible Solutions,” World
      Bank Research Observer, Vol. 16, No. 2 (Fall), pp. 125–47.

Dellas, Harris, and Martin K. Hess, 2002, “Financial Development and the Sensitivity of Stock
        Markets to External Influences,” Review of International Economics, Vol. 10, No. 3
        (August), pp. 525–38.

David de Ferranti, Guillermo E. Perry, Indermit S. Gill, and Luis Servén, 2000, Securing Our
       Future in a Global Economy, World Bank.

De Mello, Luiz, 1999, “Foreign Direct Investment-Led Growth: Evidence from Time Series and
      Panel Date,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 51, No. 1 (January), pp. 133–51.

Detragiache, Enrica and Spilimbergo, Antonio, 2002, “Crisis and Liquidity—Evidence and
       Interpretation,” IMF Working Papers 01/2 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Dollar, David, 2001, “Globalization, Inequality, and Poverty since 1980,” Development
        Research Group WB Working Paper, (Washington: World Bank)

Duygan, Burcu, 2004, “Comsumption Patterns During Financial Crises: An International
      Comparison,” Working Paper (Florence: European University Institute)

Easterly, William, R. Islam, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2001, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining
       Growth Volatility,” Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, ed. by
       B. Pleskovic and N. Stern.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2001, “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and
       Growth Models,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15, pp. 177–219.

Easterly, William, 2004, “Globalization, Poverty, and All That: Factor Endowment versus
       Productivity Views,” NBER Globalization and Poverty Workshop, Sept. 2004
       (New York, New York University).

Edison, Hali, and Frank Warnock, 2001, “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital
       Controls,” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 705 (Washington: Board of
       Governors of the Federal Reserve, August).
                                                                                             60
Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, 2002, “Capital Account
       Liberalization and Economic Performance: A Review of the Literature,” IMF Working
       Paper 02/120 (July), (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, 2002, “International Financial
       Integration and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Monetary and Finance, Vol.
       21, pp. 749–76.

Edwards, Sebastian, 2001, “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
      Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
      National Bureau of Economic Research).

Eichengreen, Barry J., Donald J. Mathieson, and Bankim Chadha, 1998, “Hedge Funds and
      Financial Market Dynamics,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 166 (Washington: International
      Monetary Fund).

Epaulard, Anne, and Aude Pommeret, 2003, “Recursive Utility, Endogenous Growth, and the
       Welfare Cost of Volatility,” Review of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.

Fatás, Antonio,, and I. Mihov, 2004, “The Case for Restricting Fiscal Policy Discretion”,
        forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Fischer, Stanley, 1998, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” in “Should the
       IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Essays in International Finance,
       Department of Economics, Princeton University, Vol. 207, pp. 1–10.

Frankel, Jeffery, 1992, “Measuring International Capital Mobility: A Review,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 82 (May) , pp. 197–202.

Forbes, Kristin and Robert Rigobon, 2000, “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring
       Stock Market Comovements,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 5 (October), pp. 2223–
       61.

———, 2001, “Measuring Contagion: Conceptual and Empirical Issues.” in International
   Financial Contagion, ed. by S. Claessens and K. Forbes (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
   Publishers).

Frankel, Jeffery A., and Andrew K. Rose, 1996, “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
       Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 41 (3–4), (November),
       pp. 351–66.

Gavin, Michael, and Ricardo Hausmann, 1996, “Sources of Macroeconomic Volatility in
       Developing Economies,” IADB Working Paper (Washington: Inter-American
       Development Bank).
                                                                                                61
Glick, Reuven, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, “Global versus Country-Specific Productivity Shocks
       and the Current Account,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 35 (February), pp. 159–
       92.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K and Nina Pavcnik, 2004, “Trade, Inequality, and Poverty: What do We
      Know? Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries,”
      NBER Working Paper 10593, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
      Research).

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2003, “The Elusive Gains from International
      Financial Integration,” NBER Working Paper 9684, (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
      National Bureau of Economic Research).

Grilli, Vittorio, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1995, “Economic Effects and Structural
        Determinants of Capital Controls,” Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 42
        (September), pp. 517–51.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, 1991a, Innovation and Growth in the Global
      Economy, (Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press).

———, 1991b, “Trade, Knowledge Spillovers, and Growth,” European Economic Review, Vol.
   35, No. 2–3 (April), pp. 517–26.

Hall, Robert E., Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output Per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, No. 1
       (February), pp. 83–116.

Hanson, Gordon, 2001, “Should Countries Promote Foreign Direct Investment?,” G-24
      Discussion Paper No. 9 (February).

Harrison, Ann, and H. Tang, 2004, “Liberalization of Trade: Why So Much Controversy?”,
       Manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Eduardo Fernandez-Arias, 2000, “Foreign Direct Investment: Good
     Cholesterol?” IADB Working Paper No. 417 (Washington: Inter-American Development
     Bank).

Henry, Peter, 2000, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market
       Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55 (April), pp. 529–64.

Hnatkovska, Viktoria, and Norman Loayza, November 2003, “Volatility and Growth,” working
      paper, World Bank.

Imbs Jean, and Roman Wacziarg, 2003, (forthcoming) “Stages of Diversification,” American
       Economic Review.
                                                                                               62
International Monetary Fund, 2001, World Economic Outlook, October.

International Monetary Fund, 2002, World Economic Outlook, September.

Ishii, Shogo, Karl Habermeier, Bernard Laurens, John Leimone, Judit Vadasz, and Jorge Ivan
        Canales-Kriljenko, 2002, “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Sector Stability,”
        IMF Occasional Paper No. 211, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, 2001, “Risk Sharing and Industrial
      Specialization: Regional and International Evidence,” (unpublished).

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking
      and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3 (June),
      pp. 473–500.

———, 2001, “Bank Lending and Contagion: Evidence from the Asian Crisis,” in Regional and
   Global Capital Flows: Macroeconomic Causes and Consequences, ed. by T. Ito, and A.
   Krueger (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER), pp. 73–99.

———, 2002, “The Center and Periphery: The Globalization of Financial Turmoil,” NBER
   Working Paper W9479.

Kemp, Murray and Nissan Liviatan (1973), “Production and Trade Patterns Under Uncertainty,”
      The Economic Record, Vol. 49, pp. 215–227.

Kim, Jinill, Sunghyun Henry Kim and Andrew Levin, 2003, “Patience, Persistence, and Welfare
       Costs of Incomplete Markets in Open Economies,” Journal of International Economics,
       61, pp. 385-96.

Kim, Jinill and Sunghyun Henry Kim, 2003, Spurious Welfare Reversals in International
       Business Cycle Models, Journal of International Economics 60, pp. 471-500..

Kim, Sunghyun Henry, M. Ayhan Kose, and Michael Plummer, 2001, “Understanding the Asian
      Contagion,” Asian Economic Journal, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 111–138.

Klein, Michael, and Giovanni Olivei, 2000, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth,
       and Economic Growth” (unpublished; Medford, Mass: Tufts University).

Kouparitsas, Michael A., 1996, “North-South Business Cycles,” Working Paper, No. 96–9,
      Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Kose, M. Ayhan, 2002, “Explaining Business Cycles in Small Open Economies: How Much Do
       World Prices Matter?,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 56, pp. 299–327.

––––––, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, 2003a, “Financial Integration and
      Macroeconomic Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers, vol: 50, 119-142.
                                                                                             63
———, 2003b, “How Does Globalization Affect the Synchronization of Business Cycles?,”,
   American Economic Review, vol: 93, 57-62.

———, 2004, “How Do Trade and Financial Integration Affect the Relationship between
   Growth and Volatility?” forthcoming IMF Working Paper (Washington: International
   Monetary Fund).

Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok and Charles Whiteman, 2003, “International Business
       Cycles: World, Region, and Country Specific Factors,” American Economic Review vol:
       93, 1216-1239.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Raymond Riezman, 2001, “Trade Shocks and Macroeconomic
       Fluctuations in Africa,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 65, pp. 55–80.

Kraay, Aart, 1998, “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effect of Capital Account Liberalization,”
       (unpublished; Washington: World Bank).

––––––, 2004, "When is Growth Pro-Poor? Cross-Country Evidence," IMF Working Paper
      04/47, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Krueger, Anne O., and Jungho Yoo, 2002, “Chaebol Capitalism and the Currency-Financial
      Crisis in Korea,” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by Sebastian
      Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, pp. 461–501 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Kumar, Manmoham S., and Avinash Persaud, 2001, “Pure Contagion and Investors’ Shifting
      Risk Appetite: Analytical Issues and Empirical Evidence,” IMF Working Paper 01/134
      (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Labán, Raul. M., and Felipe B. Larrain, 1997, “What Determines Capital Inflows? An Empirical
       Analysis for Chile,” Harvard Institute for International Development Discussion Paper
       No. 590 (June), pp. 1–24.

Lane, Philip R., and Giani Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2001, “The External Wealth of Nations:
       Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations,”
       Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 263–94.

LeBaron, Blake, 2002, “Estimating the Feasible Economic Gains from International Portfolio
      Diversification, Working Paper, (Brandeis University).

Levine, Ross, 1996, “Foreign Banks, Financial Development, and Economic Growth,”
       International Financial Markets: Harmonization versus Competition, pp. 224–54
       (Washington: AEI Press).

Lewis, Karen K., 1996, “What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption
       Risksharing?,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104, No. 2, pp. 267–297.
                                                                                                64
––––––, 1999, Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption, Journal of Economic
      Literature Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 571–608.

––––––, 2000, Why Do Stocks and Consumption Imply Such Different Gains from International
      Risk sharing? Journal of International Economics, Vol. 52, No. 1, pp. 1–35.

Loungani, Prakash, Ashoka Mody and Assaf Razin, 2003, “The Global Disconnect: The Role of
      Transactional Distance and Scale Economies in Gravily Equations,” IMF Working Paper
      (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Lucas, Robert E., 1987, “Models of Business Cycles”, (Blackwell, Oxford).

Lustig, Nora, 2000, “Crises and the Poor: Socially Responsible Macroeconomics,” IDB
        Sustainable Development Department Technical Papers Series (Washington: Inter-
        American Development Bank).

Martin, Philippe, and C.A. Rogers, 2000, “Long-term Growth and Short-term Economic
       Instability”, European Economic Review, Vol 44, pp359-381.

Mathieson, Donald J., and Liliana Rojas-Suarez, 1993, "Liberalization of the Capital Account:
      Experiences and Issues." IMF Occasional Paper No. 103 (Washington: International
      Monetary Fund).

Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh, 2002, “Emerging Market Spreads: Then
      versus Now,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 2, pp. 695–733.

Mendoza, Enrique, 1995, “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate and Economic
     Fluctuations,” International Economic Review, Vol. 36, pp. 101–137.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1999, “Lessons from the Asian Crisis,” NBER Working Paper 7102
      (April), (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Mody, Ashoka, 2002, “Is FDI Integrating the World Economy?” IMF manuscript.

———, and Antu Panini Murshid, 2002, “Growing Up With Capital Flows” IMF Working Paper
   02/75 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Mody, Ashoka, and Mark P. Taylor, 2002, “International Capital Crunches: The Time Varying
      Role of Informational Asymmetries,” IMF Working Paper 02/34 (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994a, “Evaluation Risky Consumption Paths: the Role of Intertemporal
       Substitutability,” European Economic Review, Vol. 38, pp. 1471–1486.
                                                                                             65
––––––, 1994b, “Are Industrial-Country Consumption Risks Globally Diversified?,” in Capital
      Mobility: The Impact of Consumption, Investment and Growth, ed. by L.Leiderman, and
      A. Razin, , (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 13–47.

––––––, 1995, “International Capital Mobility in the 1990s”, in Understanding Interdependence,
      ed. by P.B. Kenen, pp. 201–261, (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

———, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, “Foundations of International Macroeconomics,”
   (Cambridge, Massachusetts, London, England: MIT Press).

––––––, and Taylor, Alan, 2002, “Globalization and Capital Markets,” NBER Working Paper
      No. 8846 (Cambridge, Massachussets: National Bureau of Economic Research).

O’Donnell, Barry, 2001, “Financial Openness and Economic Performance” (unpublished;
     Dublin: Trinity College).

O’Rourke, Kevin, 2001, “Globalization and Inequality: Historical Trends,” CEPR Discussion
      Paper No. 2865 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research).

Pallage, Stephane, and Michel A. Robe, 2003a, “On the Welfare Cost of Economic Fluctuations
       in Developing Countries,” International Economic Review, Vol. 44, No. 2 (May),
       pp. 677–98.

———, 2003b, “The States versus The States: On the Welfare Costs of Business Cycles in the
   U.S.” UQAM and American University Working Paper (January).

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003, “The Effects of
       Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,
       International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper 220. Washington: International
       Monetary Fund.

Quah, Danny, 1997, Empirics for growth and distribution: Stratification, polarization, and
      convergence clubs, Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 27-59

Quinn, Dennis P. 1997. "The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation"
American Political Science Review 91(September):531-551.

Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998, “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
       Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp. 1–74.

Ramey, G., Ramey, V., 1995. “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between Volatility and
      Growth,” The American Economic Review, Vo. 85, No. 5, pp. 1138–1151

Ravallion, Martin, 2003, “The Debate on Globalization, Poverty and Inequality: Why
       Measurement Matters,” WB Policy Research Working Paper No. 3038 (Washington:
       World Bank).
                                                                                            66
Razin, Assaf, and Andrew K. Rose, 1994, “Business-Cycle Volatility and Openness: An
       Exploratory Cross-Sectional Analysis,” in Capital Mobility: The Impact on Consumption,
       Investment, and Growth, ed. by Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, pp. 48–76
       (Cambridge: University Press).

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Vincent R. Reinhart, 2001, “What Hurts Most? G-3 Exchange Rate or
       Interest Rate Volatility,” NBER Working Paper No. 8535 (October).

Reinhart, Carmen M., 2002, “Credit Ratings, Default and Financial Crises: Evidence from
       Emerging Markets,” World Bank Economic Review (forthcoming).

Reinhart.Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004a, The Modern History of Exchange Rate
       Arrangements: A Reinterpretation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):1-48,
       February 2004a.

Reinhart.Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004b, Serial Default And The “Paradox” Of Rich To
       Poor Capital Flows,” American Economic Review 94(2), May, 52-58.

Reisen, Helmut, and Marcelo Soto, 2001, “Which Types of Capital Inflows Foster Developing-
       Country Growth?,” International Finance, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring), pp. 1–14.

Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Essays in International
       Finance, No. 207 (Princeton: Princeton University).

———, and Andres Velasco, 2000, “Short-Term Capital Flows,” Annual World Bank
   Conference on Development Economics, 1999, pp. 59–90 (Washington: World Bank).

Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, 2001, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s
      Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, ed. by
      Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff (Cambridge, Massachussets: The MIT Press).

Rogoff, Kenneth, 2002, “Rethinking Capital Controls: When Should We Keep an Open Mind?”
       Finance and Development, December, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 55–56.

Rogoff, Kenneth, Aasim M. Husain, Ashoka Mody, Robin J. Brooks, and Nienke Oomes,
       Evolution and Performance of Exchange Rates Regimes, International Monetary Fund
       Occasional Paper 229, 2004. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Ruffin, Roy J., 1974, “Comparative Advantage under Uncertainty,” Journal of International
        Economics, Vol. 4, No. 3 (August), pp. 261–73.

Sala-i-Martin, Xaiver, 2002, “The Disturbing "Rise" of World Income Inequality", NBER
       Working Paper 8904.

Senhadji, Abdelhak, 2000, “Sources of Economic Growth: An Extensive Growth Accounting
      Exercise,” Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 129–57.
                                                                                             67
Shiller, Robert J. and S. Athanasoulis, 1995, “World Income Components: Measuring and
        Exploiting International Risk Sharing Opportunities,” NBER Working Paper No. 5095
        (Cambridge, Massachussets: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Stulz, Rene, 1999a, “International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets,” International Capital
        Flows, NBER Conference Report Series, pp. 257–93 (Chicago and London: University of
        Chicago Press).

———, 1999b, “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital,” NBER Working
   Paper 7021 (March).

Taylor, Mark P., and Lucio Sarno, 1999, “The Persistence of Capital Inflows and the Behaviour
       of Stock Prices in East Asia Emerging Markets: Some Empirical Evidence,” CEPR
       Discussion Paper 2150 (May).

Tesar, Linda L., 1995, “Evaluating the Gain from International Risksharing,” Carnegie-
       Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 42, pp. 95–143.

van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder, 2000, “Spillover Through Banking Centers—A
       Panel Data Analysis,” IMF Working Paper 00/88 (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

van Wincoop, Eric, 1994, “Welfare Gains from International Risksharing,” Journal of Monetary
      Economics, Vol. 34, pp. 175–200.

––––––, 1996, “A Multi-Country Real Business Cycle Model with Heterogeneous Agents,”
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 233–251.

Van Wincoop, Eric, 1999, “How Big are Potential Welfare Gains from International Risk
     Sharing?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 109–135.

Wei, Shang-Jin and Yi Wu, 2002a, “Negative Alchemy? Corruption, Composition of Capital
       Flows, and Currency Crises,” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by
       Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 461–
       501.

———, 2002b, (forthcoming) “The Life-and-Death Implications of Globalization,” IMF
   Working Paper (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

———, 2001, Globalization and Inequality: Evidence from Within China, NBER Working
   Paper 8611, November 2001.

Williamson, John, and Molly Mahar, 1998, “A Survey of Financial Liberalization,” Essays in
       International Finance, No. 211 (Princeton: New Jersey, Princeton University Press).

World Bank, 2001, Global Development Finance (Washington: World Bank)
