                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE CONCEPT OF SYSTEMATIC CORRUPTION
                    IN AMERICAN POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC HISTORY

                                            John Joseph Wallis

                                          Working Paper 10952
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10952


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




Forthcoming in Corruption and Reform, edited by Claudia Goldin and Ed Glaeser. This paper originated in
a series of conversations with Claudia Goldin, who I gratefully acknowledge. Without her support and
encouragement it never would have been written. Ed Glaeser challenged me to extend the paper farther back
in time, a license I took advantage of. Conversations with Naomi Lamoreaux, Lee Alston, and William
Novak as well as the discussion of Morton Keller at the first pre-conference, while not specifically on the
topic of this paper, were nonetheless extremely helpful, as were Professor Keller’s comments at the final
conference. My graduate class in American Economic History Spring 2004 endured a great deal of talk about
corruption and I thank them for their patience. At a critical time, Jeff Smith, Sally Snyder, and Barbara Gill
forced me to be more precise about the concept of systematic corruption. The seminar in Early American
History at the University of Maryland gave me a valuable opportunity to present the paper to historians and
their comments were very valuable. Finally, the central idea in the paper developed in conjunction with my
ongoing conversations with Barry Weingast and Doug North. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by John Joseph Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Concept of Systematic Corruption in American Political and Economic History
John Joseph Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 10952
December 2004
JEL No. B1, N0, N2, N4, H0, H1

                                            ABSTRACT

The critical role of governance in the promotion of economic development has created intense

interest in the manner in which the United States eliminated corruption. This paper examines the

concept of corruption in American history; tracing the term corruption to its roots in British political

philosophy of the 17th and 18th century, and from there back to Machiavelli, Polybius and Artistole.

Corruption was defined prior to 1850 in a way that was significantly different from how it was

defined in the Progressive Era. "Systematic corruption" embodied the idea that political actors

manipulated the economic system to create economic rents that politicians could use to secure

control of the government. In other words, politics corrupts economics. The classic cure for

systematic corruption was balanced government. Americans fought for independence because they

believed that the British government was corrupt. The structure of American constitutions was

shaped by the need to implement balanced government. Conflict and debate over the implementation

of balanced government dominated the political agenda until the 1840s, when states began moving

regulatory policy firmly towards open entry and free competition. By the 1890s, systematic

corruption had essentially appeared from political discourse. By then corruption had come to take

on its modern meaning: the idea that economic interests corrupt the political process. What modern

developing countries with corrupt governments need to learn is how the United States eliminated

systematic corruption.

John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu
                                                 *

       What is really educational and beneficial to students of history is the clear view of the
       causes of events, and the consequent power of choosing the better policy in a particular
       case. Now in every practical undertaking by a state we must regard as the most powerful
       agent for success or failure the form of its constitution; for from this as from a fountain-
       head all conceptions and plans of action not only proceed, but attain their consummation.
       -- The Histories of Polybius, Book VI.

       Corruption is a pervasive concept in western political thought. Corruption played a

central role in the political philosophies of Aristotle, Polybius, Machaivelli and the 16th century

Italians, and Harrington and the 17th and 18th century English writers who became known as

Whigs or Commonwealthmen. The Whig indictment of corruption in British government shaped

American colonial political thought and prepared the colonists to interpret the actions of Crown

and Parliament after 1763 as unconstitutional threats to their fundamental liberties as British

citizens. Once independent, Americans worried continuously about their governments and how

to design their political institutions to limit corruption.1 The reawakening of interest among

economists in the role played by political institutions as a determinant of economic performance

has stimulated a renewed interest in the quality of governance: of corruption. While corruption

did not disappear from 20th century American politics, it has ceased to be major concern. The

self-conscious, centuries long debate over corruption in western political thought in general, and

in American politics in particular, suggests that a longer view of American history might offer

insights into how economic and political institutions can curb corruption.

       The original idea behind the conference on “Corruption and Reform” was to examine the

Progressive era, but it was clear that Americans had been grappling with corruption long before

the 1890s. As it turns out, Progressive era reformers and 21th century economists think about

corruption in a way that is, in a critical dimension, 180 degrees removed from the concept of

                                                 1
corruption that prevailed until the mid-nineteenth century. The title of McCormack’s essay “The

Discovery that Business Corrupts Politics” captures the essence of the modern concept of

corruption. Economic interests corrupt politicians and bureaucrats by offering them options to

promote their own interests at the expense of the public good, or as Shleifer and Vishny define

corruption “as the sale by government officials of government property for personal gain.”2 The

fear that economic interests might capture or influence government policy is the essence of

modern corruption. In contrast, eighteenth century British – English, Scotch, Irish, and

American – political thinkers worried much more that political interests would coopt economic

groups to fundamentally erode the integrity of basic political rights and liberties. They feared

that a group of government officials -- the king and his evil ministers, for example -- could use

the grant of economic privileges to secure political support for a takeover of the government.

       The terms systematic and venal corruption are used to identify earlier and later

definitions of corruption. Systematic corruption is an idea. It is also a concrete form of political

behavior. In polities plagued with systematic corruption, political agents deliberately create

economic rents through selectively granting economic privileges. These rents bind the interests

of the recipients to the politicians who create the rents. The politicians manipulate the interests

they create – a party, faction, or conspiracy – to control the government. Systematic corruption

uses the economic rents generated by limited entry and economic privileges to control the

political system. Political interests corrupt the economic system for political gains: politics

corrupts economics. In contrast, venal corruption denotes the modern concept of corruption: the

pursuit of private economic interests through the political process. Venal corruption occurs

when economics corrupts politics. In terms of social welfare and economic growth, venal


                                                 2
corruption is small potatoes compared to systematic corruption. Polities with systematically

corrupt governments are fundamentally unable to promote economic development. These are

not rent seeking governments, they are rent creating governments. The very existence of a

systematically corrupt government depends on limiting access to markets and resources, to

create rents that bind the interests of the ruling coalition together. It appears that many

developing countries of the world today suffer from systematic corruption.

       If the history of the United States is to provide lessons for modern developing countries,

it is critically important that we understand what kind of corruption we are talking about.

“Corruption” is an anachronism: a word that means something different today than it did two

centuries ago. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries Americans were fixated on corruption as

the nation’s primary political problem. They feared systematic corruption, not venal corruption.

When Americans wrote their first constitutions, and later replaced and amended them, they

consciously tried to limit systematic corruption. Often they explained their actions in a way that

appears, to modern readers, to reflect paranoia over corruption. A deeper understanding of

American intellectual history is required to understand their legitimate fears. Americans were

not afraid that their governments actually were systematically corrupt, indeed their governments

were not corrupt by the standards of many of today’s developing countries. Instead they worried

that if they were not vigilant in protecting their liberties today that their government would

become corrupt and quickly evolve into a tyranny tomorrow. They worried about what was

going to happen next.

       The paper follows development the concept of systematic corruption from Aristotle and

Polybius, Machiavelli and Harrington, up through the 18th century British Whigs, Americans in


                                                  3
the Revolution, in the 1790s, the 1830s, and finally the Progressive Era. The paper’s

fundamental conclusion is that the most basic economic institution in a modern thriving

developed economy – unlimited free entry and competition unrestricted by governments –

developed as a solution to systematic corruption: a solution to the political problem of

constraining narrow political groups from obtaining uncontested control of governments. Open

markets with free competition did not develop historically as a way to produce economic growth

and enhance the wealth of nations; open markets were an economic tool used by political groups

to eliminate systematic corruption. Eliminating systematic corruption required an economic

solution to a political problem. By the 1890s and the Progressive movement, the danger of

systematic corruption had passed from the American political conscious. Progressive reformers,

as the essays in this book document, were concerned about containing venal corruption. The real

lesson developing countries ca learn from American history is how the United States eliminated

systematic corruption, not how twentieth century America manages venal corruption.

       Three elements appear repeatedly throughout this history. First, systematic corruption

threatened rights and liberties and was believed to lead directly to tyranny and slavery.

Systematic corruption was an infra-marginal concept: the very existence of civil society was at

stake. What seems to modern ears to be overblown rhetoric – the threat of tyranny and slavery --

was, in fact, precisely what the best educated and most knowledgeable people feared would

happen if systematic corruption went unchecked.3 Second, by the late 17th century, corruption

was always viewed in constitutional terms. Corruption violated some aspect of the constitutional

arrangement. As a result, the cures for corruption were constitutional. Americans responded

repeatedly to the threat of corruption by redesigning political and economic institutions at the


                                                 4
constitutional level. The result of this continual tinkering is America’s contribution to the major

political accomplishment of modern western economies: the concept of limited, constitutional

government. Finally, the mechanism by which political groups exercise corrupt influences on

the polity are, from 1700 onwards, always portrayed as economic mechanisms. Political

manipulation of economic interests involved in the growing government debt, the financial

management of the debt, and the supply of the Army and Navy through private contractors

fueled fears of corruption in Britain. In the United States, political manipulation of efforts to

promote economic development by chartering private business corporations focused political

concerns about corruption and the consequences of majority rule in a democratic republic. Since

systematic corruption was based on the rents created by limited entry, the creation of privileged

corporations was always a warning sign of potential corruption. By the 1840s, the United States

had established the general principle that entry into all lines of business should be open to all

entrants (free incorporation), markets should be open to unlimited entry, and competition

between firms should be generally unregulated. These fundamental institutions of modern

developed economies developed in the early 19th century United States as the solution to a

political problem, not an economic problem. This paper traces how that happened.

                                                 **

       The King’s ministers were not attacked for sitting in Parliament, but they were attacked
       for allegedly filling Parliament with the recipients of government patronage. For what
       was universally acknowledged was that if the members of the legislatures became
       dependent on patronage, the legislature would cease to be independent and the balance of
       the constitution would become corrupt. Corruption on an eighteenth-century tongue –
       where it was an exceedingly common term – meant not only venality, but disturbance of
       the political conditions necessary to human virtue and freedom.
       — J.G.A. Pocock (1985, p. 78)4

       The concept of mixed or balanced government can be traced back through western

                                                  5
political philosophy to Aristotle. Corruption was closely tied to the idea of constitutional

balance and the changing distribution of power within governments. The nature of both

balanced government and corruption evolved together until, by 1780, corruption became

synonymous with a failure to maintain balance in the constitutional structure of government.

       Aristotle defined pure forms of government as those that “govern with a view to the

common interest.” The pure and corrupt forms “are as follows: – of kingship, tyranny; of

aristocracy, oligarchy; and of constitutional government, democracy.” (1996, Book III, 1279a30

and 1279b4). Aristotle’s task in the Politics was to understand how constitutions affected the

behavior of governments, with the purpose of discerning how good governments might be

instituted in human society.5 To classic thinkers there was a profound difference between

corruption of the individual and the political system. The concept of systematic corruption

mattered so much because it was intimately tied to the concept of a constitution. Constitutions

were originally thought of as literally the body politic, not as written documents or theoretical

constructs.6 All physical bodies exhibit a cycle of growth, maturity, and decay: corruption.

Corruption happened to constitutions, just as certainly decay and death happened to individuals.

The central question of political philosophy asked whether a political constitution could possibly

be devised that did not inevitably end in corruption.

       Polybius developed Aristotle’s categories of pure and corrupt forms of government into

an explicit cyclical theory of constitutional development:

       So then we enumerate six forms of government, -- the three commonly spoken of which I
       have just mentioned, [the pure forms of kingship, aristocracy, and democracy] and three
       more allied forms, I mean despotism, oligarchy and mob-rule. The first of these arises
       without artificial aid and in the natural order of events. Next to this, and produced from it
       by the aid of art and adjustment, comes kingship; which degenerating into the evil form
       allied to it, by which I mean tyranny, both are once more destroyed and aristocracy

                                                 6
       produced. Again the latter being in the course of nature perverted to oligarchy, and the
       people passionately avenging the unjust acts of their rulers, democracy comes into
       existence; which again by its violence and contempt of law becomes sheer mob-rule. No
       clearer proof of the truth of what I say could be obtained than by a careful observation of
       the natural origin, genesis, and decadence of these several forms of government. For it is
       only by seeing distinctly how each of them is produced that a distinct view can also be
       obtained of its growth, zenith, and decadence, and the time, circumstance, and place in
       which each of these may be expected to recur. (Polybius, 1962, Book 6, 4, p. 460)

       Polybius developed a theory of “the regular cycle of constitutional revolutions, in which

and the natural order in which constitutions change, are transformed, and return again to their

original stage.” (Book 6, 10, p. 466) Any society with governments of the pure forms, inevitably

cycled from kingship, through tyranny, aristocracy, oligarchy, democracy, and mob-rule. The

mob being subdued by the noble and pure king, setting the cycle in motion again. For Polybius,

corruption was explicitly systematic. It was the process by which one form of government

evolved into another form. It was a force beyond the individual, an “undeviating law of nature”

in unmixed governments.

       Polybius also believed that it was possible to prevent corruption by resort to mixed and

balanced governments that combined elements of all three pure types, which he saw in the

historical example of Lycurgus who:

       accordingly combined together all the excellences and distinctive features of the best
       constitutions, that no part should become unduly predominant, and be perverted into its
       kindred vice; and that, each power being checked by the others, no one part should turn
       the scale or decisively out balance the others; but that, by being accurately adjusted and
       in exact equilibrium, the whole might remain long steady like a ship sailing close to the
       wind. The royal power was prevented from growing insolent by fear of the people, which
       had also assigned to it an adequate share in the constitution. The people in their turn were
       restrained from a bold contempt of the kings by fear of the Gerusia: the members of
       which, being selected on grounds of merit, were certain to throw their influence on the
       side of justice in every question that arose; and thus the party placed at a disadvantage by
       its conservative tendency was always strengthened and supported by the weight and
       influence of the Gerusia. The result of this combination has been that the
       Lacedaemonians retained their freedom for the longest period of any people with which

                                                7
       we are acquainted. (Book 6, 10, p. 466-7)

       Machiavelli took up Polybius. Machiavelli was concerned with stability and the process

of political change.7 Anything that disrupted the balance of the constitution was “technically”

corruption, whether it resulted from morally corrupt individual behavior or not. Systematic

corruption occurred because of inherent tendencies in the structure of societies.

       The very term balance suggests the modern concept of an equilibrium, but constitutional

balance was not thought to be a stable or self-enforcing equilibrium. Small changes in the

relative balance of power between the groups that made up the political and social order could

disrupt the system. A balanced constitution could ward off corruption, but it had to be

maintained by the eternal vigilance of fallible human care and attention. Maintaining the

balance required politicians and philosophers to define exactly what constituted the balance, that

is to define exactly what behavior was “unconstitutional” or corrupt. This way of thinking

produced two important consequences:

       First, articulating the concept of systematic corruption was fundamental to the evolution

of constitutions as fundamental law, captured in a written document, and realized in the lives of

men and women through custom, practice, conflict, and adjudication. Implementing the idea that

societies should be governed by laws, not men, required that society at large agree on a way to

identify when a society was corrupted.

       Second, the balanced constitution was a theoretical construct similar to a unique and

universal maximum.8 Any movement away from the balance was a movement toward tyranny

and slavery. This was true whether the movement was towards tyranny of the one, the many, or

the few. The balanced constitution was a perfect equipoise from which a slippery slope led


                                                 8
downwards in all directions. Any change in the balance was inherently corrupt. Systematic

corruption was not about specific behaviors, it was not like moral and ethical corruption. It was

change that destabilized the political order.

       The ascension of James I in 1603 initiated a century of Stuart rule in England. Just before

the civil war between the Stuarts and Parliament began, the conflict produced a defining moment

in the history of the English constitution. On June 21, 1642, two of Charles I advisors drafted

and persuaded the king to issue a document, His Majesty’s Answer to the Nineteen Propositions

of Both Houses of Parliament, in which the king declared that England was a mixed government

and not a condescending monarchy.9 The Answer was a critical turning point in constitutional

history because in it the king admitted that England possessed a balanced government, not an

absolute monarchy. It was an admission that royalists immediately began pressing the king to

retract. But the Answer quickly became part of the English constitutional canon.10 The Answer

did not concede sovereignty to Parliament nor was it a concession of royal prerogatives. It

cemented the constitutionality of the monarchy and enshrined the idea of balanced government.

       But if the Answer guaranteed a balanced constitution, it did very little to indicate exactly

how the balance was to be defined, maintained, and allowed to change. During the Interregnum,

the writings of James Harrington helped define the constitutional balance and move it from a

static to a dynamic basis. Harrington made two fundamental contributions. First, to delineate

how the distribution of military power in a society was a function of the distribution of land

tenure, and thus how every government rested on a particular set of property rights in land.

Second, to show how the constitutional balance within government must correspond to the

balance of military power between social orders implied by the distribution of land tenure.


                                                 9
Harrington’s model contained two balances, of government and military power. His genius was

to see that these two balances must correspond. A constitutional system that gave more power to

an element of society (king, aristocracy, the people) than the relevant share of land possessed by

that element of the population was inevitably unstable. Either the constitution or the underlying

balance of military power must change and, in classic Polybian terms, Harrington defined

corruption as change: “corruption in this sense signifieth no more than that the corruption of one

government (as in natural bodies) is the generation of another...” (1992, p. 60-61). Harrington

saw balanced government as a way to provide political stability and prevent the endless struggles

of the one, the few, and the many to control the government and the warfare, disruption, and

occasional tyranny that ensued.

       After the restoration of Charles II in 1660, the Stuarts continued to press the royal

prerogative.11 The Answers and Harrington’s Oceana defined a constitutional balance, but it was

not yet in place. Conflict between King and Parliaments resulted in the deposition of James and

the installation of William and Mary. Between 1660 and 1688, “commonwealthmen” or “True

Whigs” or “Real Whigs” articulated a version of the balanced constitution and its associated

corruptions.12 By 1675, they had developed a coherent position containing the basic themes of

opposition ideology, destined to be repeated for the next century.13 Balanced government

required independent actors in king, lords and commons. The creation of a standing army, as

opposed to a militia, was the starting point of their critique of Stuart government.14 A

professional standing army threatened the independence of Parliament by filling the Commons

with professional soldiers and other office holders who careers and livelihood depended on the

good will and patronage of the executive. “The standing army appears in this context as an


                                                10
instrument of corruption rather than of dictatorship. Army officers in Parliament are placemen,

and they encourage the growth of a military establishment outside parliamentary control...”

(Pocock, 1973 p. 125).

       The Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the new arrangements between King William and

Parliament produced a complementary set of institutional changes in fiscal policy and

government administration. They included the Bank of England, professionalization of tax

collection and administration, and the development of new methods to fund the growing national

debt.15 This lowered the cost of government borrowing and gave Britain an important edge in

the wars with France. Continuous warfare created a military-industrial complex in England.

Between 1700 and 1800 government expenditures rose from 5 percent of income to 20 percent of

income.16 This unprecedented expansion of state power was equally the accomplishment of

Parliament and the King, for Parliament controlled tax policy.

       It was in the early 18th century that systematic corruption began to take on an explicitly

economic character. The British came through the civil wars of the 17th century with their belief

in a balanced constitution intact and enhanced. They increasingly saw the House of Lords as a

balance between a competing Monarchy and the House of Commons.17 Independence of the

three parts was required to maintain the balance. Whigs directed their complaints at the

mechanisms by which the crown exerted influence in the Commons and subverted parliamentary

independence. These were parliamentary patronage, the public credit, and political parties. If

the King obtained enough influence in Parliament to suborn its independence, liberty would be

lost and tyranny and slavery would follow.18

       As government expenditures rose the executive had a growing number of patronage


                                                11
positions at its disposal in the Army, Navy, Treasury, Customs, and Excise. By the time of the

American Revolution, close to half of the House of Commons were placemen, pensioners, or

represented electoral districts under control of the King and his ministers.19 The steadily

growing public debt created a class creditors with a direct interest in the financial stability of the

government, many of them members of Parliament. The large profits to be made in marketing

and servicing the debt went to the favored few financial houses, banks, and chartered trading

companies all of whom had connections in both the executive and Parliament. There was ample

reason to doubt the independence of individual members of Parliament. And finally, the

manipulations of politicians like Walpole created groups within the government whose interest

“is that of men attached to the government; or to speak more properly, to the persons of those

who govern; or, to speak more properly still, to the power profit, or protection they acquire by

the favour of these persons, but enemies to the constitution.” (Bolingbroke, 1992, p. 85). The

creation of a political party within Parliament headed by the King, organized by his ministers,

financed by corporate privileges, and coordinated by the national debt, threatened the end of

balanced government and the establishment of a unitary, executive tyranny.20

       The British in the early 18th century certainly enjoyed better government than they, and

perhaps the world, had ever seen. Britons on both sides of the Atlantic extolled the virtues of the

British constitution. John Toland called the British government “the most free and best

constituted in the world.” John Adams claimed “No Government that ever existed was so

essentially free.” Even the Frenchman Montesquieu talked of “this beautiful system.”21 The

Whigs believed in the perfect balance of the British constitution. In this light, it is easy to

dismiss Whig claims of corruption as paranoia. To do so, however, overlooks that Whigs were


                                                  12
not concerned about the current state of Britain. Whigs feared what would happen next. They

had no historical yardstick to judge whether the change that British society and government was

undergoing in the 18th century was good or bad. Commonwealthmen believed, with the deepest

conviction, that if executive influence in Parliament was allowed to go unchecked, then the next

stage in British government would inevitably be tyranny and slavery.

       So the Whigs criticized the government’s relation to the economy. Adam Smith attacked

the system of government granted mercantilist privileges. In Cato’s Letters, Trenchard and

Gordon challenged the use of chartered corporations to promote economic activity potentially

created economic rents (by limiting entry) that could be used by the Crown to cement economic

interests to his cause.22 “For as to that class of ravens, whose wealth has cost the nation its all,

as they are manifest enemies to God and man, no man can call them his neighbours: They are

rogues of prey, they are stock-jobbers, they are a conspiracy of stock-jobbers!”23 The “financial

revolution” brought with it numerous instances of special privileges granted by the

government.24 The combined charges of systematic corruption, suborning the independence of

politicians and Parliament, and individual corruption, the venality and greed of stock-jobbers and

speculators, packed a powerful message.

       By mid-18th century commonwealthmen decried the corrupting evils of executive

patronage, the public credit, and parties. Commonwealth ideals were important elements of the

political conversation in the 18th century; the term “conscience Whigs” conveys the main

contribution of commonwealth thought. They defined, with clear bright lines, what was and was

not constitutional. Britain, of course, was in the midst of a phenomenal rise to world power and

most Britons were happily apathetic about the supposed corruption of their government. In


                                                 13
Briton, the commonwealthmen “were not in any sense of the word an organized

opposition...Without leaders and organization the reformers failed. When they achieved these

they still failed to attract sufficient public support and interest. A part of their failure must be

attributed to their detestation of party... The Real Whigs were not a coherent party. The

professed almost as many creeds in politics as in religion.” Yet, “In America the academic ideas

of the Whigs of the British Isles were fruitful and found practical expression.”25

                                                  ***

        Sir, we have done everything that could be done to avert the storm which is now coming
        on. We have petitioned; we have remonstrated; we have supplicated; we have prostrated
        ourselves before the throne, and have implored its interposition to arrest the tyrannical
        hands of the ministry and Parliament.
        The battle, sir, is not to the strong alone; it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave.
        Besides, sir, we have no election. If we were base enough to desire it, it is now too late to
        retire from the contest. There is no retreat but in submission and slavery! Our chains are
        forged. Their clanking may be heard on the plains of Boston! The war is inevitable -- and
        let it come!
        — Patrick Henry, Address to the Virginia Provincial Convention, March 23,1775.

        The notion of a legislative power exercised conjointly by kings, lords and commons is a
        notion of legislative sovereignty undeveloped in classical republican theory; its presence
        in the Answer is a reminder that the notion of ‘separation of powers’, though invented
        largely in England, could not be effective there and could be realized in the United States
        only after rejection of parliamentary government.
        -J.G.A. Pocock, 1987, p. 310.

        We have reached the point where British and American paths divide. The “republican

synthesis” in American history provides a convincing explanation for why Americans revolted

and what “made their revolution so unusual, for they revolted not against the English

constitution but on behalf of it.”26 The desire to preserve the existing constitution made the

American revolution one motivated by fear rather than hope. The widespread perception of

English corruption, on both sides of the Atlantic, inexorably drove the Americans to


                                                  14
independence once a wedge opened between Parliament and the colonies in 1763. The fear in

the American colonies was that England “once the land of liberty -- the school of patriots -- the

nurse of heroes, has become the land of slavery -- the school of parricides and the nurse of

tyrants.”27 At its root, the fear driving the American revolution was Polybian. The influence of

the executive in Parliament had unbalanced the constitution. What inevitably followed

monarchy, no matter how pure the intentions of those who produced the monarchy, was tyranny.

As Patrick Henry declared: “Our chains are forged. Their clanking may be heard on the plains of

Boston!”

       Any government organized along commonwealth lines should immediately have put in

place a constitution with balanced government. In May of 1776, the Continental Congress asked

the states to write their own constitutions. By July 3, New Jersey had drafted a new constitution

which, among its many features, distinctly articulated the separation of powers:

       XX. That the legislative department of this government may, as much as possible, be,
       preserved from all suspicion of corruption, none of the Judges of the Supreme or other
       Courts, Sheriffs, or any other person or persons possessed of any post of profit under the
       government, other than Justices of the Peace, shall be entitled to a seat in the Assembly:
       but that, on his being elected, and taking his seat, his office or post shall be considered as
       vacant. 28

The Constitution of Maryland ratified in November, stipulated in Section 6 of the Declaration of

Rights: “That the legislative, executive and judicial powers of government, ought to be forever

separate and distinct from each other.” Separation of powers was the most visible way that

Americans addressed systematic political corruption, but the entire structure of early state

constitutions with their articulated branches, attempted to systematize balanced government.

       The powers assumed by the states in their constitutions were not powers necessarily

denied to the national government. But once states defined their powers they could not be taken


                                                 15
by the national government without substantial political cost. The second national constitution,

written in 1787, gave the national government broad and generous powers. But only in the areas

of military and international affairs, public lands, international trade and commercial policy, and

(to a lesser and immediately disputed extent) financial and monetary policy, did the national

government possess well defined exclusive powers. Even in these areas, with the exception of

military defense and international relations, the national government subsequently found it

extremely difficult for political reasons to exercise its constitutional powers.29 National

government action inevitably raised the specter of corruption.

       The ability of states to legislate, regulate, or promote almost any aspect of economic and

social behavior meant that states, and not the national government, became the focal point of

economic policies. Americans were embarking on two new experiments in government: written

constitutions and widespread government support of private organizations. The first experiment

is a central part of American history. The second experiment, successful as it was, is so taken

for granted that we rarely recognize how important government support of private organizations

was for American social and economic development. As de Toqueville famously noted:

“Americans of all ages, all stations in life, and all types of dispositions are forever forming

associations. There are not only commercial and industrial associations in which all take part,

but others of a thousand different types – religious, moral, serious, futile, very general and very

limited, immensely large and very minute... In every case, at the head of any new undertaking,

where in France you would find the government or in England some territorial magnate, in the

United States you are sure to find an association.” (1966, p. 513)

       The American colonists brought the ancient English constitution with them, but not a

king or an aristocracy, two of the critical elements in the constitutional balance. This led to a



                                                 16
more egalitarian society, a deep belief in the right of individuals to assemble, and more vigorous

private sector organizations. In Europe, the right to form voluntary organizations was not a

universal right; and one found governments and territorial magnates at the head of organizations

because they possessed the sometimes implicit, but often explicit ability to form organizations.

The ability to form corporations was limited to the social and economic elite. Limited entry

created the economic rents that made royal grants of privilege to the monied interest so valuable.

In America, freedom to assemble, the ability to form religious, political, economic, and social

organization did not go undisputed after the revolution. Deciding how much public support

should be given to private organization was important and, at least in the economic and political

world, very contentious.

       America’s balanced state constitutions recognized the Harringtonian imperative of

balancing power within the government in the same proportion as land ownership was balanced

in the population. “Power results from the real property of society.”30 The equality of land

ownership posed new and vexing problems for American politicians, problems without English

antecedents. The distribution of land did not mirror the distribution of social prestige or the

presumed distribution of leadership talents within the “natural elite.” Freedom of assembly,

freedom of speech, and freedom of petition were fundamental rights. How far did these rights

extend into the politically competent, independent, land owning citizenry? Who had the right to

vote, to incorporate a business, or form a political party? Britain’s financial revolution did not

represent a move toward an economy or society with more open entry; it restricted entry. Smith

and the classical economists built their criticism of government policy on mercantilist limitations

on access to economic organization. Kings and ministers used limited access to created

economic rents, then used the spoils from the rents to purchase political influence, and thus



                                                 17
eroded the independence of Parliament and corrupted the entire political system. Corporations

and stock-jobbers represented the very essence of systematic and venal corruption. How was the

United States to deal with the identical problem?

                                               ****

        “It is hard to imagine how by deliberate intent, Alexander Hamilton’s economic program
       for the new republic could have been better calculated to exacerbate these
       [commonwealth] fears... they inevitably brought to mind the entire system of eighteenth-
       century English governmental finance, with all the consequences that entailed for minds
       shaped by British opposition thought.”
       — Lance Banning, 1978, p. 128

       Straightening out the nation’s finances instigated the first battle over corruption in the

new republic. Hamilton’s proposed financial policies – refunding national and state debts, a

national bank, a moderate revenue tariff, and excise taxes – all stimulated opposition and debate

when Congress considered them in the first Congress, which ended in March of 1791. Each of

Hamilton’s measures raised fears of corruption in classic commonwealth terms, but all of them

passed. The debate that ensued in the summer of 1791 over what the new financial system

meant, however, produced a conflagration of fears over corruption and led to the creation of an

opposition party in the United States. All of the policy measures at issue were economic. The

important element in the debate, however, was the effect of the economic policies on politics.

       We have already seen how the financial revolution in England created a funded national

debt, a bureaucracy of excise and tariff collectors, a national bank, and an interlocking set of

financial intermediaries and chartered corporations that marketed and traded in government debt.

As the bureaucracy expanded, so did opportunities for executive patronage. The ability to tie the

interests of the financial community to the policies of the government through the medium of the

national debt and corporate charters allowed the Crown to extend its influence and undermine

the independence of Parliament. Although stock jobbers and financial parvenus were reviled for

                                                 18
their personal venality, the danger of the English system of finance was to fundamental liberties,

it was systematic corruption. The identification of financial interest with the Crown was the

mechanism of corruption.

       Hamilton’s arguments for America’s new financial system had ominous overtones. In

the Report on the Public Credit in January 1790, Hamilton proposed that “If all the public

creditors receive their dues from one source... their interests will be the same. And having the

same interests, they will unite in support of the fiscal arrangements of the government.”31

Hamilton proposed precisely the type of arrangement with the monied interest that

commonwealthmen feared in Britain. A typical response to Hamilton’s proposals came from the

Virginia legislature’s memorial to Congress on December 16, 1790:

         That it is with great concern they find themselves compelled, from a sense of duty, to
       call the attention of Congress to an act of their last session, entitled "An act making
       provision for the debt of the United States," which the General Assembly conceives
       neither policy, justice, nor the constitution, warrants. Republican policy, in the opinion of
       your memorialists, could scarcely have suggested those clauses in the aforesaid act,
       which limit the right of the United States, in their redemption of the public debt. On the
       contrary, they discern a striking resemblance between this system and that which was
       introduced into England at the Revolution - a system which has perpetuated upon that
       nation an enormous debt, and has, moreover, insinuated into the hands of the Executive
       an unbounded influence, which, pervading every branch of the Government, bears down
       all opposition, and daily threatens the destruction of every thing that appertains to
       English liberty. The same causes produce the same effects.
         In an agricultural country like this, therefore, to erect and concentrate and perpetuate a
       large moneyed interest, is a measure which your memorialists apprehend must, in the
       course of human events, produce one or other of two evils: the prostration of agriculture
       at the feet of commerce, or a change in the present form of Federal Government, fatal to
       the existence of American liberty.32

The Virginians questioned whether “Republican policy,” i.e. commonwealth ideas, could have

suggested such a financial program, draws a direct connection between Hamilton’s plan and

English executive corruption which has “insinuated into the hands of the Executive an

unbounded influence.” In typical whig style, the memorial raises the alarm that Hamilton’s


                                                19
plans threaten the “existence of American liberty.”

       As Banning noted, it would have been difficult to consciously design a financial program

that provoked commonwealth fears of executive influence more directly than Hamilton’s.

Nonetheless, Congress passed all the plan’s elements. Washington polled his cabinet on the

constitutionality of the legislation. Attorney General Randolf and Secretary of State Jefferson

opposed the bank charter, arguing that the Constitution did not explicitly enumerate the power of

the government to create a corporation. Treasury Secretary Hamilton argued that the power to

create a corporation was inherent in the powers of a sovereign government.33 Hamilton’s

arguments carried the day and Washington signed the charter bill into law.

       Although Hamilton’s proposals were controversial, they all passed. But a debate about

the implications of the financial plan immediately flared up and revealed several inherent

contradictions in the system devised by the founders. On the Federalist side the Adamses, joined

by Hamilton, praised the British constitution and argued against extending democracy too far.

On what would become the Republican side, Jefferson and Madison, abetted by Thomas Paine

and Phillip Freneau, attacked the Adams’ as monarchists and Hamilton as an aspiring Prime

Minister. The Republicans castigated the financial plan as an attempt by Hamilton to use his

position as Treasury Secretary to secure control of the government through systematic

corruption. Public acrimony between the participants set in motion the formation of distinct

Federalist and Republican parties in national politics. The way in which the conflict was

resolved placed corruption in government promotion of economic development at the center of

American politics for the next half century, and brought to prominence several contradictions in

the American experiment with republican government:

       1) Popular Sovereignty vs. Tyranny of the Majority. Both the Federalists and the Anti-



                                                20
Federalist argued for popular sovereignty as a critical element in the new American system.

Sovereignty, lodged with the people, could be delegated to representatives through election. Yet

ultimately sovereignty remained in the hands of the voters. But to those trained in the ways of

commonwealth theory, tyranny of the many was just as much a problem as tyranny of the one or

the few. The exercise of popular sovereignty necessarily involved the risk of tyranny of the

majority, a risk that Madison and Hamilton both appreciated. Madison hoped the extended

republic would mitigate the risk, as he argued famously in Federalist #10. The greatest danger

from majority rule lay in the possibility that a demagogue would arise, unify a majority of the

voters behind him, and lead the government into despotism. Such a leader might over ride the

checks and balances built into system by sweeping a majority through all the branches of

government. Madison’s hopes didn’t last a decade, by the early 1790s the Federalists controlled

all three branches of the national government.34

       2) Political Parties vs. Corruption. The Constitution itself offered a way for Jefferson

and Madison to oppose the Federalists: the formation of a opposition party. The logic of the

winner take all electoral process for President, as well as other offices, seemed to guarantee that

eventually two competing parties would emerge.35 And despite the strict separation of executive

and legislative functions in the constitution, the President and Congress still had to find a way to

come to an agreement about how government was to be carried out, a coordination eventually

accomplished through parties. But the formation of an overt political party challenge the

incumbent Federalists, who could plausibly argue that their administration was non-partisan,

carried with it an explicit danger. Parties and factions were inherently, systematically corrupt.

For a party to contest for control of the government in an organized way was per se corrupt in

the 1790s. Madison, in a series of articles published in the National Gazette, provided an



                                                   21
intellectual justification for parties.36 Madison drew on the classic distinction between the few

and the many, arguing that the Republicans represented the many.

       But a much stronger argument was to obviate the need for parties at all. Madison and the

entire Republican party claimed that they stood on the side of the angels in a debate over

republican vs. monarchical government and pure vs. corrupt methods of governing.37 Tarring

Adams and the Federalists with being closet monarchists played well to some voters, but it was

the fear of executive influence in the legislature, wielded by Prime Minister Hamilton through

the coordinating mechanism of the Bank of the United States and the national debt that posed the

greatest threat. It was a threat that resonated with a century of British political writing and the

decades of American paranoia over corruption in the Britain. The negative political implications

of the Republicans existence as an organized political party could be minimized by stressing the

rightness of their cause. “The situation of the public good, in the hands of two parties nearly

poised as to numbers, must be extremely perilous. Truth is a thing, not of divisibility into

conflicting parts, but of unity. Hence both sides cannot be right. Every patriot deprecates a

disunion, which is only to be obviated by a national preference for one of these parties.”38 If the

Republicans were truly right, then their cause was not a partisan one but a righteous one, and

when the country came to see the wisdom of their position there would no longer be a need for

competing parties.

       3) Corruption vs. Promotion of Economic Development. By building their case against

Hamilton and the Federalists along traditional Whig lines, the Republicans gained the moral

force of a century of British/American thinking about corruption in government. At the same

time, they boxed themselves into a fundamental dilemma. The Republicans were just as much a

pro-growth and development party as the Federalists. Their arguments against the Federalists



                                                 22
were political, not economic. They were not arguing that Hamilton’s plan wouldn’t work in

economic terms, but that Hamilton was taking the first step down the slippery slope to executive

tyranny. How then did the Republicans propose to promote economic development?

       The only one model available at the end of the 18th century had been used by

governments to promote economic development for centuries, in Britain and elsewhere: by

creating public service corporations. Those corporations were given public privileges in order to

induce them to provide public services. Their public privileges generated private rents by

limiting entry. Drew McCoy’s book, Elusive Republic, makes abundantly clear that the central

tenets of Jefferson and Madison’s economic vision required the construction of a financial and

transportation infrastructure to bring the agrarian west into viable production. At the same time,

foreign economic policy had to insure growing external markets for American products abroad,

so that yeomen farmers did not produce themselves into poverty.39 There was no institutional

vehicle to promote financial and transportation improvements but the corporation. If the

Republicans were to condemn the corporation as an instrument of corruption at the national

level, they left themselves without a way of promoting the very economic development that they

sought and that voters demanded.

       None of these contradictions were resolved in the first forty years of the country’s

history, all of them resolved themselves in the 1830s and 1840s.



                                              *****

       Perhaps party competition between the Federalists and Republicans could have

culminated in a resolution of the contradictions of American democracy in the early 1800s. The

triumph of Jefferson over Adams in 1800 and the Republican’s ability to form a consensus



                                                23
national government obviated the need to form a partisan political party. By the War of 1812 the

Republicans had firm control of the national political agenda. and so put off the paradox of

corruption and political parties at the national level until 1824. The Republican’s ability to

govern by apparent consensus papered over the threat of a tyrannous majority by governing as a

virtuous majority. Geographic, if not partisan, divisions soon appeared in Congress. The

inability of the federal government to overcome the problem of internal geographic competition

produced inaction at the federal level.40 Responsibility for promoting development fell squarely

on the states. The resurgence of national party politics in the 1820s and 1830s, was fought

between the Democrats and Whigs over economic issues and, fundamentally, over systematic

corruption. Again, the national government failed to provide active leadership and, in the 1840s,

it was state governments that finally solved the paradox promoting economic development while

avoiding systematic corruption.

       I) State governments expanded their involvement in banking and transportation from

1790 onward.41 It is tempting to attribute the rise of state promotion to the absence of federal

promotion, but it seems clear that state activity was a continuation of the development of

government capacity at the state level that began in 1776 with the call for new state

constitutions. States began chartering banks, turnpike companies, bridge companies, fire

companies, and all manner of religious, charitable, educational, and municipal corporations in

the 1790s.42 By 1836, when the national charter for the Second Bank of the United States

expired, there were over 600 state chartered banks. In the meantime, the federal government had

chartered the First and Second Banks of the United States and a few small banks in the District

of Columbia.43 Between 1790 and 1860, state and local governments spent $450 million,

financing the Erie Canal, the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, hundreds of other successful projects



                                                24
as well as hundreds of failures. Over the same period, the federal government spent $54 million

on transportation improvements, mostly small rivers and harbor projects. In 1841, aggregate

state debts stood at $198 million, larger than the national debt had ever been.

       Corporate charters were, of course, grants of special privileges to small groups of

citizens. Initially, every charter required an act of the state legislature and all corporations were,

in the language of the time, special. Charters always raised the specter of corruption and strong

anti-charter sentiments were usually expressed whenever a charter was contemplated.44 At the

same time, there was wide spread public sentiment for promoting economic development, and

the corporation was seen as the vehicle for state promotion. As a result, corporate chartering

policy often contained contradictory elements.

       Although anticharter arguments were frequently stated as if they applied to all
       corporations without exception, in practice opposition usually settled on some
       corporations only. Even the Pennsylvania legislators who campaigned against the BNA
       and the reincorporation of Philadelphia [the city] apparently raised no objections to the
       charters granted “every day,” as one legislator put it in 1786, to “half a dozen or 20
       people for some purpose or another.” Similarly, in 1792 James Sullivan carefully
       distinguished the incorporation of a bank from that “to build a bridge, or to cut a canal,”
       which he found unobjectionable. Banks were probably assailed more often than any
       other kind of corporation. But consider the position of a delegate to the Massachusetts
       constitutional convention of 1853 who launched a rhetorically powerful attack on
       corporations “of a business character.” Among corporations “for other purposes,” which
       were apparently exempted from his criticisms, he included railroads, insurance
       companies and banks!”45

The right to assemble, the right to organize, was explicitly recognized by early American states.

Their charter policies reflected public support of private organization. In itself, this made a

significant, if unmeasured, to the development of the American economy.46

       But granting corporate charters was not without its costs, real and potential. In New

York the Albany Regency, headed by Martin Van Buren, used bank charters to dominate state

politics.47 The Regency granted bank charters only to their political allies. In return, the bankers


                                                  25
provided financial support to the Regency, enabling the Regency to maintain control of state

government. It was a classic case of systematic corruption: a group of politicians using

economic privileges to secure their control of the political system. New York was not unique.

Unlike New York, however, most states that created rents through by limiting entry chose to take

their share of the rents in the form of tax revenues, not political influence.48

       II) The election of 1824 offered a chance to change the course of federal policy. The

election was contested by William Crawford, John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay, and Andrew

Jackson. Corruption was the theme of Jackson’s campaign:

       Look to the city of Washington, and let the virtuous patriots of the country weep at the
       spectacle. There corruption is springing into existence, and fast flourishing, Gentlemen,
       candidates for first office in the gift of a free people, are found electioneering and
       intriguing, to worm themselves into the confidence of members of congress, who support
       their particular favorites, are bye and bye to go forth and dictate to the people was is
       right.49

Jackson won a plurality of the popular vote and the electoral vote. When the election went to the

House, however, Clay threw his support behind Adams. Adams was elected and appointed Clay

Secretary of State. Jackson decried the “corrupt bargain,” “So you see, the Judas of the West

[Clay] has closed the contract and will receive thirty pieces of silver. His end will be the same.

Was there ever witnessed such a bare faced corruption in any country before?”50 Jackson’s

campaign for the 1828 election began in 1824, and its theme was corruption.

       John Quincy Adams strongly supported internal improvements in 1825. His

administration spent more on internal improvements than any before him, but Congress refused

to authorize a general system of federally sponsored transportation projects. Jackson’s election

in 1828 did not necessarily signal the end of hope for a more active federal government, but it

did bring back into clear focus the three contradictions of American democracy. General

Jackson was the epitome of the man on horseback who, to his enemies, offered the perfect image

                                                  26
of a demagogue and the dark side of democracy. The Democratic party built to elect Jackson did

not disappear after 1828; competitive party politics became a permanent part of American

politics and raised the specter of corruption, faction, and party. Finally, the opposition party that

emerged during Jackson’s first term, what became the Whig party headed by Henry Clay and

initially financed by Nicolas Biddle, chose to contest Jackson in the arena of economic policy.

The first defining question for Whigs and Democrats was whether the national government

should renew the charter of the Second Bank of the United States.

       The economic and political history of the Bank War is well known.51 The debate

between Jackson and his opponents was carried out in terms of systematic corruption. Jackson’s

veto message railed against the special privileges conveyed to the Bank. The veto message laid

out Jackson’s position on the Bank, on the battle between the aristocratic wealthy and the masses

of the population, and on the abuse of privilege as an evil of government.52 But he did not begin

speaking of systematic corruption until the Bank War broke into open conflict with his plans to

remove the federal deposits. On September 18, 1833 Jackson had Secretary Taney read a

statement to the Cabinet that the Jackson and Taney had prepared on the why the deposits should

be removed:

       The Bank of the United States is in itself a Government which has gradually increased its
       strength from the day of its establishment. The question between it an the people has
       become one of power – a question which its adherents do not scruple to avow must
       ultimately be decided in favor of the Bank... The mass of people have more to fear from
       combinations of the wealthy and professional classes – from an aristocracy which thro’
       the influence of riches and talents, insidiously employed, sometimes succeeds in
       preventing political institutions, however well adjusted, from securing the freedom of the
       citizen, and in establishing the most odious and oppressive government under the forms
       of a free institution.”53

Jackson recalled the classic phrases of systematic corruption. The Bank itself was a government:

a small group (in this case Biddle and Clay) using the powers of government to create a powerful


                                                 27
economic interest, and gains from monopoly rents thus created were being used to subvert the

process of government and threaten the liberties of all citizens by establishing an odious and

oppressive government.

       His opponents replied in kind. In the election of 1832, they styled themselves National

Republicans, and by late 1833 the Whig party was born. In a speech in December 1833

protesting Jackson’s removal of federal deposits, Henry Clay concluded:

       The eyes and the hopes of the American people are anxiously turned to Congress. They
       feel that they have been deceived and insulted; their confidence abused; their interests
       betrayed; and their liberties in danger. They see a rapid and alarming concentration of all
       power in one man’s hands. They see that, by the exercise of the positive authority of the
       Executive, and his negative power exerted over Congress, the will of one man alone
       prevails, and governs the republic. The question is no longer what laws will Congress
       pass, but what will the Executive not veto? The President, and not Congress, is
       addressed for legislative action... We behold the usual incidents of approaching tyranny.
       The land is filled with spies and informers, and detraction and denunciation are the orders
       of the day. People, especially official incumbents in this place, no longer dare speak in
       the fearless tones of manly freemen, but in the cautious whispers of trembling slaves.
       The premonitory symptoms of despotism are upon us; and if Congress do not apply an
       instantaneous and effective remedy, the fatal collapse will soon come on, and we shall
       die – ignobly die – base, mean, and abject slaves; the scorn and contempt of mankind;
       unpitied, unwept, unmourned!54

Clay did not accuse Jackson of venal corruption. In the language of the commonwealth the

Whigs charged Jackson with executive usurpation, of corrupting the political process. Tyranny

and slavery would follow.

       The contest between Clay and Jackson, and the longer struggle between the Whigs and

the Democrats was fought over classic commonwealth concerns: executive usurpation, the

monied conspiracy, corporations, and the appropriate role of government in promoting economic

development. The major issues between Democrats and Whigs were economic, but the

foundation for the debate over economic policy was a larger debate over systematic corruption.

Both sides of the Bank War debate painted the other side as systematically corrupt.


                                                28
       Jackson’s administration resolved two of the paradoxes of American democracy. First,

from Jackson onward, demagogues were accepted, as long as they were elected President.55

Jackson permanently increased the power of the Executive branch. He claimed that the President

most effectively represented the collective will of the entire people as shown in the only nation

wide election. Second, political parties became an accepted part of the political system.

Suspicion of partisan motivation and the dangers of faction and party remain to the present day,

of course.56 But the national government could not resolve the third paradox -- corruption and

the promotion of economic development. Jackson solution to corruption in banking was to not

have a bank. This continued the existing federal policy of inaction. Except in the earliest days

of the Washington administration the national government, Congress and Executive, were unable

to design or execute a program of active government promotion of economic development.

       III) Promoting economic development was left to the states. By the end of Jackson’s

second term, states throughout the country were deeply involved in investing in and promoting

banks and transportation systems. The investment boom of the 1830s was ended by the

depression that began in 1839. By 1842, eight states and the territory of Florida were in default.

The crisis in public finance naturally brought investigations into its causes. Venal corruption

caused fiscal problems in a few states: Mississippi, Florida, and Arkansas. Most states, however,

blamed faulty institutions: they blamed it on how democracy was working out in practice.57

       American state governments were the first governments of their kind in history.

Governed by written constitutions, they operated within the framework of a national government

that provided military defense and international relations, a basic legal system, and very little

else. States believed that republican government was good. They wanted to promote economic

growth, but they worried incessantly that the corporations and privileges they created to promote



                                                 29
growth benefitted a favored few to the detriment of the many and undermined the integrity of

their governments. States were forced to solve the paradox of corruption and the promotion of

economic development. Their solution was elegantly simple: let everybody have a corporate

charter who wants one.

       Their history endowed American state governments and their citizens with the idea that

some problems of government were not caused by bad men, but by bad governments. They were

Aristotelian and Polybian in their understanding that the constitution of a government, the

stamina vitae, created incentives for the actors, politicians and citizens, to pursue particular ends.

They were the first modern people to possess extensive experience with written constitutions.58

The early nineteenth century was an era of continual political debate about the structure of

government.

       States were the first governments with extensive experience in chartering corporations.

The first and most important connections between governments and corporations were fiscal.

This was true in Britain and the mercantilist privileges that Adam Smith complained about. It

was true in the American states from the beginning. If governments were going to sell monopoly

privileges and corporate charters for revenue, then inevitably each charter required a price, a

negotiation, a bargain.59 This was a systemic feature of any system of government where

charters created limited entry into a line of business. Democratic governments could create and

sell corporate privileges. Taxpayers liked receiving government services paid for by charter

fees, taxes on capital, or dividends on stock. But by its very nature the creation of corporate

privileges created the opportunity for political groups to create economic privileges that could be

used to distort the political process. This happened in Britain with the national debt, it happened

in New York with the sale of bank charters to the political friends of the Albany Regency, it was



                                                 30
a systematic feature of any government that sold corporate privilege. State governments came to

understand that if they remained in the market for selling corporate charters, if they remained

willing to consider developers proposals that promised tax free provisions of railroads and banks,

that inevitably some politicians, even well meaning politicians, were going to make some serious

mistakes. Voters could easily be induced to vote for expenditures that promised large returns

without levying taxes. States also came to understand that allowing entry reduced the rents

associated with corporate privileges, without eliminating the wider social benefits of creating

corporations.

        The state’s solution the paradox of corruption and economic development was as simple

as it was ingenious. First, states eliminated the pressure to create special corporate privileges by

enacted constitutional provisions requiring legislatures to pass general incorporation laws

allowing unlimited entry into corporate status via an administrative procedure. Second, states

passed constitutional provisions requiring that all state borrowing required a bond referendum:

mandating that the higher taxes necessary to service the bonds be approved by the voters before

the bonds were issued. Third, most states forbade state and local investment in private

corporations. Between 1841 and 1852, twelve states wrote new constitutions. Eleven of the

twelve contained procedural debt restrictions and eight mandated general incorporation acts. In

banking, general incorporation acts produced free banking (the first free banking acts were in

Michigan and New York in 1837 and 1838). Nine states prohibited incorporation by special

legislative acts altogether, prohibiting state legislatures from creating corporations with special

privileges.60

        The point of these reforms was not to eliminate state and local government investments

in finance and transportation. Governments could borrow as long as they were willing to raise



                                                 31
taxes. The reforms were not designed to limit the creation of corporations. General

incorporation acts made it much easier to get a charter. The reforms were designed to reduce or

eliminate the private economic rents that were created when the political system limited entry.

The reforms intended to reduce the political manipulation of the economic system, not by

making such manipulations illegal or unconstitutional, but by reducing the payoff to political

machinations. Institutions supporting unlimited entry, free competition, and competitive markets

were put in place by American states in the 1830s and 1840s. They were the solution to a

political problem, not an economic problem. The effect of the reforms, however, was to put in

place a critical institutional underpinning of modern economies. It was the uniquely American

solution to the paradox of systematic corruption and the promotion of economic development.

                                             ******

       Almost any history textbook that covers the Progressive era and was written at least
       twenty years ago tells how early-twentieth-century Americans discovered how big
       business interests were corrupting politics in quest of special privileges and how an
       outraged people acted to reform the perceived evils.
       Richard L. McCormick, “The Discovery that Business Corrupts Politics,” 1981, p. 247

       By the Progressive era corruption was no longer systematic corruption: the corruption of

economics by politics. It was, as the title of McCormick’s essay suggests, venal corruption: the

corruption of politics by economics. The Civil War, the rise of an integrated national economy,

and the development of a thriving manufacturing sector all could have unbalanced and corrupted

America’s governments. But they did not produce tyranny or dictatorship and by tghe 1890s

Americans had become more confident in the resilience of their system of government.

Corruption no longer seemed to be an infra-marginal threat; the system was no longer at risk.

When progressive reformers complained about the evils of big business’s influence on politics,

they no longer suggested that slavery and tyranny were just around the corner. Their confidence


                                               32
in the American system was reflected in the constitutional changes made during the era: at the

national level the direct election of Senators by popular vote and women’s suffrage, and at the

state and local level by the spread of initiative, referendums, and recalls and the rise of home

rule. Progressive era constitutional reforms all emphasized an increased role for popular

participation in the political process, reforms that were unthinkable a century before.

       Benjamin Parke DeWitt, progressive reformer and historian, wrote in his Progressive

Movement: A Non-partisan, Comprehensive Discussion of Current Tendencies in American

Politics in 1915:

        In this widespread political agitation that at first sight seems so incoherent and chaotic,
       there may be distinguished upon examination and analysis three tendencies. The first of
       these tendencies is found in the insistence by the best men in all political parties that
       special, minority, and corrupt influence in government – national, state, and city – be
       removed; the second tendency is found in the demand that the structure or machinery of
       government, which as hitherto been admirably adapted to control by the few, be so
       changed and modified that it will be more difficult for the few, and easier for the many,
       to control; and, finally, the third tendency is found in the rapidly growing conviction that
       the functions of government at present are too restricted and that they must be increased
       an extended to relieve social and economic distress. These three tendencies with varying
       emphasis are seen to-day in the platform and program of every political party; they are
       manifested in the political changes and reforms that are advocated and made in the
       nation, state, and the cities; and because of the universality and definiteness, they may be
       said to constitute the real progressive movement. (DeWitt, 1915, pp. 4-5).

The first Progressive tendency -- that special, minority, and corrupt influence in government be

removed -- could have been written in London in 1720, Philadelphia in 1787, Albany or

Indianapolis in the 1840s, or today for that matter. The venal are always be with us and venal

corruption can only be prevented by eternal vigilance. The third tendency, a call for government

policies to relieve social and economic distress translated into new social programs like

workmen’s compensation and mother’s pensions in the 1900s and 1910s, but reached its full

measure in the New Deal.61

       The second tendency, to make changes in the structure and machinery of government,

                                                 33
constituted the heart of the Progressive reform agenda. DeWitt’s language indicates the distance

that Progressives had come from Commonwealthmen. The structure of machinery of

government “be so changed and modified that it will be more difficult for the few, and easier for

the many, to control.” A century earlier such a suggestion would have been a call for

unbalanced government -- in short, a call for corruption. The Progressive movement was an

anti-corruption reform movement, promoting policies the founding fathers would have regarded

as corrupt.    The progressive movement produced reforms in three distinct constitutional areas.

First, the Progressives altered the relationship between corporations and governments through

active regulation and changes in chartering. Second, they expanded direct participation in

government; at the national level through women’s suffrage and the direct election of Senators;

and at the state and local level through the initiative, referendum, and recall to bring direct

democracy into the policy process. Third, they altered the relationship between state and local

governments through home rule amendments and the local charter movement. These reforms

shared several elements. They allowed both public and private sector organizations more

flexibility to choose the form of their internal organization. They increased the acceptable range

of interaction between government and the economy, allowing governments to interfere and

regulate business, or withdraw their regulation. Finally, the entire process was to be monitored

by a more democracy, by putting more power in the hands of the many. The Progressives

believed in balanced government. But it was the checks and balances of the national and state

constitutions, not the balance of social orders and classes reflecting the interests of the one, the

few, and the many.

       State chartering policy links the Progressive era and the Jacksonian era. The widespread

adoption of general incorporation acts in the 1840s liberalized access to corporate charters and



                                                  34
the number of corporations in America exploded, relative to both early American history and

contemporary European economies.62 But general incorporation acts liberalized entry while

putting more severe restrictions on the structure of corporations. All corporations created under

a general act shared common features. In states that banned special incorporation altogether, a

corporation that wanted to change its internal voting rules, shareholder rights, or its management

structure was severely constrained.63 For example, corporations were typically prohibited from

owning stock in corporations domiciled in other states. All this began to change in New Jersey

in the late 1880s.64

        In a series of acts between 1888 and 1896, New Jersey created liberal general

incorporation. These acts allowed corporations to merge and hold stock in other corporations, to

operate outside of the state, and to create define their internal structure within much wider

bounds. Corporations flocked to New Jersey, swelling the state’s revenues, and opening up new

opportunities for corporate structure throughout the country.65 What followed was the great

merger movement. Between 1895 and 1904 there was a rapid consolidation of the nation’s

largest manufacturing firms. Over half of the consolidations involving more than $1 million in

capital took place in New Jersey.66 New York and Delaware soon followed New Jersey’s lead,

liberalizing their incorporation laws and trying to lure businesses into their states.

        Attributing the Progressive era to the merger movement would be silly, although there is

a remarkable coincidence of timing. “Yet, given the long-term forces involved, it is notable how

suddenly the main elements of the new political order went into place. The first fifteen years of

the twentieth century witnessed most of the changes; more precisely, the brief period from 1904

to 1908 saw a remarkably compressed political transformation. During these years the

regulatory revolution peaked; new and powerful agencies of government came into being



                                                 35
everywhere.” (McCormack, 1981, p. 252) When a small number of unprecedentedly large

corporations sprang into being during the merger wave the national and state governments

responded to the public perception that corruption was again a problem in American politics.

But they responded much differently in the first decades of the twentieth century than they had

before.

          Battling venal corruption and regulating the excesses of the plutocrats charged the

progressive movement with a populist morality. It is striking how much of the Progressive

rhetoric, perhaps in combination with the symbols of the temperance movement, focuses on bad

men rather than on bad institutions. Giving more control to the many was the mechanism by

which “special, minority, and corrupt influence in government – national, state, and city –

[could] be removed.” The constitutional machinery of the progressive constitutional reforms

were electoral and democratic. At the national level, the direct election of Senators by popular

majorities and suffrage for women were the key progressive accomplishment. At the state level,

the adoption of the initiative, referendum, and recall gave voters direct control over legislation

and officials. Initiative, referendum, and recall were adopted at the local level as well, but the

critical change was the widespread adoption of home rule provisions and new methods of

chartering local governments. These transferred control of local governments from state to local

governments, providing voters with the ability to directly shape local government policies to suit

the ends of local majorities.

          The medicine prescribed by progressives to cure systematic corruption would have

seemed insane to a founding father. Systematic corruption flowed from the ability of politicians

to use the economic system to further their political ends. Electoral excess, tyranny of the

majority, and mob rule were serious threats that had to be balanced by the creation of other



                                                  36
centers of power in the political system. All of the Progressive’s constitutional reforms

strengthened direct popular participation in political decision making. Of course, the

progressives did not dismantle the checks and balances of the Madisonian system, nor did they

dismantle the constitutional reforms that required popular approval of state and local debt issue

and therefore spending. But the idea of balancing the interests of the one, the few, and the many

had disappeared completely, as did the fear that democracy itself is corruptible. Progressive

reforms celebrated popular sovereignty, the concept that the voters were the ultimate judge of

government policy. Deciding whether politicians and policies were venally corrupt would be left

to popular choice. The many would decide whether the few had violated their mandate to govern

on behalf of the common good. Majorities really would rule.

       How could this happen? The constant element in earlier discussion of corruption in

America and Britain was that corruption inevitably leads to tyranny and slavery. Patrick Henry

could hear the chains clinking on the plains of Boston in 1775, Henry Clay feared that we would

“all die – ignobly die – base, mean, and abject slaves” if Congress allowed Jackson to remove

the federal deposits from the Bank of the United States. Such language is not to be found in the

progressive era.

       Between 1840 and 1890 American crossed a divide. On the early side of the divide

governments could never be trusted. Politicians would always, if the chance presented itself, use

the powers of government to manipulate the economic system in order to consolidate their

control of the political system. Consolidation of political control upset the delicate balance of

government and, with Polybian certainty, led to tyranny and slavery. Balance in government

could never be assumed. Small changes in the distribution of power could quickly lead to

imbalance. The defense of liberty required eternal vigilance. On the later side of the divide,



                                                37
balance in government is no longer fragile. Tyranny and slavery are still possibilities, but highly

improbable ones. By allowing, indeed mandating, more competition and entry in the economic

and political system, Madison’s extended republic, as modified by the states, had produced a

stable balance within government.

       In classical Whig political economy, increasing government regulation raised as many

red flags as did special corporate charters. Regulation created the opportunity for creating rents;

rent creation created the possibility for political manipulation of the economy. One could see

James I or Charles II promoting these changes in government, not Whig commonwealthmen. If,

on the other hand, political and economic competition limit rent creation and dissipation, they

also make it safer for the government to regulate in positive and negative ways. Competition and

entry create their own balanced equilibrium.

       This could only have happened if Americans came to trust their government more than

they ever had in the colonial, revolutionary, or early national periods.67 Progressive era reforms

increased political entry by widening the scope of popular democratic political institutions:

direct election of senators, women’s suffrage, the initiative, the referendum, the recall, and home

rule. At the same time progressive era policy reforms created much wider opportunities for rent

seeking by politicians and economic actors, trusting, apparently, that voters could monitor the

new powers given to their representatives. The threat of systematic corruption, so prevalent for

three centuries in British and American political and economic thinking, had receded to the point

of disappearance from the political debates of the Progressive era.

                                               *******

       One way to think about developing countries is that they are are poor because the

government officials are venally corrupt. If only the right people and policies could be put in



                                                 38
place, economic growth would ensue. A more pessimistic and realistic view is that developing

countries are plagued with systematic corruption. They are plagued by governments that

systematically manipulate the economy to produce economic rents that further the political

interests of the people and parties in power. This is not a matter of bad people causing problems.

This is a fundamental flaw in the constitutional structure, the stamina vitae, of these societies.

       The United States came by its fear of systematic corruption legitimately. It was born in a

constitutional crisis rooted in Whig/Commonwealth paranoia about the threat to fundamental

liberties of all Britons embodied in executive usurpation of Parliamentary independence. The

emerging institutions of modern financial capitalism – a national debt, a central bank, a stock

market, and a host of financial intermediaries – were not the causes of corruption. The

institutions of modern financial capitalism were the instruments of systematic corruption, tools

in the hands of the Crown and its evil ministers. British corruption threatened fundamental

liberties. The storm warnings of tyranny and slavery were flying in 1776.

       The founding fathers seized the first chance to write their own constitutions in 1776,

crafting a series of state constitutions implementing Whig precepts of balanced government.

They didn’t get it completely right the first time. Between 1776 and 1852 the original 13 states

wrote 29 constitutions. The national government took two tries as well: the Articles of

Confederation written in 1777 and the Philadelphia constitution written in 1787. Congress

implemented Hamilton’s financial plan in 1791 deliberately modeled on the British financial

system: a national debt, a central bank, and assumption of state debts. Within a year, national

politics fragmented over the charge that Hamilton and the Federalists were establishing a Prime

Ministry with Hamilton at the center of a web of influence and interest. The national

government remained gridlocked for decades over how, and whether, economic development



                                                 39
should be promoted. When the national government’s experiment in central banking came to an

end with Jackson’s veto of the charter of the Bank of the United States in 1832, the issue was

still systematic corruption. Clay claimed that “we shall die – ignobly die – base, mean, and

abject slaves; the scorn and contempt of mankind; unpitied, unwept, unmourned!” if Jackson

went unchecked.

       Meanwhile, in the 1790s states began chartering banks, churches, and all varieties of

corporations. By the 1820s states were building canals, experimenting with railroads, borrowing

money, and investing their own funds in corporations. By the 1830s there were over 600 state

chartered banks and state debt for internal improvement investment was double the national debt

accumulated in the Revolution and the War of 1812. State activism did not go unchallenged.

Corporations were still regarded as potential vehicles for corruption. Bank chartering under New

York’s Albany Regency was a classic example of systematic corruption: a political faction using

the creation of economic privilege to secure their control of the political system. The central

theme in Jackson’s rise to prominence was an attack on corruption, an attack on government

created privilege.

       When the internal improvement boom collapsed after 1839, states carefully re-examined

the policies that led them to issue $200 million in state bonds. States again turned to their

constitutions and implemented a series of reforms that mandated general incorporation acts

guaranteeing free entry into corporate privileges, modified the procedures by which state and

local government decided to borrow money, and prohibited government investment in private

corporations. With a few exceptions, the constitutional reforms were not bans on state

promotion of economic development. They did not prevent governments from chartering banks,

building canals or railroads, or in the progressive era building municipal water systems, sewer



                                                 40
systems, ans school systems. Constitutional reforms were explicitly designed to cut away the

roots of systematic corruption by limiting the government’s ability to create economic rents

through limiting entry and granting special economic privileges.

       Republican and Federalists in the 1790s, Whigs and Democrats in the 1840s, were just as

concerned with venal corruption as the Progressive would be in the first decade of the 20th

century. But venal corruption was not the most dangerous problem facing America before the

Civil War. Tyranny and slavery were all around the world of the early 19th century. France went

from absolute monarchy, to revolution, to dictatorship, and back to monarchy. Spain’s New

World empire collapsed in a wave of revolutions, many inspired by the United State’s example.

New world revolutionary governments often adopted constitutions explicitly modeled on the

United States: checks and balances and separation of powers included. But tyranny, not liberty,

was typically the fruit of revolution in Latin and South America. The national and state

governments probably never had truly systematically corrupt governments (the Albany Regency

included), but Americans feared that any movement away from balanced government would

bring, with Polybian certainty, a erosion of republican government and the rise of tyranny and

slavery.

       By 1890, however, not only was the American experiment in limited government a

demonstrable success, but the country’s institutions had persisted through a bloody Civil War,

liberty intact, and chattel slavery ended. Fear of tyranny and slavery was justifiably receding. A

modern industrial economy and the world’s largest integrated market posed a new set of

problems for governments. After tentative first steps at regulation in the 1870s and 1880s, the

national government effloresced in the first half of the twentieth century, as the papers in this

volume show so clearly. Giving the national government control over food and drugs would



                                                 41
have seemed insane to the founding fathers, Federalist and Republican. Such regulation opened

up vistas of rent creation beyond the imagination of James I or Charles II.

       Yet, for all the fear of corruption that filled the rhetoric of Progressive reformers, the

corruption documented so ably in this volume is distinctly venal corruption. The Progressives

were not afraid that a faction within government would use the creation of economic privileges

to seize control of the government. They were concerned that economic interests were using

their growing size to wrest concessions from governments. They worried about the efficiency of

American government, about the quality of representation, of equity, access, and fairness. They

worried that economics corrupted politics. They did not worry about tyranny and slavery.

       The landmark accomplishment of the western democracies in the 19th and 20th century

has been the creation of stable limited government. No society with a systematically corrupt

political system has limited government. The economic system is always at risk, entry is limited,

competition is fettered, and economic policies are shaped by politicians to maintain their

political control of the government. Crony capitalism is not just a manifestation of venal

corruption, it is a symptom of systematic corruption. Developing countries do not have markets

that work well, because the free entry and competition that are necessary to making impersonal

markets work cannot flourish when entry is limited to create the privileges that hold the political

system together. What lessons does the United States have to teach about corruption? The

fundamental lesson is how to construct a government that does not depend on manipulation of

the economy for its continued existence.




                                                 42
1. “In the process, the rhetoric of corruption emerged as the common grammar of politics, so
overwhelming that it became difficult to discuss public questions in any other language. The age
of Jefferson bequeathed to the United States an obsession with corruption that still deeply colors
the way we think about politics.” Murrin, 1994, p. 104.

2.Shleifer and Vishny, 1993, p. 599. For other treatments of corruption see Klitgaard, 1988;
Rose-Ackerman, 1978; and Clague, 2003.

3. “These widely voiced fears for the fate of the English constitution, “the mighty ruin of a once
noble fabrick,” were not simply the bombastic expressions of revolutionary-minded men. They
represented the rational and scientific conclusions of considered social analysis. For all of its
rhetorical exaggeration, the ideology of Whig radicalism, embraced by Americans of varying
political persuasions and at every social level, was grounded in the best, most enlightened
knowledge of the eighteenth century; it was this grounding that gave the Whig ideology much of
its persuasive force. When the American Whigs described the English nation and government as
eaten away by “corruption,” they were in fact using a technical term of political science, rooted
in the writings of classical antiquity, made famous by Machiavelli, developed by the classical
republicans of seventeenth-century England, and carried into the eighteenth-century by nearly
everyone who laid claim to knowing anything about politics.” Wood, 1969, p. 32.

4.Pocock’s work is fundamental for understanding the evolution of ideas about balanced
government and corruption. The argument is completely developed in The Machiavellian
Moment.

5. Aristotle appreciated venal corruption as well. “The conclusion is evident: that governments
which have a regard to the common interests are constituted in accordance with strict principles
of justice, and are therefore true forms; but those which regard only the interests of the rulers are
all defective and perverted forms.” Aristotle, Politics, Book III, 1279a, p. 71.

6.We speak of a persons with a hearty constitution or with a fragile constitutions. Constitutions
were like bodies. “Like their contemporaries in England and like their predecessors for centuries
before, the colonists at the beginning of the Revolutionary controversy understood by the word
‘constitution’ not, as we would have it, a written document or even an unwritten but deliberately
contrived design of government and specification of rights beyond the power of ordinary
legislation to alter; they thought of it, rather as the constituted – that is, existing – arrangement of
governmental institutions, laws, and customs together with the principles and goals that animated
them. So John Adams wrote that a political constitution is like ‘the constitution of the human
body’; ‘certain contextures of the nerves, fibres, and muscles, or certain qualities of the blood
and juices’ some of which ‘may be properly called stamina vitae, or essentials and fundamentals
of the constitution; parts without which life itself cannot be preserved a moment.” Bailyn, 1967,
p. 68, citing Adams, Works, III, pp. 478-79.
        “By constitution we mean, whenever we speak with propriety and exactness, that
assemblage of laws, institutions, and customs, derived from certain fixed principles of reason,
directed to certain fixed objects of public good, that compose the general system, according to
which the community hath agreed to be governed.” Bolingbroke, 1997, p. 88. Bolingbroke was

                                                  43
a leading Tory politician in the early 18th century and an articulate proponent of Commonwealth
ideas.

7.See Machiavelli, 1996, Book I, 16, 17, 18; Pocock, 1973, p. 129; and 1975, pp. 83-219.

8.Harrington concluded his “Epistle to the Reader,” which opens Oceana, with a theoretical
bent: “I dare promise you that if I have not made you a good flight, I have sprung you the best
quarry; for though the discourses be full of crudities, the model hath had perfect concoction.”
(1992, p. 2)

9. Pocock, 1975, p. 361

10.The text of the Answer is printed in Weston, 1965, along with the Political Catechism, a
popular document that interpreted the Answer in terms that would become a central part of Whig
theory.

11.“Charles, when he chose to exert himself, was extraordinarily clever. The role he played
during the plot period and during the Exclusion parliaments was that of a wise and skilled
politician... Charles came nearer establishing despotism than any member of his family, or
indeed any other English ruler.” Robbins, 1959, p. 27.

12.This group included Neville, Shaftesbury, Locke, Marvell, and Sidney. These men were
contemporaries of Harrington, who died enfeebled and in poor health in1677. The prominence
of Harrington in this section is a matter of exposition. Harrington ultimately had the most
influence, but he was only one of several important commonwealth thinkers. See Robbins, 1959,
for a in depth treatment of the men and their ideas.

13.I have drawn on Pocock “Machiavelli, Harrington, and English Political Ideologies” in this
section, 1973, pp. 104-147. The argument is developed further in The Machiavellian Moment,
1975, pp. 406-422.

14. Since the influential position of the aristocracy depended on their provision of military
service, the country could have an independent nobility or a professional army, but not both.
“For the power of Peerage and a Standing Army are like two buckets, the proportion that one
goes down, the other exactly goes up...” From A Letter from a Person of Quality to his Friend in
the Country, as quoted in Pocock, 1973, p. 118.

15.On the Bank of England and the financial revolution generally see Dickson, 1967; on the
bureaucratization of tax collection see Brewer, 1989 ; and for the national debt see North and
Weingast, 1989.

16.Mathias and O’Brian, 19??, review the history of government revenues and expenditures in
18th century Britain.

17.This is the theme of Weston, 1965.


                                               44
18.“It is certain then, that if ever such men as call themselves friends of the government, but are
real enemies of the constitution, prevail, they will make it a capital point of their wicked policy
to keep up a standing army.... To destroy British liberty with an army of Britons, is not a measure
so sure of success as some people may believe. To corrupt the Parliament is a slower, but might
prove a more effectual method; and two or three hundred mercenaries in the two Houses, if they
could be listed there, would be more fatal to the constitution, than ten times as many thousands
in red and in blue out of them. Parliaments are the true guardians of liberty. For this principally
they were instituted; and this is the principal article of that great and noble trust, which the
collective body of the people of Britain reposes in the representative. But then no slavery can be
so effectually brought and fixed upon us as parliamentary slavery. By the corruption of
Parliament, and the absolute influence of a King, or his minister, on the two Houses, we return to
that state, and are really governed by the arbitrary rule of one man.” Bolingbroke, 1997, pp. 92,
93-4.

19.See the essays on “Parliamentary Patronage,” pp. 46-56, and on “Placemen and Pensioners,”
pp. 118-126 in Namier and Brooke, 1964.

20.The Whigs were opposed political parties as a manifestation of corruption. To confuse
matters, At the same time one of the parties that developed in Britain was the Whig Party, which
is distinct from the Whig/Commonwealth thinkers. Bolingbroke, for example was a prominent
Tory politician as well as a prominent Whig philosopher.

21.Quotations from Wood, 1969, p. 11.

22. “Companies and joint-stocks are always established for the encouragement and benefit of
trade; though they always happen to mar and cramp trade.” Trenchard and Gordon, 1995, Cato’s
Letters, No. 9. December 31, 1720; p. 69.

23.Cato’s Letters, No. 3, November 19, 1720, pp. 44-5. The title of Letter No. 6, December 10,
1720, conveys the sentiments of Trenchard and Gordon: How easily the People are bubbled by
Deceivers. Further Caution against deceitful Remedies for the publick sufferings from the
wicked Execution of the South-Sea Scheme.

24.As Dickson summarized: “Finally, it is worth noting that while few aspects of the Financial
Revolution were of greater political and economic utility than the development of a market in
securities in London, none united contemporary opinion more against it. It was denounced as
inherently wicked and against the public interest. The phrase ‘stock-jobbing’, freely used to
denote every kind of activity in the market, had clear overtones of self-interest and corruption.
An anthology of comments by contemporaries would be remarkably uniform, indeed
monotonous, in its tone, and uninformative about how the market actually worked.” 1967, pp.
32-33.

25.Robbins, 1959, quotes from pages 381, 382, and 385.




                                                45
26.Wood, 1969, p. 10. The republican synthesis literature is neatly summarized and discussed in
Shallope 1972 and 1982.

27.The quotation is from a letter from Charles Lee to Robert Morris, Jan. 3, 1776, as quoted by
Wood, 1969, p. 32.

28.New Jersey, Constitution of 1776, Article 20. The New Jersey Constitution of 1844 read:
Article 3, Section 1: “1. The powers of the government shall be divided into three distinct
departments-the legislative, executive and judicial; and no person or persons belonging to, or
constituting one of these departments, shall exercise any of the powers properly belonging to
either of the others, except as herein expressly provided.”


29.This point is developed further in Wallis, 2004B, and Wallis and Weingast, 2004.

30.Joseph Galloway to the Continental Congress, as quoted by Jensen, 1940, p. 66, quoting John
Adam’s Notes on Debates, Works of John Adams, 2:372.

31.“Report on the Public Credit” American State Papers, Finance, Vol I, p. 15. See Ferguson,
1961, for an analysis of how constitutional issues and the public debt interacted in Hamilton’s
thinking.

32.American State Papers, Finance, Vol. I, p. 90.

33.Hamilton wrote “The latter [Randolph], expressly admits, that if there is anything in the bill
which is not warranted by the Constitution, it is the clause of incorporation.
          Now it appears to the Secretary of the Treasury [Hamilton] that this general principle is
inherent in the very definition of government, and essential to every step of the progress to be
made by that of the United States, namely: That every power vested in a government is in its
nature sovereign, and includes by force of the term, a right to employ all the means requisite and
fairly applicable to the attainment of the ends of such power, and which are not precluded by
restrictions and exceptions specified in the Constitution, or not immoral, or not contrary to the
essential ends of political society.” Hamilton’s letter to Washington on the Constitutionality of a
National Bank, McKee, 1934, p. 101, emphasis in the original.

34. “the success of the Federalist Party in gaining control of all three branches of the national
government called into question the fundamental premise of the Madisonian federalism of 1787-
8: that durable factious majorities would be far less likely to coalesce at the national level of
politics....” Ferejohn, Rakove, and Riley, 2001, , p. 3.

35.“Yet even amid the presumed “paranoia” of the 1790s, with insidious motives being ascribed
all around, both Federalists and Republicans opted to seek advantage not through a strategy of
exit but rather by exploiting potential opportunities within the Constitution itself. Both parties
quickly discovered a strong incentive to convert the untested mechanism of presidential election
into an occasion for political innovation. In 1787 no one had expected the presidency to emerge


                                                46
as the crucial focus for national political competition, but by 1796, and even more so by 1800, it
was evident that control of the executive was essential to control of the government.” Ferejohn,
Rakove, and Riley, 2001, p. 7.

36.In particular see Hofstadter, 1969, p.80-86, and the third chapter “The Jeffersonians in
Opposition.”

37.“A final aspect of these essays is worth remark, since it represents a strain in Republican
thought which we encounter again and again: it is the effort to reduce the issue between the two
sides to a dispute over the merits of republican government. Today this seems a false question;
the issues of funding, assumption, the bank, taxation, and foreign policy seem real and
substantial enough without superimposing on them an artificial quarrel over a question of
monarchy and hereditary power which all but the tiniest handful of Americans agreed. But the
exaggerated passions of both sides can be understood if we remember that most politically
conscious Americans were acutely aware of being involved in a political experiment in
republicanism that was attended by difficulties of the most acute kind and that might face many
hidden and unpredictable pitfalls. Both sides were nervous about the stability of republicanism
in an extensive federal union pervaded by many differences of sensibility and interest.”
Hofstadter, 1968, p.p. 84-5. In this passage Hofstadter articulates the notion than any movement
away from the perfect balance is a move down a slippery slope “back towards monarchy and the
hereditary principle.” My only qualification to Hofstadter is his overemphasis on the fear of
monarchy relative to the fears of systematic corruption represented by the funding system.

38.John Taylor, A Definition of Parties, (1794), p. 2; cited in Hofstadter, 1968, p. 100.

39.In particular see McCoy, 1980, chapter Three, “Commerce and the Independent Republic,”
pp. 76-104. The opening chapters to McCoy lay out the Whig origins of Republican thought as
clearly as Banning, 1978. The essential role of corruption in McCoy’s analysis is captured in the
title to chapter One: “Social Progress and Decay in Eighteenth Century Thought.”

40.Wallis and Weingast, 2004, investigate the causes of federal inaction.

41.The history of government promotion of transportation improvements, federal, state, and
local, is Goodrich, 1960. Larson, 2001, supplements Goodrich’s study of the politics of federal
internal improvements. The history of banking is enormous. State banking is the subject of two
recent books by Bodenhorn, 2000 and 2003.

42.In the decade of the 1800s, New York averaged 18 incorporations per year, Ohio 1, Maryland
2, Pennsylvania 6, and New Jersey 4. In the 1830s, New York averaged 57, Ohio 43, Maryland
18, Pennsylvania 38, and New Jersey 18; Evans, 1948. There is a substantial historical and
legal literature on American corporations: Davis, 1961, Dodd, 1954, Hurst,1970, Handlin and
Handlin,1969, Seavoy, 1982, Maier, 1992 and 1993, Lamoreaux, 2004, and Dunlavy, 2004.

43.For state involvement in banking in the early 19th century see Wallis, Sylla, and Legler, 1994;
Sylla, Legler, and Wallis, 1987; and Bodenhorn, 2000 and 2003.

                                                47
44.Larson, 2001, p. 119.

45.Maier (1992), pp. 73-4.

46.See Handlin and Handlin, 1969, for a clear statement of how corporation policy in
Massachusetts was used to support private organizations.

47.See Bodenhorn, this volume, Seavoy, 1982, and Benson, 1961, for the political uses of bank
chartering in New York.

48.Wallis, Sylla, and Legler (1994) present a simple model of “fiscal interest” that explains why
some states chose to limit entry into banking in return for higher dividends on the bank stock
they owned. Pennsylvania consciously limited entry into banking. New Jersey created a
monopoly railroad, the Camden and Amboy, from which the state received substantial dividends
(Cadman, 1949). In Arkansas, two politically powerful families used a state bank for the same
purposes as the Albany Regency; Worley (1949 and 1950).

49.Eaton, 1824, p. p. 3-4, as quoted in Larson, 2001, p. 154. The quote is from Letters of
Wyoming, campaign pamphlets that began appearing in 1823, written by John Eaton, later
Jackson’s Secretary of War. “Eaton was constructing for Jackson our of older republican cloth a
coat of virtue and simplicity that made other candidates appear to be draped in ancient, British-
style corruption.” Larson, 2001, p. 155.

50.Jackson to Lewis, February 20, 1825; as quoted in Remini, 1981, p. 98.

51.See Remini, 1967, and Temin, 1969. The debate in economic history over the effects of the
Bank War, Jackson’s other economic policies, and the causes of the macroeconomic rages on.
For a summary of the literature, and a strong argument that Jackson’s domestic economic
policies contributed to the Panic of 1837, see Rousseau, 2003.

52. “It is to be regretted that the rich and powerful too often bend the acts of government to their
selfish purposes. Distinctions in society will always exist under every just government.... but
when the laws undertake to add to these natural and just advantages artificial distinctions, to
grant titles, gratuities, and exclusive privileges, to make the rich richer and the potent more
powerful, the humble members of society – the farmers, mechanics, and laborers – who have
neither the time nor the means of securing like favors to themselves, have a right to complain of
the injustice of their government. There are no necessary evils in government. Its evils exist
only in its abuses.
          If we can not at once, in justice to interest vested under improvident legislation, make
our government what it ought to be, we can at least take a stand against all new grants of
monopolies exclusive privileges, against any prostitution of our Government to the advancement
of the few at the expense of the many, and in favor of compromise and gradual reform in our
code of laws and system of political economy.” Jackson’s Veto Message, July 10, 1832,
Richardson, 1897, pp. 1153-4.



                                                48
53.From “Paper read to the Cabinet” in the Jackson Papers, L.C.; as quoted in Remini, 1967,
Bank War, p. 119.

54.Henry Clay’s speech on the “Removal of Deposits,” December 30, 1833. Register of
Debates, 21st Congress, 1st Session, p. 94.

55.Sprague colorfully expanded on the dangers of Jackson. “The people love their constitution,
their liberties, and themselves. They are always politically honest.... But they are not infallible...
oftentimes a military chieftain, having wrought real or fancied deliverance by successful battles
-- fervent gratitude, unbounded admiration, the best feelings of our nature, rush towards him... In
the paroxysm of their devotion, they are ready at his shrine to sacrifice their rights, their liberties,
their children, and themselves.” Senate Debate, 23rd Congress, 1st Session, on the Removal of
the Deposits, Register of Debates, pp. 386-87. January 29, 1834.

56.Hoftstader’s, 1968, is particularly illuminating on the rise of parties and the role played by
Martin Van Buren in the process of rationalizing the need for parties in a democracy.

57.See Wallis, Sylla, and Grinath, 2004, for a description of the default crisis and a discussion of
its causes. We explicitly consider the role played by naivete and corruption and find that most
states were neither.

58.By the 1830s most of the original states had experience with two or more state constitutional
conventions and the state ratifying conventions for the national constitution. Only North
Carolina and Massachusetts, stayed with their first constitution through the Civil War. By 1860,
states had written the following number of constitutions: Connecticut, 2; Delaware, 3; Georgia,
3; Maryland, 2; New Hampshire, 3; New Jersey, 2; New York, 3; Pennsylvania, 3; South
Carolina, 3; Vermont, 2; Virginia, 3. Of the new states: Kentucky, 2; Tennessee, 2; Maine was
part of Massachusetts until 1820 when it wrote a new constitution. In addition to the new
constitutions, there were several constitutional conventions that produced constitutions that were
not ratified by the voters.

59.Andrew Jackson’s first complaint in his veto of the proposed charter renewal for the Second
Bank of the United States was that the government wasn’t getting a good enough deal: “Every
monopoly and all exclusive privileges are granted at the expense of the public, which ought to
receive a fair equivalent... If our Government must sell monopolies, it would seem to be its duty
to take nothing less that their full value, and if gratuities must be made once in fifteen of twenty
years let them not be bestowed on the subjects of a foreign government nor upon a designated
and favored class of men in our own country.” Veto Message, July 10, 1833, Richardson, 1897,
pp. 1140-1141.

60.The history of these constitutional changes in presented in Wallis, 2005. The general
relationship between public finance and corporations is discussed in Wallis, 2003. For a history
of incorporation laws see Evans, 1948, for and a larger discussion of the 19th century corporation
see Hurst, 1970.


                                                  49
61.See Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor, this volume, for a discussion of social welfare in the New
Deal and the end of corruption in relief administration.

62.For a comparison on corporate chartering in France and the United States, see Lamoreaux and
Rosenthal, 2004. Their point that the options open to structure firms in France was much more
flexible than the options open to firms in the United States is a key argument in the following
section.

63.For a discussion of general acts see Dunlavy, 2004; Million, 1990; and Mark, 2000. The
actual structure of corporations under general acts is an area of which legal and economic
historians are almost completely ignorant. Dunlavy’s paper and her current project examining a
large sample of corporate charters, is beginning to shed light on this critical area.

64.For the history of New Jersey corporations, see Cadman, 1949. For the specifics of New
Jersey’s changing corporation policy, see Grandy, 1989.

65.“By the end of the merger wave, revenue from incorporation fees and franchise taxes
represented more than 60 percent of State Fund revenues. The state budget moved solidly into
the black by 1890 and stayed there into the next century. By 1902 New Jersey had eliminated its
bonded debt and had abolished its state property tax.” Grandy, 1989, pp. 681-3.

66.“New Jersey charters represented more than 60 percent of firm disappearances and almost 80
percent of the capitalization of these combinations. Half of John Moody’s 318 “industrial trusts”
bore New Jersey charters – including all of his seven “greater industrial trusts.” Grandy, 1989, p.
678. See Lamoreaux, 1985, and Nelson, 1959, for more detailed history of the merger
movement.

67.This “trust” is historically relative; Americans retain a profound ability to mistrust
government.




                                                 50
References

Aristotle. 1996. The Politics and the Constitution of Athens. Edited by Stephen Everson, New
        York: Cambridge University Press.

Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press, 1967.

Banning, Lance. The Jeffersonian Persuasion. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1978).

Benson, Lee. The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy: New York as a Test Case. (Princeton:
      Princeton University Press, 1961).

Bodenhorn, Howard. A History of Banking in Antebellum America. (Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 2000).

Bodenhorn, Howard. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. (Oxford:
      Oxford University Press, 2003).

Bolingbroke. 1997. Political Writings. Edited by David Armitrage, New York: Cambridge
       University Press.

Brewer, John. 1989. The Sinews of Power: War, Money, and the English State, 1688-1783. New
      York: Knopf.

Cadman, John W. The Corporation in New Jersey: Business and Politics, 1791-1875.
     (Cambridge; Harvard University Press, 1949).

Callender, Guy Stevens. “The Early Transportation and Banking Enterprises of the States.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. XVII, no. 1 (November,1902), 111-162.

Clague, Christopher. “The International Campaign against Corruption: An Institutionalist
       Perspective,” in Heckelman and Coates, ed. Collective Choice: Essays in Honor of
       Mancur Olson, (New York: Springer, 2003).

Davis, John P. 1961. Corporations: A Study of the Development of the Origin and Development
       of Great Business Combinations and their Relation to the Authority of the State. New
       York: Capricorn.

De Toqueville, Alexis. 1966. Democracy in America. Translated by George Lawrence, New
      York: Harper and Row.

DeWitt, Benjamin Parke.1915. The Progressive Movement: A Non-partisan, Comprehensive
      Discussion of Current Tendencies in American Politics. Reprinted by The University of

                                              51
       Washington Press, Seattle, 1968

Dickson, P.G.M.. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England. London: Macmillan, St. Martin’s
      Press.

Dodd, Edwin Merrick, 1954. American Business Corporations until 1860; with Special
      Reference to Massachusetts. Cambridge; Harvard University Press.

Dunlavy, Colleen A. “From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth Century Shareholder Voting
      Rights and Theories of the Corporation,” in Crossing Corporate Boundaries: History,
      Politics, and Culture, in Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia, eds. (New York: Oxford
      University Press, 2004).

Evans, George Heberton. Business Incorporations in the United States, 1800-1943. (NBER,
       Baltimore: Waverly Press, 1948).

Ferguson, E. James. 1961. The Power of the Purse: A History of American Public Finance,
       1776-1790. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Ferejohn, John, Jack N. Rakove, and Jonathan Riley. 2001. Constitutional Culture and
       Democratic Rule. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fishback, Price V. and Shawn Everett Kantor. 2000. A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins
       of Worker Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Goodrich, Carter. Government Promotion of American Canals and Railroads. (New York:
      Columbia University Press, 1960).

Goodrich, Carter, "The Revulsion Against Internal Improvements." Journal of Economic
      History, X, (November 1950),145-169.

Grandy, Chrisopher. 1989. “New Jersey Corporate Chartermongering, 1875-1929.” Journal of
      Economic History, 49 (September), 677-692.

Handlin, Oscar and Mart Flug Handlin. 1969. Commonwealth: A Study of the Role of
       Government in the American Economy: Massachusetts, 1774-1861. Cambridge: Belknap
       Press, 1969.

Harrington, James. 1992. The Commonwealth of Oceana and A System of Politics. Edited by
       J.G.A. Pocock. New Yorlk: Cambridge University Press.

Hofstadter, Richard. The Idea of a Party System. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1969.


                                              52
Hurst, James Willard, 1970. The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation in the Law of the
        United States, 1780-1970. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.

Jensen, Merrill. 1940. The Articles of Confederation. Reprinted 1970. Madison: University of
       Wisconsin Press.

Klitgaard, R. Controlling Corruption. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988).

Kruman, Marc W. Between Authority and Liberty: State Constitution Making in Revolutionary
     America. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997).

Lamoreaux, Naomi. “Parnerships, Corporations, and the Limits on Contractual Freedom in U.S.
      History: An Essay in Economics, Law, and Culture,” in Crossing Corporate Boundaries:
      History, Politics, and Culture, in Kenneth Lipartito and David B. Sicilia, eds. (New
      York: Oxford University Press, 2004).

-----. 1985. The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895-1904. New York:
         Cambridge University Press.

Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, “Legal Regime and Business’s Organizational
      Choice.” NBER Working paper 10288, February, 2004.

Larson, John Lauritz. 2001. Internal Improvement: National Public Works and the Promise of
       Popular Government in the Early United States. (Chapel Hill: University of North
       Carolina Press).

Machiavelli, Niccolo. 1996. Discourses on Livy. Translated by Mansfield and Tarcov. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Maier, Pauline, 1993 “The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation.” William and
       Mary Quarterly, 3d series, 50, 1 (January 1993), 51-84.

Maier, Pauline, “The Debate Over Incorporations: Massachusetts in the Early Republic,” in
       Conrad Wright, ed. Massachusetts an the New Nation. (Boston: Massachusetts Historical
       Society, 1992).

Malone, Laurence J. Opening the West: Federal Internal Improvements Before 1860.
      (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1998).

Mathias, Peter and Patrick O’Brien, 1976. “"Taxation in Britain and France, 1715-1810: A
      Comparison of the Social and Economic Incidence of Taxes collected for the Central
      Government.” Journal of European Economic History.

McCormack, Richard L.1981. “The Discovery the Business Corrupts Politics.” The American

                                               53
       Historical Review, 86 (April), 247-274.

McCoy, Drew R. 1980. Elusive Republic: Political Economy in Jeffersonian America. Chapel
     Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

McKee, Samuel Jr., ed. 1934. Alexander Hamilton’s Papers on Public Credit Commerce and
     Finance. New York: Columbia University Press.

Million, David. 1990. “Theories of the Corporation.” Duke Law Journal, 201-262.

Murrin, John M. “Escaping Perfidious Albion: Federalism, Fear of Corruption, and
       Democratization of Corruption in Postrevolutionary America.” in Richard K. Matthews,
       ed., Virtue, Corruption, and Self-Interest. Bethlehem: Lehigh University Press, 1994.

Namier, Sir Lewis and John Brooke, 1964. The House of Commons, 1754-1790. London:
      Parliament Trust.

Nelson, Ralph L. 1959. Merger Movements in American Industry, 1895-1956. Princeton:
       Princeton University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
       Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England.”
       Journal of Economic History, 49 (December), 189-210.

Pocok, J.G.A. Virtue, Commerce, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

-----. 1977. ed. The Political Works of James Harrington. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.

-----. 1975. The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic
         Republican Tradition. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

-----. 1973. Politics, Language, and Time. New York: Atheneum.

-----. 1987. Ancient Constitution and the Feudal Law. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Pocock, J.G.A. “Virtue and Commerce in the Eighteenth Century.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
      History 3 (72) p 124-5.

Polybius.1962. The Histories of Polybius, vol. 1. Translated from the text of F. Hultsch by
       Evelyn S. Shuckburgh. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Richardson, James D. 1897. The Messages and Papers of the Presidents. Washington: Bureau of
       National Literature.

                                                 54
Remini, Robert V. 1967. Andrew Jackson and the Bank War. New York: W.W. Norton.

Robbins, Caroline. 1959. The Eighteenth-Century Commonwealthman. Cambridge: Harvard
      University Press.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan. Corruption: A Study in Political Economy, (New York: Academic Press,
      1978).

Rousseau, Peter. 2002. “Jacksonian Monetary Policy, Specie Flows, and the Panic of 1837.”
      Journal of Economic History, 62 (June), 457-488.

Seavoy, Ronald E. The Origins of the American Business Corporation, 1784-1855. (Westport:
      Greenwood Press, 1982).

Shalhope, Robert E. 1972. “Toward a Republican Synthesis: The Emergence of an
      Understanding on Republicanism in American Historiography.” The William and Mary
      Quarterly, 29 (January), 49-80.

-----. 1982. “Republicanism and Early American Historiography.” The William and Mary
        Quarterly, 39 (April), 334-356.

Shleifer and Vishny, “Corruption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 3, (1993), 599-617.

Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations.

Sylla, Richard, John B. Legler, and John Joseph Wallis. "Banks and State Public Finance in the
        New Republic." Journal of Economic History, 47, 2 (June, 1987.), 391-403.

Temin, Peter. 1969. The Jacksonian Economy. New York: W. W. Norton and Company.

Trenchard, John and Thomas Gordon. 1995. Cato’s Letters. Edited by Ronald Hamowry.
      Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.

Wallis, John Joseph, Arthur Grinath, and Richard Sylla, “Debt, Default, and Revenue Structure.”
        NBER Working Paper and mimeo, 2004.

Wallis, John Joseph, Richard Sylla and John Legler. “The Interaction of Taxation and Regulation
        in Nineteenth Century Banking.” In Goldin and Libecap, eds. The Regulated Economy: A
        Historical Approach to Political Economy, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994,
        pp. 121-144).

Wallis, John Joseph, 2000, “American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to 1990,”
        Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 1, (January, 2000), 61-82 .


                                              55
-----. 2001. “History of the Property Tax,” in Property Taxation and Local Government Finance,
         Wallace E. Oates, ed., (Cambridge: Lincoln Institute, 2001), 123, 147.

-----. 2003. "Market Augmenting Government? The State and the Corporation in 19th Century
         America" in Omar Azfar and Charles Cadwell, ed. Market-Augmenting Government: The
         Institutional Foundations for Prosperity. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
         2003).

-----. 2003A. “The Property Tax as a Coordination Device: Financing Indiana’s Mammoth
         System of Internal Improvements.” Explorations in Economic History. (July 2003).

-----. 2003B. “The Public Promotion of Private Interest (Groups)” Collective Choice: Essays in
         Honor of Mancur Olson, Jac Heckelman and Dennis Coates, ed. Springer-Verlag.

-----. 2004. “American Government and the Promotion of Economic Development In the
         National Era, 1790 to 1860,” forthcoming in Fishback, ed.

-----. 2005. “Constitutions, Corporations, and Corruption: American States and Constitutional
         Change, 1842 to 1852.” NBER Working Paper #10451. Forthcoming in the Journal of
         Economic History.

-----. The NBER/Maryland State Constitution Project, http://129.2.168.174/constitution/.

Wallis, John Joseph and Barry Weingast. 2004. “Equilibrium Federal Impotence: Why the States
        and Not the American National Government Financed Infrastructure Investment in the
        Antebellum Era.” Mimeo.

Weston, Corinne Comstock. 1965. English Constitutional Theory and the House of Lords, 1556-
      1832. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Wood, Gordon S. 1969. The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787. Chapel Hill:
      University of North Carolina Press.

Worley, Ted R. “The Control of the Real Estate Bank of the State of Arkansas, 1836-1855.” The
      Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 37, 3 (December 1950), 403-426.




                                              56
