NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESOLVING THE PUZZLE OF THE
UNDERISSUANCE OF NATIONAL BANK NOTES
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph R. Mason
Working Paper 10951
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10951
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Resolving the Puzzle of the Underissuance of National Bank Notes
Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason
NBER Working Paper No. 10951
December 2004
JEL No. E5, E42, G21, G28, N11, N21
ABSTRACT
The puzzle of underissuance of national bank notes disappears when one disaggregates data, takes
account of regulatory limits, and considers differences in opportunity costs. Banks with poor lending
opportunities maximized their issuance. Other banks chose to limit issuance. Redemption costs do
not explain cross-sectional variation in issuance and the observed relationship between note issuance
and excess reserves is inconsistent with the redemption risk hypothesis of underissuance. National
banks did not enter primarily to issue national bank notes, and a “pure arbitrage” strategy of
chartering a national bank only to issue national bank notes would not have been profitable. Indeed,
new entrants issued less while banks exiting were often maximum issuers. Economies of scope
between note issuing and deposit banking included shared overhead costs and the ability to reduce
costs of mandatory minimum reserve and capital requirements.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Joseph R. Mason
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
3141 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
joe.mason@drexel.edu

I. Introduction
During the Civil War, the federal government began to charter national banks.
These banks enjoyed the privilege of being licensed to issue national bank notes, which
were default risk-free liabilities of the banks, backed 111% by U.S. Treasury bonds
deposited by issuing banks at the U.S. Treasury.1 The creation of these new banks,
combined with a 10% annual tax on state bank note issues, soon resulted in the
supplanting of state banks’ notes by the new national bank notes.
Scholars have long puzzled over the observation that national banks did not take
greater advantage of the authority to issue notes. The aggregate supply of notes never
reached its maximum permissible level, despite calculations measuring the profitability
of allocating capital toward bank note supply collateralized by bonds (e.g., as derived by
Cagan 1965) indicating that national bank note issuance was more profitable than the
typical profit earned by allocating bank capital toward lending funded by a combination
of deposits and capital. Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 23) write:
Before 1890 the amount outstanding ranged around 20 per cent of the possible
maximum, by 1900 it had risen to about 28 per cent, and by World War I to about
80 percent. The maximum was in fact approached only in the twenties, when for
the first time U.S. bonds deposited to secure circulation and government deposits
(which also required such security) nearly equaled the total of eligible bonds.
Before 1905, the capital stock of national banks set narrower limits to their
maximum possible note issue than did the total of eligible bonds, but the actual
issue did not approach this lower limit either. Thereafter, the capital stock of
national banks exceeded the total of eligible bonds and hence was not the
effective limit on note issue. Yet, despite the failure to use fully the possibilities
of note issue, the published market prices of government bonds bearing the
circulation privilege were apparently always low enough to make note issue
profitable except in the years 1884 to 1891. The fraction of the maximum issued
fluctuated with the profitability of issue, but the fraction was throughout lower
than might have been expected. We have no explanation for this puzzle.
1

After 1874, banks also had to deposit a 5% minimum cash redemption fund at the Treasury in
addition to these bonds.

1

Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965) argued that profits from note issue
were large on the margin, because bond issues to back note issues remained cheap and
because banks could easily leverage their capital devoted to those bond purchases.2 In
their discussions of potential constraints on bank note issues, they pointed to the more
than adequate aggregate supply of bonds, and while they recognized that regulations
constrained bank note issuing relative to bank capital, they argued that bank capital was
not a constraint because its aggregate amount exceeded the amount required for
increased note issues.
The reasoning typically advanced to explain low national bank note issuance
posits hidden transacting costs, either in the form of physical note redemption costs or the
costs of maintaining cash balances in support of bank note issues. Authors like Bell
(1912), Cagan (1965), Goodhart (1965), Cagan and Schwartz (1991), Duggar and Rost
(1969), and Champ, Wallace, and Weber (1992) argue that redemption costs may have
been large enough to explain bankers’ reluctance to issue despite the seeming
profitability from expanding the supply of notes.
James (1978) was the first to suggest that aggregate calculations, like those
provided by Cagan and Friedman and Schwartz, might be providing a misleading picture
of national bank note profitability. He showed that cross-sectional variation in the
regional supply of bank notes was large and consistent with regional variation in the
opportunity cost of note issuance (that is, regional variation in the profitability of bank

2

Cagan and Schwartz (1991) point out that one can restate the puzzle of underissuance as the
puzzling absence of a large premium on U.S. Treasury bonds (i.e., lower bond yields). High
profits from note issuing should have led national banks to bid up the price of bonds (in order to
satisfy legal backing requirements for note issues), which should have raised the premium on
bonds, and thus eliminated allegedly excess profits.

2

lending). In James’ view, at least some of the puzzle of low bank note issuance was
explicable by the high profitability of bank lending in the South and West, where note
issuance was relatively low. But James’ explanation was not a complete one. After
1874, there were no regional limits on note issuance, suggesting that banks in the East
(where loan profitability was relatively low) should have substantially increased their
outstanding notes. Why did the banks in the East not issue more notes?
Hetherington (1990) showed that some of the time variation in the extent of note
issue could be explained by changes in rules governing note issues. But that approach
did not explain the puzzle posed by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965);
like James’ (1978) explanation of cross-state variation in note issuance, Hetherington’s
(1990) explanation of some of the variation in supply over time did not address the
persistent underissue of bank notes: the level of bank notes remained far below its
maximum despite the high profitability of note issuing.
In this paper, we test the various theories of note underissuance with
microeconomic data. We are able to resolve much of the puzzle of note underissuance by
disaggregating data on national banks and analyzing individual banks’ note issuing
incentives and constraints. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965) compared
average profitability of note issuing and lending, and considered the aggregate supply of
bonds and the aggregate amount of bank capital. But that is not the correct way to take
account of regulatory constraints on note issues. It is possible that regulatory limits on
bank note issues were binding on many individual banks. If, as James argued, some
banks faced high opportunity costs (leading them to limit note issuing), and if other banks
earning lower profits from lending were issuing the maximum amount of notes that they

3

were permitted to issue by law, then it may be that there is no puzzle of “underissuance.”
We take account of the legal constraints facing individual banks that limited their
maximum (and minimum) permissible note issuance.
In fact, we will show that many banks (61% of national banks in 1880 and 21% in
1900) were at a “corner solution” (issuing the maximum amount of notes that they could
legally issue), while other banks (which we are able to identify as banks with observably
higher opportunity costs) chose to issue less than their legal maxima. Thus, the puzzle of
national bank note issuance turns out to be largely an artifact of aggregation error.
We develop a data set linking individual bank note issuing behavior, the specific
legal constraints on note issuing faced by each bank, and the profitability of bank lending.
Our dataset consists of individual bank data for all reporting national banks in 1880 and
1900. Our measures of the opportunities for lending include banks’ characteristics as well
as characteristics of the economic environment (county or state) in which banks operated.
Section II models the equilibrium supply and demand for national bank notes, and
describes the legal limits on note supply. Section III reviews our data and summarizes the
note issuing behavior of national banks in 1880 and 1900. Section IV tests and rejects
Cagan’s (1965) redemption risk theory of underissuance. Section V documents and
explains the absence of pure note issuing “arbitrage” strategies by national banks; that is,
we show why national banks did not enter solely with the purpose of issuing notes.
Section VI provides Tobit regression analysis of the extent of individual bank note issues
relative to their maximum potential level in 1880 and 1900. The results lend support to
James’ opportunity cost theory of note issuing. Section VII analyzes patterns of entry and
exit by national banks between 1880 and 1900. Entry and exit patterns confirm the

4

findings in Sections V and VI, which indicate that note issuing was not a primary profit
center in U.S. banking. Section VIII concludes. Overall, we find that a combination of
legal restrictions on maximum note issuing and banks’ opportunity costs explain the
extent of bank note issuing in a manner consistent with bank profit maximization.

II. Supply and Demand for National Bank Notes
The quantity of national bank notes in circulation should be determined by supply
and demand in the market for bank notes. While there were legislative limits placed on
the aggregate quantity of notes outstanding and on the geographic distribution of note
issuing, those aggregate limits were never binding constraints on individual bank
issuance. Prior to 1874, whenever the amount of notes came close to reaching the
maximum allowable supply, the law was changed to accommodate more note issues. In
1874, the law was changed to remove any aggregate limits on note issues, although the
limited supply of U.S. Treasury bonds (to serve as 111% collateral for note issues)
effectively placed a non-binding upper bound on the potential supply of notes.
National bank notes were essentially perfect substitutes for transactions purposes
with U.S. notes (greenbacks) and coins, and traded at par with those alternative
transacting media (except briefly during 1873, when the special value to banks of holding
greenbacks, which were a legal reserve currency, led their value to temporarily exceed
that of bank notes – see Friedman and Schwartz 1963, pp. 21-2). National bank notes
and greenbacks were always inframarginal sources of transacting media whose quantity
was set by suppliers and who were unresponsive to shifts in the demand for transacting

5

media; increases in demand for transacting media on the margin were met by changes in
the supply of specie currency (see Calomiris 1988, 1994, Hetherington 1990).
Equilibrium in international markets under the classical gold standard
simultaneously determined gold-denominated interest rates and specie flows to
equilibrate the markets for goods and money (Calomiris and Hubbard 1996). The supply
of national bank notes adjusted endogenously to the level of interest rates set in the
money market. Calomiris (1988, 1994) shows that (so long as the supply of Treasury
bonds to back national bank notes was greater than the amount demanded for that
purpose) the supply of national bank notes for banks that were not at a corner solution
should have been determined by (a) the yield on government bonds, (b) the profitability
of bank lending, and (c) the tax rate charged on national bank note issues. The supply of
notes, in this model, is set by the profit-maximizing choices of national banks about
whether to allocate marginal capital toward (a) the business of deposit taking and lending
or (b) the business of producing national bank notes, backed by government bond
purchases. In any empirical model of cross-sectional differences in note issuance (in
particular, for our sample of national banks in 1880) the profitability of lending is the
primary influence that should predict cross-sectional differences in the propensity to issue
notes, since the taxation rate and market yield on bonds are the same for all banks.
Of course, this model does not apply on the margin to banks that are at a corner
solution, either because of legal limits on maximum issues that require them to issue less
than they would like, or legal limits on minimum issues that require them to issue more
than they would like. Among banks issuing the maximum permissible amount of notes,
cross-sectional variation in bank characteristics should have no explanatory power for

6

marginal note issuing, although those cross-sectional characteristics should help explain
which banks are at a corner solution. Thus, before applying the model to individual bank
data, one must take account of the various limits on note issuing that might constrain
banks to operate at a corner solution.
Prior to 1882, the limits on note issues relating to capital for national banks were a
complex function of the capital levels and bond holdings of banks, and these limits varied
by the size of the bank and (due to grandfathering) by the date the bank was chartered.
These constraints are summarized in Table 1, and are based on National Monetary
Commission (1910). A bank chartered before March 1865 could not issue notes in
excess of 90% of the bank’s paid in capital. A bank chartered from March 1865 through
July 1870 was governed by the following limits on note issue relative to capital: A bank
with capital less than $500,000 could issue up to 90% of capital; a bank with capital of
between $500,000 and $1,000,000 could issue up to 80% of capital; a bank with capital
of between $1,000,000 and $3,000,000 could issue up to 75% of capital; and a bank with
capital in excess of $3,000,000 could issue up to 60% of capital. Banks chartered after
July 12, 1870 were governed by the following limits: No bank could issue more than
$500,000 in notes; banks with capital less than $500,000 could issue up to 90% of
capital; and banks with capital between $500,000 and $625,000 could issue up to 80% of
capital. In 1882, those requirements were supplanted by a single measure of maximum
note issue of 90% capital for all banks. In 1900 that restriction was raised to 100% of
capital. (The complexity of regulations on the maximum preceding 1882 is the primary
reason why previous literature has focused nearly exclusively on the period after that
year.) National banks that also had outstanding state bank issues (dating from the time

7

before they became national banks) had to include those notes in any measure of total
permissible note issues.
All banks also faced an effective minimum note issuing requirement, since all
national banks were required to maintain government bond holdings of at least $30,000
or an amount equal to one third of bank capital, whichever was higher. (That requirement
was reduced to 25% of capital for banks with capital less than $150,000 in 1882.) To the
extent that a bank was constrained to hold the minimum amount of government bonds,
issuing notes backed by those bonds would have always been profitable (Hetherington
1990). As we shall show below, these ceilings and floors on permissible note issues were
often binding on individual banks.

III. Data on Individual Banks
Our dataset consists of hand-collected information on 2,094 national banks in
1880, and 3,879 national banks in 1900. We also collected data about the states and
counties in which those banks resided. Data on counties are available only for decadal
census dates. We chose 1880 as a starting date for several reasons. First, by 1880, it is
reasonable to assume that banks had adjusted to the effects of the changes on note issuing
limits in 1874. Second, in January 1879 the U.S. resumed convertibility of dollars into
gold, an event that had been anticipated for several years prior to that time (Calomiris
1988). Analyzing note supply after resumption of convertibility simplifies the discussion
by permitting one to abstract from various complications associated with deflationary
expectations during the 1870s (Calomiris 1988). Third, as the above quotation from
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) shows, they regard the underissuance of national bank

8

notes during the periods before 1884 and after 1891 as especially puzzling. According to
Cagan (1965, p. 93), profitability on note issuing rose during the 1890s and accelerated as
the result of the Gold Standard Act of March 1900. Like 1880, 1900 was a time of
relatively high profitability from note issuing; both years have been viewed by previous
scholars as times of puzzling underissuance of profitable national bank notes.
The dependent variable we analyze is the extent to which banks issued their
maximum permissible amount of national bank notes. Specifically, the dependent
variable, Issue Propensity (IP), is defined as:

IP =

(Actual Notes – Minimum Required Issuance) /
(Maximum Permissible Notes – Minimum Required Issuance)

Table 2 provides definitions of all the variables used in this study. Table 3
provides summary statistics. As shown in Table 3, in 1880 the median value of IP is
0.9889 and the mean is 0.8043. Fully 75% of national banks in 1880 have values of IP
greater than 0.7460. We assume that banks with IP greater than 98% are effectively at
their maximum amount of note issue (given potential rounding effects from the minimum
denomination of bond issues and random variation in outstanding notes associated with
redemptions). Thus, we assign all banks with a value of IP greater than or equal to 0.98 a
truncated value of IP equal to 0.98. Similarly, we assign banks with a value of IP less
than 0.02 a truncated value of IP equal to 0.02. Our truncated measure of IP, therefore,
varies between 0.02 and 0.98.3

3

In 1880, 5 banks did not issue any notes at all. Another 117 banks issued fewer than supported by the
minimum required bond holdings. We classify all of these banks as minimum issuers. In 1900, 181 banks

9

Using 0.98 as our truncated measure of maximum note issuance, 61% of national
banks in 1880 were issuing the maximum amount of notes permitted. In other words,
61% of national banks were at a maximum corner solution in their issuing of national
bank notes. Another 7% of national banks in 1880 were at a minimum corner solution
(with a truncated value of IP equal to 0.02). The remaining 32% of national banks in
1880 had IP values between the truncated minimum and maximum values. Figure 1 plots
a histogram of the distribution of the truncated value of IP for all banks in 1880. Figure 2
plots a histogram of IP for the 32% of national banks that were neither at the maximum
nor at the minimum in 1880.
Table 3 shows that the distribution of IP changed considerably by 1900. In 1900
the median value of IP is 0.0913 and the mean is 0.2919. Only 25% of national banks in
1900 have values of IP greater than 0.7600. Again using 0.02 as our truncated measure of
minimum note issuance, 49% of national banks in 1900 were issuing the minimum
amount of notes permitted. In other words, 49% of national banks were at a minimum
corner solution in their issuing of national bank notes. Another 21% of national banks in
1990 were at a maximum corner solution (with a truncated value of IP equal to 0.98). The
remaining 30% of national banks in 1900 had IP values between the truncated minimum
and maximum values. Figure 3 plots a histogram of the distribution of the truncated value
of IP for all banks in 1900. Figure 4 plots a histogram of IP for the 30% of national banks
that were neither at the maximum nor at the minimum in 1900.

did not issue any notes at all. Another 948 banks issued less than the minimum required bond holdings
suggest. We also classify these banks as minimum issuers. In 1880, 67 banks issue at levels slightly above
their statutory maximum. In 1900, 5 banks slightly exceeded the maximum issue allowed. We classify all
72 of these banks as maximum issuers. In most instances, exceptional cases are explicable in terms of some
combination of the following factors: small size, recent startup, or preexisting state bank note issues that
the regulators apparently chose to ignore.

10

Figure 5 plots the geographical distribution of national banks in 1880 and 1900
according to whether they were minimum issuers, maximum issuers, or other issuers
(which we call “discretionary” issuers). We divide the United States into six regions: the
Middle Atlantic (MIDATL), the Midwest (MIDWEST), the South (SOUTH), Appalachia
(APPAL), the West (WEST), and the Northeast (EAST). Given the high physical costs of
operating banks in cities, and potentially more profitable lending opportunities there, we
expected major cities’ national banks to display less propensity to issue bank notes.
Banks in New York City (NYC) are separately considered. We also consider the more
general category of urban (URBAN) banks (defined as banks located in the major cities
of New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, New Orleans, or San Francisco).
Figure 5 shows that there were average differences across regions in IP in 1880,
and that those differences also appear in 1900. In each of these years, New England, the
Middle Atlantic, and Appalachia had higher proportions of banks at the maximum and
lower proportions at the minimum than banks in the corresponding year located in the
South, West, and Midwest. Interestingly, urban banks, and especially NYC banks, had
much lower proportions of maximum issuers, and much higher proportions of minimum
issuers than average banks in most regions of the country.
The evidence on regional variation in note issuance is consistent with James’
(1978) opportunity cost explanation for cross-sectional differences in note issuance, but it
is conceivable that other factors (e.g., regional variation in redemption risks, and their
associated costs) could also explain these patterns. Thus, before returning to an empirical
investigation of the James hypothesis, we first investigate the extent to which redemption
risk might explain cross-sectional variation in note issuance.

11

IV. Cagan’s Redemption Risk Theory of Underissuance
Cagan (1965, p. 95) specifically points to redemption risk as the most likely
explanation for the low issuance of national bank notes:
The slow expansion [of national bank notes] suggests that national
banks waited until it seemed certain that no reason to withdraw the notes
would arise in the near future. Why a withdrawal need be feared, however,
is not clear.
Cagan (p. 89) argued that the amount national banks held on deposit at the Treasury in
excess of the 5% minimum required redemption fund likely reflected, at least in part, a
form of precautionary reserve holdings, which should be included in the cost of issuing
notes. More generally, advocates of hidden redemption costs as the solution to the
national bank note issuance puzzle have focused on the risks of unpredictable
redemption.
As Cagan recognized, it is not obvious that redemption risk should have been
significant in practice. National banks could pay out to the public each other’s notes
received from the public, and notes were default risk-free, thus, it is not clear why notes
would be presented at the Treasury or at any national bank, for redemption rather than
continue to circulate among banks and the public at par (except for reasons of wear and
tear).4 Furthermore, national banks could instruct the Treasury to sell bonds on deposit at
the Treasury to pay for redemption, or borrow in the interbank market (from a bank that
could take funds to the Treasury as needed) to finance redemption on short notice. To the
extent that transportation costs and idle notes may have represented hidden redemption
4

Indeed, Cagan and Schwartz (1991) provide detailed criticisms of various arguments advanced
by other authors in support of the idea that redemption costs were significant. Cagan and
Schwartz also note (p. 303) that, circa 1900, notes were redeemed on average only once every 32
months.

12

costs, the Treasury routinely accepted notes for redemption at subtreasury offices located
in large reserve cities.5 Even if notes could not be reissued quickly after being returned
from the Treasury, banks could still invest them in the interbank deposit market, which
yielded about 2% throughout our period.
Cagan’s discussion suggests a straightforward test of the proposition that the costs
of unpredictable redemption were important, and that the 5% minimum redemption fund
did not adequately eliminate the risk of redemption. If unpredictable redemption costs
were important, then national banks would have maintained excess reserves on deposit at
the Treasury (or perhaps in their vaults) to ensure their ability to redeem notes on
demand. Because the size of excess reserves maintained at the Treasury and in bank
vaults by each national bank is observable, one can test whether national banks held
precautionary balances against note issues, and whether the need for excess reserves to
mitigate the costs of redemption risk can explain regional differences in the propensity to
issue notes.
The first thing to note about national banks’ excess balances at the Treasury is
that they were quite small. In 1880, total excess reserves at the Treasury were 0.61% of
total outstanding national bank notes. In 1900, they were 0.75% of national bank notes.
The cross sectional standard error of the ratio of excess treasury reserves to national bank
notes outstanding was 0.0010627 in 1880 and 0.0012327 in 1900. Clearly, the average
precautionary demand for excess reserves at the Treasury to mitigate the risk of sudden
redemption was small.

5

Cagan and Schwartz (1991) cite estimates that some 85% to 90% of banks whose notes were
redeemed were located in those large reserve cities (p. 300).

13

We employ regression analysis to test for a relationship between the scale of bank
note issue and the amount of excess reserves. If banks were concerned about redemption
risk, and if the desired excess reserve ratio is a constant fraction of notes outstanding
(after controlling for regional differences and other bank characteristics), then banks with
larger amounts of notes should hold larger amounts of excess reserves.
Table 4 presents simple regression analysis of narrow reserves held at the
Treasury (since Cagan emphasized that component) as a ratio of total bank liabilities
(assets minus net worth), which we call TER, and the ratio of excess cash reserves
(including funds at the Treasury as well as those in the bank’s vault) relative to total bank
liabilities, which we call NER, for both 1880 and 1900. The model of the determinants of
reserve demand is taken from Calomiris and Mason (2004).
The excess reserve demand regressions measure the relationship between excess
reserve holdings and various bank characteristics. Characteristics include bank balance
sheet characteristics and bank location characteristics. Location is captured both by
regional indicators, and by indicators that capture whether the bank is located in a
“reserve city” or a “central reserve city”. Banks located in reserve cities or central reserve
cities faced different regulatory requirements for deposits, and also different business
opportunities, which may have affected their demands for reserves.
Bank balance sheet characteristics include bank leverage (total liabilities relative
to total assets, TLTA), the total amount of bank liabilities (log of total liabilities, LNTL),
and various measures of the mix of liabilities, the mix of assets, and the location of the
bank. Economies of scale in transactions demand for reserves is a common feature of all

14

empirical money demand models (Baumol 1952, Tobin 1956, Miller and Orr 1966) and
implies a negative relationship between total liabilities and the demand for reserves.
Our measures of liability mix allow the demand for reserves to depend on liability
composition, which is likely to reflect differences in the volatility of withdrawals or
redemptions (as modeled in Miller and Orr 1966). These variables include the ratio of
bank notes relative to total liabilities (NTL), its square, NTLSQ (to allow for nonlinearity in this effect), and measures of deposit mix. Deposits are divided into three
categories: U.S. government deposits, interbank deposits, and deposits of the public. The
ratios of U.S. government deposits to total deposits is USDTD, and the ratio of interbank
deposits to total deposits is IBDTD. The ratio of public deposits to total deposits is the
omitted category of deposits.
We also include the ratio of loans and discounts relative to securities (after
omitting U.S. government securities held as backing for bank notes), which we call
LOANRAT. LOANRAT can be thought of as a measure of the attractiveness of bank
lending opportunities as reflected in banks’ asset mix decisions. Calomiris and Wilson
(2004) show that superior lending opportunities result in lower reserve demand, ceteris
paribus.
Our focus here is on the relationship between increases in bank notes and the
demand for excess reserves. Cagan’s precautionary reserve-demand hypothesis implies
that an increase in the total amount of national bank notes issued by the bank should
result in an increase in excess reserve holdings of the issuing bank.
The regressions in Table 4 show that there is no statistically significant
relationship between the amount of national bank notes and the level of excess cash

15

reserves (measured either by TER or NER). Banks that issued larger amounts of notes,
ceteris paribus, did not hold larger amounts of excess cash reserves. Furthermore, with
the exception of the South, there is no evidence of regional variation in the target excess
reserve ratio of reserves held at the Treasury (TER). There is some evidence of regional
variation in NER, but that variation is not consistent over time, and it does not correspond
with the regional variation in note issuing described by James or by Figure 5. We
conclude that narrowly defined excess cash reserves (whether held at the Treasury or in
the bank vault) were generally unrelated to bank note issue. That evidence suggests that
banks believed that their 5% minimum redemption fund was more than adequate to
handle redemption risks from note issuance. Consequently, we conclude that the
hypothesized costly maintenance of cash balances to mitigate redemption risk cannot
explain the puzzle of underissuance of national bank notes.
In Table 5, we broaden our definition of excess reserves to include total reserves
(specie, legal tender, deposits at the Treasury, plus deposits held at other banks) minus
the amount of required reserves (either at the bank or at the Treasury), relative to total
liabilities, which we call BER. We find that broadly defined reserve holdings are
negatively related to note issue, and that this relationship is statistically significant.
It is important to remember that the relationship between notes and excess
reserves in Tables 4 and 5 is not univariate. As noted before, expanding the bank size to
increase note issuance implies not only an additional effect through NTLSQ, but also a
commensurate (111%) increase in assets and liabilities. Hence, Table 6 presents the total
marginal effects on excess reserves of a $100,000 increase in bank size brought about by
increasing note issuance accounting for the appropriate changes in TLTA, LNTL, NTL,

16

and NTLSQ at the variable means. The resulting marginal effect of increased note issue
is negative for all classes of reserves in Table 6, and is most negative for the broadest
class of reserves estimated in Table 5. Hence, it appears that note redemption was not a
risk that was magnified by increased note issue.
The results in Table 5 not only contradict the redemption risk hypothesis, they
suggest a significant reduction in reserve management costs from issuing notes for the
average bank. We interpret this result as reflecting a complementarity (economy of
scope) between, on the one hand, note issuing, and on the other hand, deposit taking and
lending, which resulted from the fact that the 5% minimum cash reserve requirement on
notes was more than the amount warranted by actual redemption risk on notes. Under that
hypothesis, note-issuing banks could economize on the costs of maintaining desired
reserves associated with deposit taking and lending (motivated, for example, by portfolio
risk reduction) because the unwarranted high required reserves against notes could be
applied toward reducing the amount of excess reserves needed in the deposit taking and
lending arm of the bank. In other words, taken together, the results in Tables 4 and 5
indicate that redemption risks for notes were unusually low, and were more than
adequately dealt with by the minimum cash reserves held at the Treasury. Excessive
required reserves on note issues, however, reduced the demand for excess reserves for
other purposes. The economies of scope in reserve management also help to explain why
national banks combined deposit taking and note issuing, rather than specialize in note
issuing, since combining the two reduced the cost of note issuing (more on this point in
Section V below).

17

V. The Absence of Pure Arbitrage Strategies
The fact that many banks issued the maximum permissible amount of notes in
1880 and 1900 presents one with two related puzzles of underissuance. First, one must
explain why some banks in existence did not issue the maximum amount of notes that
they could (we return to that question in Section VI below). Second, one must also
explain the lack of entry by pure “arbitragers” into the note issuing business. That second
question is addressed here.
If note issuing were profitable, and if existing banks willing to issue notes had
already issued their legal maximum or had deployed their equity capital in the pursuit of
profitable alternative opportunities, one might still expect bank entry by new, purely note
issuing bankers. The scarcity of financial or human capital in the banking industry (which
was already being employed in other banks) would not constrain such investors, since
they had no need for knowledge of the businesses of lending and deposit taking. We term
entry by investors to establish a wholly note issuing national bank a “pure arbitrage”
strategy for issuing notes. In essence, such an arbitrage strategy would be a means of
taking advantage of an interest rate subsidy on “margin loans” from the government for
the purpose of purchasing government bonds.
Interestingly, no national banks pursued this pure arbitrage strategy. As shown in
Table 7, which summarizes data on the ten banks in 1880 that had the lowest ratios of
assets other than government bonds relative to total assets (OTHASS) and the ten banks
in 1880 that had the lowest ratios of deposits to assets (DEPASS), all national banks were
involved in lending/investment and deposit taking to some degree. For example,
Montpelier National Bank, which maintained the lowest OTHASS ratio, had an OTHASS

18

ratio of 31.6% and a DEPASS ratio of 50.8%. Casco National Bank, which maintained
the lowest DEPASS ratio, had an OTHASS ratio of 97.2% and a DEPASS ratio of
33.2%. Results for 1900 (not reported here) are similar to those reported in Table 7,
although two banks in 1900 displayed low DEPASS ratios of 5.5% and 5.6%. But those
two banks displayed OTHASS ratios of 52.7% and 53.7%, respectively.
When one considers the practical obstacles to pursuing a profitable pure arbitrage
strategy, it is not surprising that no national banks did so. A bank in 1880 establishing
itself solely to issue notes would have only pursued one of two strategies (summarized,
respectively, in Figures 6 and 7). The first strategy (illustrated in Figure 6) – to issue the
maximum amount of notes, equal to $500,000 – implied a required capital investment of
$625,000 in initial equity capital and an additional $125,000 in surplus capital, for a total
equity investment of $750,000.6 The bank would also have been required to maintain a
$25,000 redemption fund at the Treasury. The remaining $1,225,000 could be held in
government bonds. Long-term government bonds yielded roughly 3.5% in 1880.7 The
pre-tax annual earnings on these bonds would have been $42,875. The bank also had to
pay a tax equal to one percent of its outstanding national bank notes, or $5,000. Thus,
even if the bank faced no physical costs of operating, its after-tax earnings would equal
$37,875, implying a return on equity capital of 5.05%.
A second possible strategy for 1880 is summarized in Figure 7. Here the bank
issues fewer notes ($449,999) in order to maintain paid in capital just below $500,000,
6

The initial capital investment is necessary to satisfy the regulation that notes must be less than
80% of capital, if capital is above $500,000. The surplus capital requirement is set according to
the requirements of Sections 33 and 38 of the National Bank Act of June 3, 1864, which requires
that banks accumulate and retain surplus equal to 20% of paid in capital.
7
According to Homer and Sylla (1991), p. 316, in 1880, U.S. government bonds maturing in
1891 had a yield to maturity of 3.45%, and U.S. government bonds maturing in 1907 had a yield
to maturity of 3.63%.

19

and thus be able to issue 90% of its capital in notes (as opposed to only 80% of capital).
Assuming zero operating expenses, this bank has after-tax earnings of $31,463, and a
return on equity of 5.24%.
In 1900, long-term Treasury bond yields were much lower, ranging from 1.7% to
2.12%, implying substantially lower returns on equity from a pure arbitrage strategy.8
Assuming a Treasury bond yield of 2% for 1900, and using the same methods for
computing profitability as in Figures 6 and 7, the banks issuing $500,000 and $449,999 in
notes, respectively, would earn returns on equity of 2.6% and 2.8%.
This method for computing returns on equity results in values that are lower than
those described by Cagan or Friedman and Schwartz, but they are still unrealistically
high. A national bank would have undoubtedly had some minimal costs of operation,
even if it did not engage in lending or deposit taking. National banking law required at
least five members of the board of directors (who would have to meet and be
compensated for their time), and the hiring of employees (a president, vice president, and
cashier), the regular filing of accounts, the maintenance of a headquarters, and regular
bank examinations paid for by the national bank being examined. Section 54 of the Bank
Act of 1864 requires that examiners be compensated at the rate of $5 a day, plus $2 per
25 miles traveled on their way to the bank, all billed to the bank. We conservatively
estimate the physical costs of running a bare bones bank (rent, maintenance costs, wages,
examination fees, and accounting costs) at roughly $1,000 per year. That estimate
assumes that directors and officers serve at no cost, assumes a wage cost of $750 per year
(the estimated cost of employing a cashier to keep the bank’s premises, manage its
accounts, and meet with the examiner, assuming that the cashier is paid $2.50 per day),
8

Homer and Sylla (1991), p. 343.

20

and rental, maintenance, and examination costs of an additional $250 per year. We add
to those costs the Comptroller’s initial redemption cost estimates in the range of $62.50
per $100,000 of notes, which Goodhart and others argued rose considerably due to
seasonal fluctuations in demand for monetary medium. Under these assumptions, total
operating costs for the banks operating in 1880, described in Figures 6 and 7, equal
$1,313 and $1,281, respectively. Those costs imply returns on equity of 4.87% and
5.03%, respectively. For the analogous banks operating in 1900, the implied returns on
equity would be 2.43% and 2.54%, respectively. Our estimates of physical costs are very
conservative, which may explain why the implied returns on equity are still above the
Comptroller’s miniscule estimates of returns to note issuance of 50-175 basis points in
1880 (Annual Report, p. 8). Nevertheless, these returns are quite modest, especially
considering the fact that note issuing did imply substantial interest rate risk.9
Another way to think about the profit from the pure arbitrage strategy, which
takes into account interest rate risk, is to compare it to a similarly leveraged purchase of
government bonds. For example, assume that a state-chartered bank had established itself
purely with the intent of investing in government bonds, and had borrowed on the
interbank deposit market to fund that investment, and that it chose to maintain the same
balance sheet amounts as in Figures 6 and 7, but substituted interbank deposits for
national bank notes as a source of finance. That state-chartered bank would have been in
a somewhat inferior position to a national bank pursuing a pure arbitrage strategy for two
reasons: (1) the interest cost on interbank deposits is greater than the cost of finance from
bank notes (which is just the one percent tax on note issues), and (2) the national bank
does not bear as much interest rate risk as the state-chartered bank, since increases in
9

For further discussion of interest rate risk, see Kuehlwein (1992).

21

interest rates have no effect on the required return paid on national bank notes (which are
always zero).
Interbank deposit funding imposes an interest cost of roughly 2% during our time
period.10 Thus, abstracting from interest rate risk differences, the annual after-tax
national bank “subsidy” for its zero-interest margin loan from the government for
investing in government bonds would have been roughly one percent of the amount of
notes issued ($5,000 in the first example, and $4,500 in the second example).
The difference in interest rate risk can be captured by considering the difference
in the sensitivity of bank equity to variation in the yields on long-term bonds for the two
hypothetical banks. For concreteness, assume that both the national and state-chartered
hypothetical banks had a Macaulay duration of assets of 10 years (reflecting their
holdings of government bonds with average maturities in excess of 10 years).
Alternatively, assume that the arbitragers expected to operate the banks for 10 years and
then liquidate them, implying a duration on bank notes of 10 years.11 Assume that
interbank deposits used to finance the state-chartered bank had a duration of ninety days
and assume (to be consistent with the examples in Figures 6 and 7) that the ratio of debt
to assets was 0.4. In a simple, one-factor model of interest rate risk, the sensitivity
(percentage decline) of bank equity value resulting from a one percent rise in interest
rates for the banks we consider is given by the following equation:
10

John James (1976, p. 200) writes: “…explicit payment of interest was becoming a pervasive
practice in New York by the late 1880s, and at that time also the rate of interest stabilized at 2
percent…”
11
Alternatively, one could assume an indefinite maturity of bank notes, if the founders of the
bank could have sold their stock in the bank to others upon their retirement. In the event, changes
in monetary regime rules brought an end to the license to issue national bank notes, and this was a
risk that arguably was known in advance. Thus, we think a 10-year expectation for the operation
of the national bank note issuing license is reasonable. Reasonable variation in that assumption
will not change our conclusions.

22

DK = A/K [DA – (L/A) DL].
Under the above assumptions, the values of DK for the national and state-chartered banks
would be as follows: For the national bank, DK = 1.67 [10 - (0.4)10] = 10. For the statechartered bank, DK = 1.67 [10 – (0.4)(0.25)] = 16.53.
How much would this difference in interest rate risk have mattered for the value
of the national bank? Judging from the small yield differences in 1880 on government
bonds with maturity dates of 1891 and 1907 (the first of which had a duration less than
10 years, and the second of which had a duration greater than 17 years), the market did
not view the added risk as very great. According to Homer and Sylla (1991, p. 316), in
1880, U.S. government bonds maturing in 1891 had a yield to maturity of 3.45%, and
U.S. government bonds maturing in 1907 had a yield to maturity of 3.63%, implying a
difference of 18 basis points.12 We conservatively estimate the value of the reduced risk
to the national bank at roughly 20 basis points of return on equity per year. In the
example in Figure 6, for 1880 that would amount to $1,500 of added annual value,
bringing the total subsidy to a pure arbitrager (before expenses) of $6,500 per year. In the
example in Figure 7, for 1880 the 20 basis point premium would add $1,200 of added
annual value, raising the total subsidy (before expenses) to $5,700 per year. The
analogous additions for 1900 would be smaller.
Thus, around 1880, the annual gain (gross of physical expenses) from pursuing
the pure arbitrage strategy, taking into account the value from interest payments savings
and reduced interest rate risk, was roughly $6,500 on an equity investment of $750,000,
or $5,700 on an equity investment of $600,000 – in both cases, less than one percent of
12

The difference for 1900 was even smaller. The Treasury bond maturing in 1907 had a yield of
1.70%, while the bond maturing in 1925 had a yield of 1.82% (Homer and Sylla 1991, p. 343).

23

equity invested. The gain from the subsidy net of physical expenses would have been
substantially lower, and possibly negative. In other words, the gain from using a national
bank charter as a vehicle for investing in U.S. government securities was nearly zero, and
perhaps negative, after one takes into account physical costs and the cost of risk. By
1900, that gain was even smaller.
In summary, as an empirical matter, banks did not pursue the pure arbitrage
strategy. When one considers the limitations on leverage from the banking regulations,
the taxes on note issues, and the cost of operating even a “bare bones” national bank, it is
not surprising that pure arbitrage remained a hypothetical opportunity. Note issuance
was not profitable as a stand-alone strategy for a bank; note issuing was only profitable
when combined with lending and deposit taking. Note issuing was not the primary profit
center for a national bank. Note issuing, by itself, was not a viable business; it depended
for its profitability on economies of scope between note issuing and other banking
functions due to sharing physical costs of operating and diversifying risks. The empirical
work in Section VII further confirms that note issuing was of small and declining
profitability over time, as indicated by the low propensity to issue notes by banks
entering between 1880 and 1900.

VI. Regression Analysis
We turn to regression analysis of our truncated measure of IP. We consider
whether observable differences in the attributes of issuers related to the opportunity cost
of issuing notes (i.e., lending profitability) explain their propensities to issue notes. As we
discussed above, and as James (1978) hypothesized, a bank’s opportunities other than

24

note issuing should have been important determinants of IP. Our measures of bank
opportunity costs, which we expect to be negatively associated with IP, take account of a
variety of those potentially relevant factors.
First, as a measure of lending opportunities we include a measure of asset returns
– for assets other than U.S. Treasury securities held to secure note circulation – of banks
in the state in which the national bank is located, as one measure of bank profitability
(bank-level or county-level data on banks’ revenues and costs are not available). ROAL
is constructed by adjusting state-level ROA to remove the effect of interest earned on
U.S. Treasuries securing note circulation, using data on that year’s Treasury yields and
data on state-level note circulation to calculate the amount of Treasury securities backing
note issues. Of course, ROAL is a noisy indicator of lending opportunities for individual
banks because it is a state-level aggregate and also because it fails to capture dynamic
growth or contraction in expected loan opportunities, which would be relevant to bank
decisions about allocating capital between note production and lending. Thus, as
additional bank-level proxies, we also consider two other measures.
We include the individual bank’s ratio of loans and discounts relative to its
holdings of securities (other than the U.S. Treasury bonds held to secure note circulation).
Banks with superior lending opportunities should maintain a higher LOANRAT. This
measure captures the portfolio allocation decisions of each bank, and takes into account
forward looking expectations of loan profitability.
Finally, we include additional measures of opportunity cost related to the growth
and profitability of agriculture and manufacturing within the county (or counties) in
which the bank located, weighted by the importance of those sectors in the county

25

economy. For 1880 and 1900, both decadal census years, data on the amount of capital in
manufacturing, and on the amount of capital in agriculture, are available. These variables
can be used to measure the relative importance (weight) of each of the two sectors in the
local county economy, and also the growth rate of capital for the previous ten year period
prior to each of 1880 and 1900. The variables WDFK and WDMK measure the weighted
growth in farm and manufacturing capital within the county (or counties) in which the
bank is located, both for the 1880 and 1900. Additionally, for 1900, census data are also
available on the profitability of the manufacturing sector. For 1900, we include weighted
return on capital assets in manufacturing (WROAM) instead of WDMK as an alternative
measure of manufacturing profitability.
We also include various control variables in our analysis related to the size, age,
and urban location of banks. Size is defined as asset size (SIZE) and bank age (AGE) is
defined as years since its national bank charter. The relationships between IP and bank
size and age are potentially complex. Ceteris paribus, because older banks were initially
allowed different maximum issue sizes, their IPs could be lower (because, ceteris paribus,
they are less likely to be constrained in their desired amounts of issues). Larger banks,
ceteris paribus, could have higher IP because they are more likely to be constrained by
the maximum issuance limit. But those implications about ceteris paribus associations
may not hold true in measured associations between IP and size and age variables
because size and age might be associated with marginal lending opportunities (more on
this point in Section VII below). Older and larger banks might have surplus capital
relative to new lending opportunities, for example, which could lead to a higher value of
IP. Thus, we include SIZE, AGE, and SIZExAGE as controls, since all three may be

26

relevant for predicting note issuing propensity, although we recognize that there are
multiple interpretations of the measured effects associated with these variables.
We also include separate indicator variables to control for any special
characteristics of banks located in New York City (NYC), and for banks located in other
major cities listed above (URBAN).
In Tables 8 and 9 (for national banks in 1880 and 1900, respectively) we report
Tobit regressions, which take into account the truncations that result from minimum and
maximum note issuing rules, and which measure the effects of opportunity cost and
control variables. For each year, we report specifications that alternately include or
exclude regional indicator variables. We begin with regressions that exclude all the
opportunity cost variables, but include regional indicators (a regression that is analogous
to James’s 1978 results). For 1880, we report three regressions – (1) with regional
indicators but without opportunity costs, (2) without regional indicators but with
opportunity costs, and (3) with both regional indicators and opportunity costs. For 1900,
we report four regressions, since we have two alternative measures of county-level
profitability of manufacturing (WDMK and WROAM).
The results are broadly consistent with one another and with our hypothesized
opportunity cost effects. They indicate substantial variation in the propensity to issue
national bank notes that is traceable to county, state, and bank-specific characteristics
related to the profitability of lending. State-level ROAL enters negatively, but it is not
typically statistically significant. Bank-level LOANRAT enters negatively and
significantly. County-level WDFK enters negatively and significantly in 1880, but is less
significant in 1900. WDMK enters negatively and insignificantly for 1880 and 1900, but

27

the alternative measure of manufacturing profitability (WROAM) enters negatively and
significantly in 1900 (the only year for which these data are available).
It is also interesting to note that the effect of the regional indicator variables for
MIDWEST, SOUTH, and WEST, remain negative and statistically significant in the
presence of the opportunity cost variables, which indicates that our measures of
opportunity cost still do not capture all of the important regional influences on note
issuing.
Controls for SIZE, AGE, and SIZExAGE generally are significant and remain
significant in the presence of regional indicator variables. NYC and URBAN enter
negatively and sometimes significantly. Those effects may also indicate an opportunity
cost effect, since banks in cities may have had special lending opportunities that reduced
their propensity to issue notes.
Our results provide support for James’ (1978) view that opportunity costs of
lending varied across banks and explain variation in the propensity to issue notes. Many
banks (with low lending opportunity costs) were at a corner solution with respect to note
issuing. Other banks (with high lending opportunity costs) issued less than the maximum
permissible amount of notes.

VII. Entry, Exit, and Bank Note Issuance
The declining propensity to issue notes over time was reinforced by the exit of
high note issuers and the entry of low note issuers. Furthermore, the tendency for banks
in the MIDWEST, SOUTH, and WEST to issue fewer bank notes in 1880 and 1900 was

28

true of banks that survived the entire period, as well as those that entered between 1880
and 1900.
Figure 8a illustrates that of the many national banks that entered the industry
between 1880 and 1900, only 17% of those that entered (411 of 2,381 entering banks)
chose a maximum note issue strategy while a full 55% (1,300 of 2,381) chose to issue at
the minimum. Furthermore, Figure 8b shows that 59% of those exiting the industry
during the period (275 out of 470 exiting banks) were maximum issuers, while only 10%
(46 of 470) were minimum issuers. Figure 5 illustrates that the majority of entry was in
the regions of low note issue – the MIDWEST, SOUTH, and WEST – where issuance
was already low. Because entering banks predominantly issued at the minimum possible
level, it appears (consistent with the discussion in section V) that those banks were
interested in opportunities other than note issuance. Hence, despite 118% growth in the
number of banks in the MIDWEST, 360% in the SOUTH, and 437% in the WEST, note
issuance remained suppressed in those regions.
Figure 8c illustrates that, of banks that survived the period 1880-1900, 36% (546
of 1,508) were minimum issuers and a roughly equal amount, 26% (397 of 1,508), were
maximum issuers. Figure 8d shows that among those surviving banks, 26% maintained a
constant IP (despite changes in the method for computing IP in 1882) and 67% reduced
their IP across the period. Hence, only around 26% (397 banks) of banks that survived
the period and 17% (411 banks) of entering banks, for a total of 808 banks out of 3,492,
showed an interest in maximizing their note issuance in the period of 1880-1900.
The fact that exiting banks tended to rely more on note issuing than average and
that entering banks focused less on note issuing than average while remaining banks

29

reduced their issuance over our period provides further evidence that note issuing was not
the primary profit center for national banks during our period. The regional patterns of
entry, and the fact that new entrants in the low-issuing regions were especially low note
issuers corroborates the James (1978) hypothesis that opportunities other than note
issuing were particularly high in those regions.

VIII. Conclusion
The longstanding puzzle of underissuance of national bank notes disappears when
one disaggregates the data to the level of individual banks, takes account of the limits
banks faced on their maximum permissible note issues, and considers differences in
opportunity costs of note issuing across banks. Sixty-one percent of national banks in
1880 and twenty-one percent of national banks in 1900 were maximum note issuers.
Banks with low lending opportunities maximized their ability to issue notes, but could
not issue more than a certain amount. Other banks, with high lending opportunities,
rationally chose not to issue more notes.
Models of redemption costs do not explain the substantial cross-sectional
variation in the extent to which national banks chose to issue national bank notes. The
theory that redemption risk explains underissuance of bank notes is inconsistent with the
observed lack of any relationship between bank note issuance and excess reserve
holdings.
Furthermore, there seem to have been substantial economies of scope between
note issuing, on the one hand, and deposit taking and lending, on the other hand. Those
economies of scope probably included shared overhead costs as well as the ability to

30

economize on the costs of maintaining mandatory minimum levels of reserves and capital
when issuing notes. Combining deposit taking and note issuing allowed banks to make
full use of capital and reserves that were legally required in support of note issuing but
which exceeded warranted levels.
National banks did not enter solely to issue national bank notes (what we call the
pure “arbitrage” strategy), and once one takes proper account of the regulatory limits on
issuance, and of the costs and benefits of entering purely to issue notes, that fact is not
surprising. Indeed, over the period 1880 to 1900, new entrants focused less on note
issuing, while banks exiting were more likely to be maximum issuers. Note issuing was
only profitable when combined with lending and deposit taking, and note issuing seems
to have been a relatively unprofitable line of business for successful bankers.
The puzzle of underissuance of national bank notes appears in large part to be an
object lesson in the importance of disaggregating data, and thus avoiding misleading
“representative bank” analysis relating average bank behavior and average bank
opportunities.

31

References
Baumol, William J. (1952). “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic
Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 545-56.
Bell, Spurgeon (1912). “Profit on National Bank Notes.” American Economic Review
(March), pp. 38-60.
Cagan, Phillip (1965). Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,
1875-1970, New York: Columbia University Press.
Cagan, Phillip, and Anna J. Schwartz (1991). “The National Bank Note Puzzle
Reinterpreted.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking (August), pp. 293-307.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1988). “Price and Exchange Rate Determination During the
Greenback Suspension,” Oxford Economic Papers (December), pp. 189-220.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1994). “Greenback Resumption and Silver Risk: The Economics
and Politics of Monetary Regime Change in the United States, 1862-1900.” In M.D.
Bordo and F. Capie, eds., Monetary Regimes in Transition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 86-132.
Calomiris, Charles W., and R. Glenn Hubbard (1996). "International Adjustment Under
the Classical Gold Standard: Evidence for the U.S. and Britain, 1879-1914," in Modern
Perspectives on the Gold Standard, Tamim Bayoumi, Barry Eichengreen, and Mark
Taylor, eds., Cambridge University Press, 1996, 189-217.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (2004). “The Demand for Reserves of
National Banks,” Working paper, Columbia University.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson (2004). “Bank Capital and Portfolio
Management: The 1930s ‘Capital Crunch’ and the Scramble to Shed Risk,” Journal of
Business 77 (3), pp. 421-55.
Champ, Bruce, Neil Wallace, Warren E. Weber (1992). “Resolving the National Bank
Note Paradox,” Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Spring), pp.
13-21.
Duggar, Jan W., and Ronald F. Rost (1969). “National Bank Note Redemption and
Treasury Cash.” The Journal of Economic History (September), pp. 512-520.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
States,1867-1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Goodhart, Charles A. E. (1965). “Profit on National Bank Notes, 1900-1913.” Journal of
Political Economy (October), pp. 516-522.

32

Hetherington, Bruce W. (1990). “Bank Entry and the Low Issue of National Bank Notes:
A Reexamination,” Journal of Economic History (September), pp. 669-76.
Homer, Sidney, and Richard Sylla (1991). A History of Interest Rates (3rd Edition), New
Brunswick, Rutgers University Press.
James, John A. (1976). “A Note on Interest Paid on New York Bankers’ Balances in the
Postbellum Period,” Business History Review 50 (Summer), pp. 198-202.
James, John A. (1978). “The Conundrum of the Low Issue of National Bank Notes,”
Journal of Political Economy (April), pp. 359-67.
Kuehlwein, Michael (1992). “The National Bank Note Controversy Reexamined,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 24 (1), pp. 111-26.
Miller, Merton H., and Daniel Orr (1966). “A Model of Demand for Money by Firms,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 80, pp. 413-35.
National Monetary Commission (1910). Laws of the United States Concerning Money,
Banking, and Loans, 1778-1909, Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. S.
Doc 580, pt. 2, 61st Cong 2nd session.
Tobin, James (1956). “The Interest Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 38, pp. 241-7.

33

Figure 1: Histogram for Issue Propensity -- All Issuers, 1880
70
60

Percent of All Banks

50
40
30
20
10

0.
98

0.
90

0.
82

0.
74

0.
66

0.
58

0.
50

0.
42

0.
34

0.
26

0.
18

0.
10

0.
02

0

Issue Propensity
Figure 2: Histogram for Issue Propensity -- Discretionary Issuers Only, 1880

6
5
4
3
2
1

Issue Propensity

0.
92

0.
84

0.
76

0.
68

0.
60

0.
52

0.
44

0.
36

0.
28

0.
20

0.
12

0
0.
04

Percent of All Banks

7

Figure 3: Histogram for Issue Propensity -- All Issuers, 1900
70
60

Percent of All Banks

50
40
30
20
10

0.
98

0.
90

0.
82

0.
74

0.
66

0.
58

0.
50

0.
42

0.
34

0.
26

0.
18

0.
10

0.
02

0

Issue Propensity
Figure 4: Histogram for Issue Propensity -- Discretionary Issuers Only, 1900

6
5
4
3
2
1

Issue Propensity

0.
92

0.
84

0.
76

0.
68

0.
60

0.
52

0.
44

0.
36

0.
28

0.
20

0.
12

0
0.
04

Percent of All Banks

7

Figure 5: Distribution of Issuance Across Regions
Mid-Atlantic
(618 banks, 1880; 942 banks, 1900)

New England
(552 banks, 1880; 565 banks, 1900)
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30

1880

0.50
0.40
0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

Minimum
Issuers

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Minimum
Issuers

Midwest
(660 banks, 1880; 1,436 banks, 1900)

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

South
(90 banks, 1880; 415 banks, 1900)

0.70

0.70
1900

0.60

0.60

1880

0.50

Proportion

Proportion

1900

0.60

1880
Proportion

Proportion

0.70

1900

0.40
0.30

0.30
0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00
Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

1880

0.40

0.20

Minimum
Issuers

1900

0.50

Minimum
Issuers

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Figure 5 (cont'd): Distribution of Issuance Across Regions
West
(38 banks, 1880; 204 banks 1900)

Appalachian
(124 banks, 1880; 243 banks 1900)
0.70

0.70
1900

0.50

1880

0.40
0.30

0.50
0.30
0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00
Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Minimum Issuers

New York City
(48 banks, 1880; 44 banks, 1900)
0.70

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Urban
(111 banks, 1880; 107 banks, 1900)
1880

0.70

1900

0.60

0.60
1880

0.50

Proportion

Proportion

1880

0.40

0.20

Minimum Issuers

1900

0.60
Proportion

Proportion

0.60

0.40
0.30

0.40
0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

1900

0.50

0.00
Minimum
Issuers

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Minimum
Issuers

Discretionary
Issuers

Maximum
Issuers

Figure 6: The Financial Effects of Note Issue Arbitrage in 1880

Assets

Liabilities

Bonds to back
Circulation

1,225

Legal Tender

25

1,250

Notes

500

Capital
Surplus

625
125
1,250

Assuming that government bonds earn 3.5% and taking into account the 1% tax on notes
issued:
Profits = 3.5% * 1,225 - 1% * 500
Profits = 42.875 - 5.000
Profits = 37.875

Dividing profits by capital and surplus yields:
37.875 / (625 + 125) = 5.05% ROE

Figure 7: The Financial Effects of Note Issue Arbitrage in 1880

Assets

Liabilities

Bonds to back
Circulation

1,028

Notes

Legal Tender

22.5

Capital
Surplus

1,050

450
499.99
100
1,050

Assuming that government bonds earn 3.5% and taking into account the 1% tax on notes
issued:
Profits = 3.5% * 1,050 - 1% * 450
Profits = 35.9625 - 4.500
Profits = 31.4625

Dividing profits by capital and surplus yields:
31.4625 / (499 + 100) = 5.24% ROE

Percent of Banks
30

Percent of Banks

40

Issue Propensity
0.
02
0.
08
0.
14
0.
20
0.
26
0.
32
0.
38
0.
44
0.
50
0.
56
0.
62
0.
68
0.
74
0.
80
0.
86
0.
92
0.
98

0.
02
0.
08
0.
14
0.
20
0.
26
0.
32
0.
38
0.
44
0.
50
0.
56
0.
62
0.
68
0.
74
0.
80
0.
86
0.
92
0.
98

Figure 8a: 1900 IP of Banks Entering 1880-1900
Figure 8b: 1880 IP of Banks Exiting 1880-1900

70
70

60
60

50
50

40

30

20
20

10
10

0
0

Issue Propensity

Figure 8c: 1900 IP of Banks Surviving 1880-1900

Figure 8d: Survivors' Change in IP, 1880-1900
35

30

30

25

25

Percent of Banks

Percent of Banks

35

20

15

20

15

5

5

0

0

Issue Propensity

-1
.0
0
-0
.8
5
-0
.7
0
-0
.5
5
-0
.4
0
-0
.2
5
-0
.1
0
0.
05
0.
20
0.
35
0.
50
0.
65
0.
80
0.
95

10

0.
02
0.
08
0.
14
0.
20
0.
26
0.
32
0.
38
0.
44
0.
50
0.
56
0.
62
0.
68
0.
74
0.
80
0.
86
0.
92
0.
98

10

Proportional Change in Issue Propensity, 1880-1900

Table 1: National Banking Laws Specifically Constraining Note Issue
Constraints on Maximum Note Issue:
1. If bank chartered before end of 1864, can issue up to 90% market value of bonds (not to exceed 90% of
par if bonds pay greater than 5% interest), though not exceeding 100% capital. (p. 340 Act of March 3,
1863) [coded the effective constraint as 90% of capital]
2. If bank chartered from beginning of 1865 to July 1870 (p. 364 Act of March 3, 1865):
• Banks with capital less than $500,000, can issue up to 90% capital;
• Banks with capital more than $500,000 and less than $1,000,000 can issue up to 80% capital;
• Banks with capital more than $1,000,000 and less than $3,000,000 can issue up to 75% capital;
• Banks with capital greater than $3,000,000 can issue up to 60% capital.
3. If bank chartered after 1870 then (p. 370 Act of July 12, 1870):
• No bank chartered after July 12, 1870 may issue more than $500,000 total.
-- Banks with capital less than $500,000, can issue up to 90% capital (previous provision unaltered);
-- Banks with capital more than $500,000 and less than $625,000 can issue up to 80% capital
(previous provision unaltered and 0.80*625,000=500,000);
4. After July 12, 1882, all banks may issue up to 90% of the par value of bonds backing the note issue, not
exceeding 90% of capital. On March 14, 1900, the requirement was further relaxed to 100% of the par value
of the bonds, not exceeding 100% of capital.
State bank notes not yet redeemed subsequent to conversion count as national bank notes in calculations of
maxima.

Constraints on Minimum Note Issue:
Banks must hold bonds to back circulation amounting to the maximum of $30,000 or 33% of capital. Since
banks must hold 111% of notes in bonds to back the circulation, these note constraints mean that banks may
issue notes amounting to the greater of $30,000*(1/1.11)=$27,027 or 33%*Capital*(1/1.11). After July 12,
1882, the minimum bond requirement was revised to 25% of capital for banks with capital less than
$150,000.
Source: National Monetary Commission. Laws of the United States Concerning Money, Banking, and Loans,
1778-1909. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1910. Senate Document 580, part 2, 61st
Congress, 2nd session.

Table 2: Variable Definintions
Variable Name

Definition

IP

(Actual Notes – Minimum Required Issuance) / (Maximum Permissible Notes –
Minimum Required Issuance)

IPTRUNC

IP trucated from above at 0.98 and from below at 0.02.

TER

Amount due from the Treasury in Excess of the 5% Redemption Fund / Total
Liabilities

NER

For central reserve cities: (Legal Tender Notes+Due from the Treasury in Excess of
the 5% Redemption Fund0.25*Total Deposits) / Total Liabilities;
For reserve cities: (Legal Tender Notes+Due from the Treasury in Excess of the 5%
Redemption Fund0.125*Total Deposits) / Total Liabilities;
For other cities: (Legal Tender Notes+Due from the Treasury in Excess of the 5%
Redemption Fund0.06*Total Deposits) / Total Liabilities.

BER

For central reserve cities: (Legal Tender Notes+Due from the Treasury in Excess of
the 5% Redemption Fund+
Due from Other Banks and Bankers-0.25*Total Deposits) / Total Liabilities;
For other cities: (Legal Tender Notes+Due from the Treasury in Excess of the 5%
Redemption Fund+
Due from Other Banks and Bankers-0.15*Total Deposits) / Total Liabilities.

NYC

1 if bank is located in New York City, 0 otherwise.

URBAN

1 if bank is located in Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, New Orleans or San Francisco,
0 otherwise.

LNTA

Natural log of Total Assets

AGE

Number of years since treceiving a National Bank charter.

SIZEAGE

LNTA * AGE

ROAL

For 1880: State-level: (Net Income)/(Total Assets)-0.02885*(Notes
Outstanding)/(Total Assets)
For 1900: State-level: (Net Income)/(Total Assets)-0.01000*(Notes
Outstanding)/(Total Assets)

LOANRAT

Loans and Discounts/(Loans and Discounts+US Bonds on Hand+Other Stocks,
Bonds, and Mortgages)

WDMK

[(Total Capital in Manufacturingt-Total Capital in Manufacturingt-10)/Total Capital
in Manufacturingt-10)]*
[Total Capital in Manufacturingt/(Total Capital in Manufacturingt+Total Capital in
Agriculturet)]

WDFK

[(Total Capital in Agriculturet-Total Capital in Agriculturet-10) / Total Capital in
Agriculturet-10]*
[1-Total Capital in Manufacturingt/(Total Capital in Manufacturingt+Total Capital in
Agriculturet)]

WROAM

[(Value of Products in Manufacturing-Total Wages in Manufacturing-Total Cost of
Materials in Manufacturing) /
Total Capital in Manufacturing]*[Total Capital in Manufacturing/(Total Capital in
Manufacturing+
Total Capital in Agriculture)]

TLTA

Total Liabilities / Total Assets

LNTL

Natural log of Total Liabilities

NTL

Notes Outstanding / Total Liabilities

NTLSQ

NTL squared.

USDTD

US Deposits / Total Deposits

IBDTD

Due to Other Banks / Total Deposits

RCITY

For 1880: 1 if bank is located in: Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore, Albany,
Pittsburgh, Washington, New Orleans, Louisville, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Chicago,
Detroit, Milwaukee, St. Louis, or San Francisco; 0 otherwise.
For 1900: 1 if bank is located in: Boston, Albany, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, Pittsburg,
Baltimore, Washington, Savannah, New Orleans, Louisville, Houston, Cincinnati,
Cleveland, Columbus, Indianapolis, Detroit, Milwaukee, Des Moines, St. Paul,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, St. Joseph, Lincoln, Omaha, Denver, San Francisco, Los
Angeles, or Portland; 0 otherwise.

CRCITY

For 1880: 1 if bank is located in New York City; 0 otherwise.
For 1900: 1 if bank is located in New York City, Chicago, or St. Louis; 0 otherwise.

NEWENGL

1 if bank is located in CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, or VT; 0 otherwise.

MIDATL

1 if bank is located in DE, NJ, NY, or PA; 0 otherwise.

MIDWEST

1 if bank is located in IL, IN, MI, OH, WI, IA, KS, MN, MO, NE, SD, ND, or DK
(Dakota for 1880); 0 otherwise.

SOUTH

1 if bank is located in VA, AL, AR, FL, GA, LA, NC, SC, or TX; 0 otherwise.

APPALACH

1 if bank is located in KY, MD, TN, or WV; 0 otherwise.

WEST

1 if bank is located in CO, CA, OR, AZ, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, WY, WA, AK, or HI;
0 otherwise.

NOTEOUT

Bank notes outstanding.

Table 3: Summary Statistics
Variable Name
IP
IPTRUNC
TER
NER
BER
NYC
URBAN
LNTA
AGE
SIZEAGE
ROAL
LOANRAT
WDMK
WDFK
WROAM
TLTA
LNTL
NTL
NTLSQ
USDTD
IBDTD
RCITY
CRCITY
NEWENGL
MIDATL
MIDWEST
SOUTH
APPALACH
WEST
NOTEOUT

N
2094
2094
2094
2092
2092
2094
2094
2094
2093
2093
2060
2094
1685
1685
1704
2094
2094
2094
2094
2092
2092
2094
2094
2094
2094
2094
2094
2094
2094
2094

1880
Mean
Median
0.8043
0.9889
0.8039
0.9800
0.0012
0.0000
-0.0002
-0.0028
0.0039
-0.0154
0.0229
0.0000
0.0530
0.0000
13.204
13.030
12.404
15.000
165.339
194.741
-0.0361
0.0145
0.9181
0.9687
0.1323
0.0397
0.0650
-0.0231
0.1127
0.0550
0.6389
0.6385
12.7431
12.5695
0.3677
0.3450
0.1700
0.1190
2.70E-08 0.00E+00
0.0648
0.0156
0.0912
0.0000
0.0229
0.0000
0.2636
0.0000
0.2951
0.0000
0.3152
0.0000
0.0430
0.0000
0.0592
0.0000
0.0181
0.0000
152,183
90,000

Std Error
0.0079
0.0067
0.0001
0.0011
0.0020
0.0033
0.0049
0.020
0.103
1.446
0.0161
0.0026
0.0141
0.0169
0.0031
0.0022
0.0215
0.0041
0.0035
5.94E-09
0.0027
0.0063
0.0033
0.0096
0.0100
0.0102
0.0044
0.0052
0.0029
3,645

N
3879
3879
3878
3877
3877
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879
3816
3879
3217
3236
3261
3878
3878
3878
3878
3878
3878
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879
3879

1900
Mean
Median
0.2919
0.0913
0.3428
0.0913
0.0004
0.0000
-0.0298
-0.0304
-0.0380
-0.0642
0.0113
0.0000
0.0276
0.0000
13.194
13.060
19.015
17.000
256.790
218.844
0.0182
0.0166
0.8857
0.9413
0.2772
0.1165
0.2531
0.0552
0.1107
0.0767
0.7190
0.7359
12.8504
12.7279
0.1302
0.1001
0.0293
0.0100
7.98E-06 0.00E+00
0.0556
0.0091
0.0781
0.0000
0.0157
0.0000
0.1457
0.0000
0.2428
0.0000
0.3702
0.0000
0.1070
0.0000
0.0626
0.0000
0.0526
0.0000
73,430
45,000

Std Error
0.0073
0.0064
0.0000
0.0005
0.0016
0.0017
0.0026
0.018
0.197
2.762
0.0001
0.0023
0.0138
0.0127
0.0020
0.0018
0.0190
0.0018
0.0009
7.02E-06
0.0020
0.0043
0.0020
0.0057
0.0069
0.0078
0.0050
0.0039
0.0036
3,251

Table 4: OLS Models of Excess Reserves, 1880 and 1900
(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Treasury
Excess
Reserves,
TER

Treasury
Excess
Reserves,
TER

Narrow
Excess
Reserves,
NER

Narrow
Excess
Reserves,
NER

All Banks,
1880

All Banks,
1900

All Banks,
1880

All Banks,
1900

N

2,092

3,877

2,092

3,877

R-squared
Adj. R-squared

0.003
-0.003

0.010
0.006

0.511
0.508

0.443
0.441

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Intercept

0.0037
0.0038

0.0018
0.0008

0.1167
0.0214

0.0469
0.0067

TLTA

0.0006
0.0024

-0.0025
0.0006

-0.0378
0.0135

-0.0491
0.0052

LNTL

-0.0001
0.0002

0.0000
0.0001

-0.0067
0.0013

-0.0029
0.0005

NTL

-0.0008
0.0032

0.0006
0.0011

-0.0231
0.0182

0.0137
0.0090

NTLSQ

0.0016
0.0034

-0.0030
0.0021

0.0263
0.0191

-0.0030
0.0178

LOANRAT

-0.0016
0.0012

0.0000
0.0004

-0.0168
0.0066

-0.0045
0.0030

USDTD

-299.0
506.3

-0.0171
0.1106

3,252.5
2,874.5

1.0742
0.9172

IBDTD

-0.0001
0.0014

0.0000
0.0005

0.0033
0.0077

0.0323
0.0039

RCITY

0.0000
0.0006

0.0003
0.0002

-0.0381
0.0033

-0.0414
0.0018

CRCITY

-0.0002
0.0011

0.0004
0.0004

-0.1652
0.0064

-0.1252
0.0037

MIDATL

0.0002
0.0004

0.0001
0.0002

0.0126
0.0024

0.0011
0.0014

MIDWEST

0.0003
0.0004

0.0002
0.0002

0.0350
0.0025

-0.0003
0.0014

SOUTH

0.0009
0.0007

0.0005
0.0002

0.0449
0.0043

0.0099
0.0017

APPALACH

-0.0005
0.0006

-0.0002
0.0002

0.0254
0.0036

0.0007
0.0019

WEST

-0.0002
0.0011

0.0001
0.0003

0.0186
0.0063

-0.0079
0.0022

Dependent Variable
Sample

Table 5: OLS Models of Broad Excess Reserves, 1880 and 1900
(A)

(B)

Broad
Excess
Reserves,
BER

Broad
Excess
Reserves,
BER

All Banks,
1880

All Banks,
1900

N

2,081

3,877

R-squared
Adj. R-squared

0.212
0.206

0.204
0.201

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Intercept

0.4472
0.0488

0.3793
0.0244

TLTA

-0.2476
0.0307

-0.1909
0.0190

LNTL

-0.0186
0.0029

-0.0210
0.0020

NTL

-0.2881
0.0415

-0.3213
0.0328

NTLSQ

0.2339
0.0434

0.5524
0.0648

LOANRAT

-0.0193
0.0151

-0.0209
0.0108

USDTD

11,041.0
6,537.5

6.9173
3.3473

IBDTD

0.0375
0.0174

0.1653
0.0141

RCITY

0.0220
0.0075

0.0515
0.0065

CRCITY

-0.0849
0.0145

0.0200
0.0135

MIDATL

0.0200
0.0054

0.0051
0.0050

MIDWEST

0.0589
0.0057

0.0206
0.0050

SOUTH

0.1021
0.0097

0.0655
0.0061

APPALACH

0.0527
0.0083

0.0338
0.0071

WEST

0.0906
0.0143

0.0493
0.0078

Dependent Variable
Sample

Table 6: Marginal Effects from Reserves Models

Marginal Effect of a $100,000 increase in notes outstanding:
Treasury
Excess
Reserves,
TER
1880

Treasury
Excess
Reserves,
TER
1900

Narrow
Excess
Reserves,
NER
1880

Narrow
Excess
Reserves,
NER
1900

Broad
Excess
Reserves,
BER
1880

Broad
Excess
Reserves,
BER
1900

Initial condition:

0.00110

0.00024

-0.00634

-0.03751

0.00231

-0.06490

After $100,000
increase in notes:

0.00108

0.00020

-0.00939

-0.03771

-0.02254

-0.08479

Difference:

-0.00002

-0.00003

-0.00306

-0.00020

-0.02485

-0.01989

Dependent
Variable

Table 7: Examples of Issuers with Extreme of Arbitrage Possibilities in 1880
Ten banks with the lowest OTHASS (other assets/assets)
Bank Name
City
State
ln(Size)
Montpelier
Montpelier
VT
13.726
First
Watertown
NY
12.337
First
Manchester NH
13.010
NB
Middlebury VT
13.226
N Landholders'
Kingston
RI
12.395
N Whaling B
New London CT
12.973
First
Stonington
CT
13.262
Fourth
Pittsburgh
PA
13.659
Washington
Westerly
RI
12.882
Vineland
Vineland
NJ
12.021

Age
15
17
15
15
15
15
15
16
15
2

IP2
0.980
0.949
0.980
0.980
0.971
0.980
0.980
0.980
0.980
0.980

OTHASS DEPASS IP (Raw)
0.316
0.508
0.993
0.364
0.474
0.949
0.396
0.597
0.989
0.401
0.568
0.988
0.412
0.485
0.971
0.419
0.559
1.016
0.422
0.534
0.984
0.426
0.597
1.000
0.440
0.491
0.999
0.448
0.684
1.000

Ten banks with the lowest DEPASS (other debt/assets)
Bank Name
City
State
ln(Size)
Casco
Portland
ME
14.402
Caledonia
Danville
VT
12.265
Roger Williams
Providence
RI
13.755
N Exchange
Houston
TX
12.100
American
Providence
RI
14.751
Commercial
Providence
RI
14.333
Phenix
Phenix
RI
12.059
Belvedere
Belvedere
NJ
13.407
N Warren B
Warren
RI
12.856
Meriden
Meriden
CT
13.383

Age
15
15
15
7
15
15
15
15
15
15

IP2
0.020
0.385
0.064
0.024
0.259
0.304
0.386
0.027
0.506
0.516

OTHASS DEPASS IP (Raw)
0.972
0.332
-0.488
0.722
0.355
0.385
0.798
0.362
0.064
0.805
0.365
0.024
0.738
0.375
0.259
0.698
0.382
0.304
0.652
0.398
0.386
0.850
0.398
0.027
0.648
0.404
0.506
0.675
0.421
0.516

Table 8: Tobit Models of Truncated Issue Propensity (IPTRUNC), 1880
(A)

(B)

(C)

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

All Banks,
1880

All Banks,
1880

All Banks,
1880

2,093

1,675

1,675

-1688.1
-1810.9
245.6
0.000

-1371.2
-1460.5
178.6
0.000

-1353.0
-1460.5
215.0
0.000

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Intercept

-0.2220
0.9611

-0.3327
1.0885

0.1755
1.0951

NYC

-0.3709
0.1402

-0.3441
0.1481

-0.3690
0.1465

URBAN

-0.1257
0.0906

-0.1110
0.0953

-0.1263
0.0951

SIZE

0.0999
0.0758

0.1433
0.0846

0.1092
0.0844

AGE

0.3499
0.0678

0.3433
0.0754

0.3354
0.0748

SIZEAGE

-0.0252
0.0053

-0.0252
0.0059

-0.0247
0.0058

MIDATL

0.0463
0.0525

0.0236
0.0749

MIDWEST

-0.2526
0.0513

-0.2260
0.0629

SOUTH

-0.2627
0.0970

-0.4068
0.1364

APPALACH

0.1104
0.0915

0.1291
0.1068

WEST

-0.3993
0.1406

-0.1996
0.2098

Estimation Method
Sample
N
Log-likelihood
Restricted Log-likelihood
χ-squared
Significance (α)

ROAL

-0.9313
3.1557

-0.6742
4.1651

LOANRAT

-0.4812
0.1922

-0.4459
0.1902

WDFK

-0.1675
0.0424

-0.1004
0.0377

WDMK

-0.0250
0.0325

-0.0171
0.0329

0.7361
0.0242

0.7219
0.0237

Scale

0.7403
0.0221

Table 9: Tobit Models of Truncated Issue Propensity (IPTRUNC), 1900
(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

All Banks,
1900

All Banks,
1900

All Banks,
1900

All Banks,
1900

3,879

3,217

3,217

3,236

-3969.0
-4142.2
346.5
0.000

-3302.5
-3436.0
267.2
0.000

-3275.4
-3436.0
321.2
0.000

-3270.9
-3451.2
360.6
0.000

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Coefficient
Std. Error

Intercept

-5.4395
0.4738

-4.2166
0.5644

-4.6937
0.5729

-5.3059
0.5859

NYC

-0.4323
0.2149

-0.1762
0.2224

-0.3280
0.2238

-0.1059
0.2263

URBAN

-0.8743
0.1455

-0.8170
0.1557

-0.8629
0.1555

-0.6570
0.1593

SIZE

0.4068
0.0368

0.3836
0.0416

0.4123
0.0417

0.4839
0.0442

AGE

0.2134
0.0208

0.2165
0.0241

0.2268
0.0241

0.2142
0.0240

SIZEAGE

-0.0153
0.0016

-0.0156
0.0018

-0.0165
0.0018

-0.0157
0.0018

MIDATL

0.1580
0.0666

0.1508
0.0840

0.0448
0.0857

MIDWEST

-0.1515
0.0638

-0.1167
0.0836

-0.2750
0.0892

SOUTH

-0.2402
0.0876

-0.2051
0.1146

-0.3346
0.1166

APPALACH

0.1034
0.0973

0.1997
0.1116

0.0873
0.1129

WEST

-0.5197
0.1123

-0.5959
0.1349

-0.7574
0.1368

Estimation Method
Sample
N
Log-likelihood
Restricted Log-likelihood
χ-squared
Significance (α)

ROAL

-6.4553
3.0933

-4.8212
3.6110

-5.9485
3.5858

LOANRAT

-0.9267
0.1633

-0.7635
0.1697

-0.7431
0.1685

WDFK

-0.0872
0.0407

-0.0121
0.0406

-0.0677
0.0382

WDMK

-0.0190
0.0316

-0.0085
0.0314

WROAM
Scale

-1.6098
0.3181
1.1347
0.0275

1.1407
0.0304

1.1276
0.0300

1.1188
0.0298

