                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DOES OPENNESS TO TRADE MAKE COUNTRIES
                     MORE VULNERABLE TO SUDDEN STOPS, OR LESS?
                       USING GRAVITY TO ESTABLISH CAUSALITY

                                            Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                           Eduardo A. Cavallo

                                          Working Paper 10957
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10957


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Eduardo A. Cavallo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does Openness to Trade Make Countries Mor Vulnerable to Sudden Stops or Less? Using
Gravity to Establish Causality
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Eduardo A. Cavallo
NBER Working Paper No. 10957
December 2004
JEL No. F32, F36, F41

                                           ABSTRACT

Openness to trade is one factor that has been identified as determining whether a country is prone

to sudden stops in capital inflow, currency crashes, or severe recessions. Some believe that openness

raises vulnerability to foreign shocks, while others believe that it makes adjustment to crises less

painful. Several authors have offered empirical evidence that having a large tradable sector reduces

the contraction necessary to adjust to a given cut-off in funding. This would help explain lower

vulnerability to crises in Asia than in Latin America. Such studies may, however, be subject to the

problem that trade is endogenous. We use the gravity instrument for trade openness, which is

constructed from geographical determinants of bilateral trade. We find that openness indeed makes

countries less vulnerable, both to severe sudden stops and currency crashes, and that the relationship

is even stronger when correcting for the endogeneity of trade.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138-5801
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Eduardo A. Cavallo
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138-5801
eduardo_cavallo@ksg.harvard.edu
Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less?
                       Using Gravity to Establish Causality

        A “sudden stop” -- and abrupt cut-off in capital inflows -- entails a resource transfer
to creditor countries, from the debtor country. Often it also entails a financial or currency
crisis in the latter, accompanied by a sharp fall in output.3 Broadly speaking, there are two
opposing views on the relationship between a country’s openness and whether it is prone to
sudden stops. The first view is that openness makes a country more vulnerable to sudden
stops. A country highly integrated into world markets is more exposed to shocks coming
from abroad. The second view is that countries that are open to international trade are less
vulnerable to sudden stops. If the ratio of trade to GDP is structurally high, it is easier to
adjust to a cut-off in international financing of a given magnitude. This paper tests the
relationship between trade openness and vulnerability to sudden stops to help choose
between the two hypotheses. Such tests have been done before, but without fully taking
into account the possible endogeneity of trade. Our incremental contribution here is to use
the gravity instrument for trade openness -- which aggregates geographically-determined
bilateral trade across a country’s partners -- to correct for the possible endogeneity of trade.
        The view that openness makes countries more vulnerable to crises comes in a
number of forms. The claim is particularly salient if we are talking about openness to
capital flows: “you can’t have an international debt crisis if you don’t have international
debt.4 But the claim is also made with respect to openness to trade. One variant is that a
weakening in a country’s export markets is sometimes the trigger for a sudden stop in
capital flows, so that a high-trade country is more vulnerable. Another variant notes that
sudden stops in finance often extend to a loss in trade credit -- especially for imports, but
sometimes also even for exports -- and that the resulting shrinkage in trade is more painful
if trade was a larger share of the economy. A third variant says that openness to trade in
practice goes hand in hand with openness to financial flows, for example because much
trade needs multinational corporations, who in turn need to be able to move money across


3
  To the best of our knowledge, the expression “Sudden Stops” was first used by Dornbusch, Goldfajn and
Valdes (1995) and has since become increasingly popular. The first analytic approach to the problem of
sudden stops is Calvo (1998).
4
  Even here, the evidence is mixed. A good entry point to the large literature on financial liberalization and
economic performance is Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003).
national borders; or because it is harder to enforce capital controls if trade is free.5 In the
limiting case, a country that is in autarky with respect to trade must have a net capital
account of zero due to the balance of payments adding up constraint. Regardless the
specific reasoning, the notion that globalization leads to crises is a generalization that
appeals to many.
         The view that openness to trade makes countries less vulnerable also comes with a
number of different specific mechanisms that have been proposed. Rose (2002) argues that
the threatened penalty of lost trade is precisely the answer to the riddle “why do countries
so seldom default on their international debts?” and offers empirical evidence that strong
trade links are correlated with low default probabilities. International investors will be less
likely to pull out of a country with a high trade/GDP ratio, because they know the country
is less likely to default. A higher ratio of trade is a form of “giving hostages” that makes a
cut off of lending less likely.6
         Another variant of the argument that openness reduces vulnerability takes as the
relevant penalty in a crisis the domestic cost of adjustment, i.e., the difficulty of eliminating
a newly-unfinanceable trade deficit. The argument goes back at least to Sachs (1985). He
suggested that Asian countries had been less vulnerable to debt crises than Latin American
countries -- despite similar debt/GDP ratios -- because they had higher export/GDP ratios.
The relatively worse performance observed in Latin America was due to the lower
availability of export revenue to service debt. He concludes that: “After a decade of rapid
foreign borrowing, too many of Latin America’s resources were in the nonexporting sector,
or abroad. When financial squeeze in the early 1980’s caused banks to draw their loans,
the only way that Latin countries could maintain debt servicing was through a recession
and a large reduction in imports combined with debt rescheduling” (p.548). More recently,
Guidotti et. al. (2004) make a similar point by providing evidence that economies that trade
more recover fairly quickly from the output contraction that usually comes with the sudden
stop, while countries that are more closed suffer sharper output contraction and a slower
recovery.


5
 Aizenman (2003), and Aizenman and Noy (2004).
6
 The point was originally made by Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). They argue that countries that trade more are
subject to more harmful trade-related retaliation in the aftermath of default and therefore are less likely to
default.


                                                                                                             2
         Consider first a country that faces a given cut-off in financing, and must adjust
without nominal or real exchange rate flexibility. The adjustment must then come through a
reduction in spending. To achieve a $1 billion improvement in the trade balance, the
contraction has to be $ (1/m) billion, where m is defined as the marginal propensity to
import (in a Keynesian model) or the share of spending that falls on tradable goods (in a
tradable/nontradable model). The lower is m, the more painful the adjustment. Whether
output itself falls depends, of course, primarily on whether wages and prices are flexible.
But even in a full-employment world, sharp reductions in consumption are painful.
         Consider, second, a country that does have the option of nominal and real exchange
rate flexibility. In traditional textbook models, if the adjustment is achieved in part through
nominal and real depreciation, rather than exclusively through expenditure-reduction, the
country can accommodate the tougher new financing constraint without necessarily
suffering a recession. This is true even if a relatively large devaluation is required to
generate the necessary improvement in the trade balance. But since the emerging market
crises of 1994-1998, economists have increasingly emphasized contractionary effects of
devaluation, particularly via the balance sheet effect: if the country’s debts are denominated
in foreign currency, the balance sheets of the indebted banks and corporations are hit in
proportion to the devaluation.7 If the economy is starting from a high ratio of trade to GDP
the necessary devaluation need not be large, and therefore the adverse balance sheet effect
need not be large. But if the economy is not very open to trade to begin with, the necessary
devaluation, and the resulting balance sheet impact and recession, will all be large. Again
we arrive at the result that whether the necessary adjustment will be large and painful
depends inversely on openness.
         The balance sheet version of the openness story is modeled formally by Calvo,
Izquierdo, and Talvi (2003) and Cavallo (2004). Both have in mind the example of
Argentina, which has traditionally had a low ratio of trade to GDP, and has suffered some

7
  The analytical literature on balance sheet effects and output contraction includes: Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), Krugman (1999), Aghion, Banerjee and Bacchetta (2000), Cespedes, Chang and Velasco (2000,
2003), Chang and Velasco (1999), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2002), Christiano, Gust and Roldos (2002),
Dornbusch (2001), and Mendoza (2002). Cavallo, Kisselev, Perri and Roubini (2002) provide empirical
evidence of the output cost associated to the balance sheet effect. Looking at the experience of the 1990´s they
show that countries entering a crisis with high levels of foreign debt tend to experience large real exchange
rate overshooting (devaluation in addition to the long run equilibrium level) and large output contractions.




                                                                                                              3
of the worst sudden stops.8 But the hypothesis that openness to trade reduces a country’s
vulnerability to sudden stops transcends any one formal model, causal link, or country
example. The same is true of the hypothesis that openness raises a country’s vulnerability.
This paper seeks to choose empirically between the two competing hypotheses.
         What do we mean by “vulnerability to sudden stops?” Our primary criterion will be
a probit model measuring the probability of a sudden reduction in the magnitude of net
capital inflows, following closely the definition of Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2003). But
we also consider some other possible definitions. We look at the definition of crisis
episodes in Frankel and Rose (1996) and Frankel and Wei (2004), which is based on the
exchange market pressure variable defined as the percentage depreciation plus percentage
loss in foreign exchange reserves. In addition to looking at the probability of a sudden stop
or currency crisis, we also examine the subsequent output loss and its magnitude. One
possibility is that in a country where sudden stops are associated with large recessions, they
are more likely to occur, because investors fear that the country will default to avoid the
recessions -- Cavallo (2004).9 The opposite relationship between the magnitude and
probability of crises is also possible, however. Dooley (2000) has suggested that when
crises lead to recessions, countries are more likely to take care to avoid them, and so sudden
stops are less likely.
         Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2003) and Edwards (2004) are among the empirical
papers that find that openness to trade is associated with fewer sudden stops. On the other
hand, Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998, 2000) find that openness helps trigger crises and/or




Similarly, Guidotti, Sturzenneger and Villar (2003) find evidence that liability dollarization worsen output
recovery after a sudden stop in capital inflows.
8
  Others who have argued that Argentina’s low trade/GDP ratio helps explain why it was such a victim of the
global sudden stop after 1999 include Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2003), Calvo and Talvi (2004), Desai and
Mitra (2004) and Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill, who once said it was unsurprising the Argentines had lost
the confidence of investors because they don’t export anything.
9
  Cavallo’s model shows first that under a plausible set of assumptions applicable to emerging market
economies, closedness is costly in terms of output loss in the aftermath of sudden stops. The reason is that
these shocks trigger real exchange rate depreciations and these, in turn, are contractionary in economies that
are highly dollarized. The size of the contraction (or, analogously, the “cost of the adjustment”) is negatively
related to the degree of trade openness. It also shows that foreign investors who foresee this are more likely
to pull their money out of these countries, making sudden stops more likely.


                                                                                                              4
sharp reversals of the current account.10 All these papers -- except the first -- use the
trade/GDP ratio as the measure for openness to trade.11
         A critic might argue that the trade/GDP ratio is endogenous. One way in which
trade openness could be endogenous is via income: richer countries tend to liberalize trade
barriers -- in part because their mode of public finance shifts from tariff revenue to income
or VAT taxes. A second way is that trade liberalization could be part of a more general
reform strategy driven by pro-globalization philosophy or “Washington Consensus” forces.
Other aspects of such a reform program, such as privatization, financial liberalization, or
macroeconomic stabilization might affect the probability of crises, and yet an OLS
regression analysis might inappropriately attribute the effect to trade. A third way that trade
openness could be endogenous is that experience with crises -- the dependent variable --
may itself cause liberalization, via an IMF program. Or it might have the opposite effect, if
a country’s response to a crash is disenchantment with globalization and the Washington
Consensus.
         A fourth way in which trade openness could be endogenous is through the
feedbacks between trade and financial openness. Aizenman (2003) shows in the setting of a
simple model how more commercial openness increases the effective cost of enforcing
financial repression, rendering financial openness a by-product of greater trade integration.
Similarly, one could potentially think of a reverse causality process, whereby for example,
greater financial openness may reduce the cost of trade credit and encourage FDI, and both
adjustments may facilitate more commercial trade. Aizenman and Noy (2004) empirically
investigate the presence of two-way feedbacks between financial and trade integration.
         How can the endogeneity of trade be addressed?12                    We use gravity estimates to
construct an instrumental variable for trade openness. This methodology was developed by
Frankel and Romer (1999) in the context of the effect of trade on growth, and was later
applied to a variety of settings in which trade and some other variable could potentially be


10
   Along with current account balance, terms of trade, world interest rates and other variables. Easterly, Islam
and Stiglitz (2001) find that trade openness raises output volatility.
11
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2003) use a different measure of openness, which they claim to be superior to
the trade to GDP ratio because it is not subject to direct valuation effects that occur as a result of changes in
the real exchange rate. They use w = (Y*-S)/A*, where Y* is the supply of tradable goods, S are factor
payments and A* is the absorption of tradable goods.




                                                                                                               5
jointly determined.13 Basically, it consists of aggregating up across a country’s partners the
prediction of a gravity equation that explains trade with distance, population, language,
land-border, land-area, and landlocked status. Gravity estimates are a good instrumental
variable, because they are based on geographical variables which are plausibly exogenous
and yet when aggregated across all bilateral trading partners are highly correlated with a
country’s overall trade.
         In this paper we use capital account (also known as financial account) and current
account data for all countries in the world with data available from the IMF International
Financial Statistics (IFS), to identify sudden stops in capital flows statistically. The data set
covers 141 countries in total, for the period 1970-2002. Following Calvo, Izquierdo, and
Mejia (2003), we define a sudden stop episode as taking place in a country during the year
in which there is a noticeable reduction in the current account deficit that is driven by a
disruptive, i.e. recessionary, reduction in foreign capital inflows.14 As an alternative, we
also use the Frankel and Rose (1996) definition of crisis episodes. For the instrumental
variable, we use the Frankel and Rose (2002) dataset to compute gravity estimates for each
country in the sample. These are the key variables needed to test the relationship between
trade openness and crises.
         Using a stacked cross-section, instrumental variables techniques and controls for
other plausible determinants of sudden stops, we show that (lack of) trade openness is
indeed a powerful predictor of these capital account shocks: moving from Argentina’s
current trade share (approximately 20% of GDP) to Australia’s average trade share
(approximately 30% of GDP), reduces the probability of a sudden stop by 32%. Some may
find this result counterintuitive: trade protectionism does not “shield” countries from the
volatility of world markets as proponents might hope. On the contrary, less trade openness
leads to greater vulnerability to sudden stops. Finally, using a measure of composite output
loss from Frankel and Wei (2004), and instrumental variables techniques, we find evidence

12
   Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2003) try to deal with the problem of endogeneity of trade by computing a
two-step hierarchical bootstrapped confidence intervals for all variables in the model.
13
   For example, Frankel and Rose (2002) shows that currency unions may raise output, via trade. For a survey
of the gravity model in general, and applications and extensions, see chapters 4 and 6 of Frankel (1997).
14
   A reduction in the financial account surplus could potentially be the optimal response to a positive trade
shock. To rule out such a case as a crisis episode, we require that a sudden stop be accompanied by a
recession. As a matter of fact, this assumption is not essential for the results and we later show that all the
findings are robust to alternative definitions of sudden stops.


                                                                                                             6
that openness reduces the output cost associated with the crises that occur, although this
result is not as strongly robust as the others.
        The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we elaborate on the empirical
strategy and discuss the estimation method. Next, we present standard probit results using
sudden stop episodes as the dependent variable and confirm the negative correlation
between trade openness and the probability of sudden stops that has already been noted in
the literature. We then present instrumental variable probit results to show that the direction
of causality goes from trade openness to reduced vulnerability to sudden stops. We then
repeat the exercise using the Frankel and Rose (1996) definition of crisis episodes and
confirm the previous results. Next, we perform several robustness checks, including using a
composite output loss variable as the dependent variable in the regressions to test the
relationship between openness and the cost of crisis that take place. Finally we discuss
results and conclude.


        II. Empirical Strategy
        We begin by testing whether countries that trade more are (all else equal) more or
less prone to sudden stops in capital flows. We estimate variants of the following equation:
SSi,t = c + (Trade Openness)i,t + (Foreign Debt/GDP)i,t-1 + (Liability Dollarization)i,t-1 +
 (CA/GDP) i,t-1 + Z + µi,t                                                                     (1)
where
    •   “SSi,t” takes value 1 if a sudden stop hits country “i” at year “t” and 0 otherwise,
    •   “CA/GDP” is the current account balance to GDP, and
    •   “Z” is a set of lagged and contemporaneous regressors included for robustness
        check purposes.
        Let us begin with the dependent variable. In order to construct SSi,t, we follow the
Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2003) criteria for a sudden cut in foreign capital inflows (i.e.
worsening of the financial account surplus, FA) that is not the consequence of a positive
shock (namely a trade shock). Using a dataset containing annual observations for all the
countries in the world with available data in the IMF International Financial Statistics
database (IFS) for the period 1970-2002, we compute sudden stop episodes as a reduction
in the CA deficit during the same year as a reduction in FA surplus. To guarantee that this



                                                                                                     7
reduction in the CA deficit is not the result of a boom – rising exports imports and
income—the episode has to be disruptive, i.e., accompanied by a simultaneous reduction in
real output. In words, a sudden stop occurs during the year in which there is a noticeable
reduction in the current account deficit that is accompanied by a recessionary reduction in
foreign capital inflows.15 Based on alternative definitions of what is “noticeable” and
“disruptive” we compute four classifications of sudden stops to be used as robustness
checks for the results.
         The preferred definition is SS1. This algorithm classifies as a sudden stop a
situation in which at a year “t”, the financial account surplus of country “i” (prevailing at
year “t-1”) falls at least two standard deviations below the sample mean; the current
account deficit falls by any amount either in “t” or in “t+1”; and GDP per capita falls by
any amount either in “t” or in “t+1.” The overall global pattern of sudden stops under this
criterion is summarized in Figure 1.


                                      INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

         The total number of episodes captured using this methodology is 86, which is 2.4
percent of total available country/year observations in the dataset.16 As Figure 1 shows,
these events take place around well-known crises periods: the early 1980’s debt crises in
Latin America; the 1992-1993 European Monetary System crises; the 1997-1998 Asian
crises; and the new wave of crises in developing countries in the late 1990’s and early
2000. As shown in the last six columns of the summary statistics table in Appendix A.4,
16% of all sudden stops occurred in the Asia-Pacific region; 13% in Europe; 33% in Latin
America; 15% in the Middle East; 21% in Africa; and 1% in South Asia and North America
respectively. Alternative definitions show similar patterns of temporal/spatial distribution.17
         On the regressors side, trade openness is typically measured as a country’s ratio of
total trade to GDP -- (X + M / Y). All these data are readily available from the IFS and the
World Development Indicators CD-ROM (WDI) for almost all countries. But, as argued in
the Introduction, the problem of using this measure of trade openness is that it might be


15
   Technical details are left to the data appendix.
16
   The complete list of crisis episodes per country is in Table A.1. in Appendix A.1.
17
   Graphs are available upon request.


                                                                                             8
correlated with other unobserved country characteristics, creating identification problems
and potentially biased estimators. The contribution we seek to make to the literature is to
avoid these problems by using instrumental variables regression techniques. We instrument
trade openness by the predicted ratio of trade to GDP based on gravity equations. In its
most basic form, the gravity equation captures the intuitive notion that bilateral trade flows
are proportional to the product of each country GDP level, and inversely related to the
distance between them. Therefore, the “predicted” trade to GDP ratio can be computed
from data on countries’ geographic characteristics, bilateral trade flows, and GDP. The
gravity model has become popular, and there are some very extensive databases that can be
used for these computations. We used the dataset at Andrew Rose’s webpage,18 which is
perhaps the most complete one available and has been widely used for empirical research.19
Details on the methodology are left to the appendix. The important point is that, to the
extent that the “predicted” trade to GDP ratio is highly correlated with the actual trade to
GDP ratio20, it is a good instrument, because it is less likely that geography is related to
economic outcomes through any channel other than trade. In other words, geography is
quite plausibly exogenous. A limitation imposed by this methodology is that it does not
allow for enough variation in the instrument over time so as to estimate a model with
country fixed effects. We don’t consider this to be a serious limitation, because most of the
variation in trade openness is across countries, not over time.
         “Liability Dollarization” introduces the “balance sheet” effects into the empirical
model. According to the emerging markets crises literature cited before, the mismatch
between the currency denomination of assets and liabilities in the private and public
balance sheets of these countries increases the output costs of external shocks that trigger
real exchange rate depreciations. Indeed, some sort of “balance sheet” mismatch is required
to explain why real depreciations are contractionary in some countries, because in a world



18
   http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/RecRes.htm
19
   The data set consists of 41,678 bilateral trade observations spanning six different years (1970, 1975, 1980,
1985, 1990, and 1995). All 186 countries, dependencies, territories, overseas departments, colonies, and so
forth for which the United Nations Statistical Office collects international trade data are included in the data
set. The trade data are taken from the World Trade Database, a consistent recompilation of the U.N. trade data
presented in Feenstra, Lipsey, and Bowen (1997), augmented with data from U.N.’s International Trade
Statistics Yearbook. This data set is estimated to cover at least 98% of all trade.
20
   The actual correlation between the variable “trade openness” and the instrument used in this paper is 0.52.


                                                                                                              9
without these imperfections real depreciations should be expansionary.21 We use two
alternative measures of “liability dollarization”: (i) One is the ratio of foreign liabilities of
the financial sector to money (IFS line 26C/Line 34). This is not a direct measure of the
extent to which a country’s balance sheets present a mismatch in the currency
denomination of assets and liabilities. Nevertheless this variable has been used in the
literature22 as a proxy, primarily because it is available for almost all countries since 1970
and because it should be correlated to actual balance sheet mismatches. (ii) Our alternative
proxy is a measure of deposit dollarization from Arteta (2002) and Arteta (2003). This is
“Dollar Deposits / Total Deposits” in the financial system. Intuitively, countries with a high
percentage of deposit dollarization, but whose domestic currency is not the U.S. dollar, are
(most likely) countries whose public and private sectors tend to borrow heavily in a
currency different from their own. In Arteta’s database, data on the aggregate volume of
foreign-currency-denominated (“dollar”) deposits of residents are available for 92
developing and transition economies. The time span varies across countries, with some
having data from as early as 1975 and some having data only from about 1995 onwards.
           “Foreign Debt /GDP” is included to control for the level of financial openness.
Without debt to service, there are no sudden stops to worry about. Data for “Foreign
Debt/GDP” comes from IFS, where foreign debt is line 89a in that database.
           “CA/GDP” is “Current Account Balance/GDP.”               Its presence controls for the
“quantity” of the resource transfer required in the aftermath of a sudden stop in inflows.
Data on country’s current account balances comes from the WDI CD-ROM.
           Finally, “Z” is a set of (lagged and contemporaneous) regressors included for
robustness check purposes. These are:
•      “the log of Reserves in months of imports” (because reserves could potentially be used
       as self-insurance against sudden stops),
•      “the log of GDP per capita” (to control for the stage of economic development),
•      “FDI / GDP” (the stability of FDI flows could reduce the likelihood of a sudden stop),
•      “institutional quality” (to avoid that “trade openness,” whether or not instrumented, is
       incorrectly appropriating effects on sudden stops that really go through institutions),


21
     See Cespedes et. al. (2003) for a thorough discussion.
22
     E.g., Alesina and Wagner (2003) and Guidotti et. al. (2003).


                                                                                                 10
•      “The ratio of short term debt to total debt” (to control for the effect of the term structure
       of the debt in the likelihood of a crisis), and
•      “ierr”, a measure for nominal exchange rate rigidity that is included to test whether
       monetary policy affects the probability of sudden stops.
           All these variables come from WDI CD-ROM, with the exception of the
“institutional quality” data, which come from Kaufmann et. al. (2002) and Marshall and
Jaggers (2002)’s Polity IV Project, and data on “ierr,” which come from Levy Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2003) and are based on their “de-facto” exchange rate classification.
           We first present results without instrumental variables, to confirm the existence of a
negative correlation between sudden stops and trade openness. Our specification is Probit.
Then, we present the results based on instrumental variables for Probit (iv probit). We
refrain from reporting panel data (country) fixed-effects results because, as already
discussed, most important source of variation is across countries, not within. Summary
statistics for all the variables are found in the Appendix A.3, and for all variables tabulated
by SS1 in Appendix A.4.
           We then run similar regressions where the dependent variable is currency crises,
from the Frankel-Rose (1996) and Frankel-Wei (2004) definition, instead of the sudden
stop measure.23 They define crisis episodes based on the foreign market pressure index.
This index is defined as the percentage fall in reserves plus the percentage fall in the
foreign exchange value of the currency. The idea is that this index measures the fall in
demand for the country’s currency; it is then up to the monetary authorities to determine
whether to accommodate, by letting the money supply fall, or to depreciate. To avoid
treating every year of a multi-year high-inflation period as a separate crisis, the approach
followed by the authors requires that the increase in exchange market pressure represent an
acceleration of at least an additional 10 percent over the preceding period to be considered
a crisis episode; and they also adopt an exclusion window of 3 years. The total number of
episodes captured using this methodology is 419 which is 13 percent of total available
country/year observations in the dataset. This means that the alternative way of computing
crisis episodes is much more comprehensive than the sudden stop criterion. The overall
global pattern of crises events under this criterion is summarized in Figure 2. As can be

23
     Summary statistics are in Appendix A.3


                                                                                                 11
readily observed in Figure 2, the peak in the number of episodes captured using this
methodology is also centered around well-known crisis periods.24


                                           INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE


         III. Results
         We begin by estimating non-instrumental variables variants of equation (1), using a
stacked cross-section. We compute standard errors robust to clustered heteroskedasticity.
All independent variables -- other than trade openness and effectiveness of government--
are lagged one period.25 Results include year fixed effects and regional dummies, but these
coefficients are not reported here.26 The results reported here are based on “SS1,” but all
estimates are robust to the use of alternative definitions of sudden stops.27 We do not
exclude contiguous crisis episodes, but all the results reported here are robust to the
inclusion of a one-year, two-sided omission window around crisis episodes.
         The explanatory power of the regressions is not high. This is not surprising; it is
consistent with the performance of standard models of crises and the usual inability of
leading-indicator exercises to properly predict events.28 Table 1 summarizes the results for
some variants of (1) using non-instrumental variables Probit specification.
         As a measure of institutional quality we report the coefficient on “effectiveness of
government” which is one of the six proxies of institutional quality in Kaufman et. al.
(2002).29 The institutional quality data in Kaufman et. al. (2002) are not in panel form, so
every country in the sample is assigned a single (time-invariant) value. As additional
robustness checks, we also use Marshall and Jaggers (2002)’s Polity IV Project data, which




24
   For further details on the methodology and additional summary statistics, please refer to Frankel and Wei
(2004)
25
   Introducing contemporaneous rather than lagged variables does not affect the results.
26
   Further details on the results and robustness checks are available upon request.
27
   We use three alternative definitions. The details are in the data appendix.
28
   See, for example, Arteta (2003)
29
   All the results reported here are qualitatively and quantitatively robust to the inclusion of any of the other
five proxies proposed in that paper. These are: “Voice and Accountability”, “Control of Corruption”, “Rule
of Law”, “Political Stability/Lack of Violence”, and “Regulatory Framework”.


                                                                                                             12
is panel (country/year).30 Using this alternative measure does not change the results, so we
don’t report them.
                                      INSERT TABLE 1 HERE

         Table 1 confirms the existence of a negative correlation between trade openness and
the likelihood of a sudden stop, as previously documented in Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia
(2003) and Edwards (2004). Nevertheless, the methodology employed in these papers can
not guarantee the exogeneity of trade openness and therefore, falls short of establishing
causality.
         As for the other regressors, interestingly, the coefficient on “Foreign Debt / GDP”
does not appear statistically significant across most of the variants in Tables 1 or 2.31 The
last column in Table 1 shows that the result for trade openness is robust to the exclusion of
the debtvariable from the regression. This is consistent with the hypothesis that different
countries are able to tolerate different levels of debts. 32
         Similarly, the coefficient that seeks to capture the “balance sheet” effects --
Liability Dollarization -- is positive but not always statistically significant when definition
(i) is used and always insignificant when Arteta’s dollarization definition (ii) is used
instead.33 This result suggests that these measures of dollarization appear not to have
significant detrimental effects in terms of increased vulnerability to sudden stops. Column 4




30
    It provides a measure of the political regime’s characteristics [either democracy (high values) or autocracy
(low values)] rather that institutional quality per se. In particular: POLITY2 (numeric). Range = -10 to 10 (-
10 = high autocracy; 10 = high democracy). Combined Polity Score: Computed by subtracting AUTOC from
DEMOC; normal range polity scores are imputed for coded “interregnum" and "transition period" special
polity conditions, polities coded “interruption" on the POLITY variable are left blank.
31
   Similarly, Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia. (2003) don’t find a significant effect of total public debt in their
probit regressions for sudden stops, nor do Frankel and Rose (1996) in their probit regressions of currency
crashes.
32
   We also tried “Foreign Debt/Exports” in lieu of “Foreign Debt/GDP.” In theory, the insignificance of
could be due to the fact that both “Foreign Debt” and “GDP” are measured in domestic currency, but the
former potentially has a larger component of foreign currency, so “Foreign Debt/GDP” could be
underestimating financial openness before a sudden stop (if the real exchange rate was overvalued) and
simultaneously overestimating financial openness after sudden stop (if the real exchange rate overshoots ex-
post). Nevertheless, the results using “Foreign Debt/Exports” do not change from those reported using
“Foreign Debt/GDP.” [Unfortunately, series for exports in domestic currency are not as widely available as
series for GDP, so we have fewer observations for this variable.]
33
   Note that when Arteta’s definition is used, many data points are lost. Nevertheless, the coefficient on trade
openness appears to increase a lot when the sample is restricted using Arteta’s dollarization data.


                                                                                                            13
in Tables 1 shows that results are robust to the exclusion of any of the proxies for
dollarization from the regressions (as long as some of the other controls remain in place).34
         Finally, the coefficient that controls for the size of the transfer in the aftermath of
the sudden stop -- CA / GDP -- is negative and statistically significant across all variants.
The implication is as conjectured: a sudden stop is more likely when a larger resource
transfer is expected in its aftermath (i.e., when the initial CA deficit is high).
         As for the other controls: the coefficient on short term debt to total debt appears as
small and positive, but (weakly) statistically significant only in one of the variants of (1).
This suggests that the term structure of the debt appears not to have a significant effect on
the probability of a sudden stop. The coefficient on the index of rigidity of the nominal
exchange rate is positive but statistically insignificant in the regressions. The rest of the
controls, including institutional quality proxies, never appear as statistically significant and
all the results are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of these variables from the
regressions. Regional dummies (not reported) are always insignificant.
         Now we come to what we hope is our contribution to the state of the art. Table 2
presents instrumental variable estimates for probit. 35


                                        INSERT TABLE 2 HERE


         The results are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 1, although the point
estimates of the coefficient on trade openness are quantitatively different. Interestingly,
when we use gravity estimates as instrumental variables for trade openness, the point
estimates are noticeably bigger in absolute value. This means that correcting for the




34
   In our preferred model, liability dollarization is part of the story whereby trade openness can be expected to
have an effect on the probability of a sudden stop. The fact that the coefficient on trade openness remains
statistically significant even after excluding liability dollarization from the regressions, however, may mean
that it works through one of the other channels discussed in the introduction. Or it may be due to the fact that
some of the other controls (in particular, foreign debt/GDP) also capture liability dollarization if most foreign
debt is denominated in foreign currencies as it is usually the case in crisis prone countries. Without any
additional control, trade openness does not appear as statistically significant in the non-IV regressions, in spite
of the fact that the controls themselves are rarely significant.
35
   The STATA module used to run these regressions is due to Gelbach (1999) and it implements the method
of Whitney Newey, “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Endogenous
Explanatory Variables”, Journal of Econometrics (1987).


                                                                                                               14
potential sources of endogeneity, the effect of trade openness on the probability of sudden
stop is even stronger than what one would be led to conclude from the OLS regressions.
         From the point estimates of the coefficient on trade openness we can estimate the
average change in the probability of an event occurring as the result of a unit change in the
value of trade openness.36 This number is approximately -0.077,37 meaning that an increase
in trade openness of 10 percentage points decreases the likelihood of a sudden stop by
approximately 32%.38 That is, a country that only trades 20% of GDP (i.e. Argentina) is,
ceteris paribus, 32% more likely to be hit by a sudden stop than a country that trades 30%
of GDP (i.e. Australia).
         The rest of the point estimates are qualitatively similar to those found in Table 1.
Two differences are notable. (i) The estimated coefficient on trade openness remains
strongly negative and statistically significant even when the variable “Foreign Debt / GDP”
is excluded from the regressions. (ii) The coefficient on “Liability Dollarization” appears
positive and statistically significant when the variable “Short Term Debt / Total Debt” is
excluded from the regressions. In spite of these results, it is worth reemphasizing that the
methodology here only promises the exogeneity of trade openness, so no causal
relationship can be derived from the other estimates.
         Next, we redo the exercise using the Frankel-Rose and Frankel-Wei definition of
crises as the dependent variable. In Table 3 we report standard probit results, and in Table 4
we present IV probit results with gravity estimates as the instrumental variable for trade.
The results are consistent with those reported before.
                                           INSERT TABLE 3 HERE



36
   Note that in a linear regression model the slope coefficient of a regressor measures the effect on the average
value of the regressand for a unit change in the value of the regressor. In probit the rate of change in the
probability is somewhat complicated and given by j*Ø(Zi), where j is the coefficient of the jth regressor and
Ø(.) is the density function of the standard normal variable where Zi = X, that is, the regression model used
in the analysis.
37
   This average is based on reported and not reported regressions.
38
   A 10 percentage point increase in the independent variable “trade openness” is, for example, an increase
from the mean value of this variable in the sample, which is 0.63, to 0.73 (see appendix A.3. for summary
statistics); or, equivalently, an increase in trade openness of approximately two standard deviations above the
sample mean. Given the estimated coefficient on trade openness, this 0.10 increase in the independent
variable decreases the left hand side by: 0.10*(-0.077) = -0.0077. The left hand-side variable is either “0’s” or
“1’s”. Because 2.39% of the observations in the sample are 1’s, a -0.0077 change in the left hand side variable




                                                                                                             15
                                           INSERT TABLE 4 HERE
         The main highlights are:
         •   Openness reduces the probability of a currency crisis. The point estimates are
             not as large in absolute value as those obtained when using “SS1;” but the new
             coefficients are always statistically significant at standard confidence levels and
             the instrumental variables results are still stronger than the standard probit
             results. This reinforces the point already made, that correcting for the potential
             sources of endogeneity, the effect of trade openness on the probability of an
             external crisis is even stronger than what one would be led to conclude from the
             OLS regressions that use the trade to GDP ratio as a measure of openness.
         •   The coefficient on “Foreign Debt / GDP” is positive and statistically significant
             in most of the IV probit regressions, suggesting that the presence of a large
             stock of foreign debt as a percentage of GDP increases the probability of crisis.
             The result is not robust in the standard probit regressions and is idiosyncratic to
             this particular definition of crisis episodes.
         •   The coefficient on the log of Reserves, in months of imports, is systematically
             negative and statistically significant across both, standard and IV probit
             regressions. This suggests that having a large stockpile of reserves reduces the
             probability of being hit by a crisis. This result is interesting because this variable
             is always insignificant in the regressions that use “SS1” as the dependent
             variable. The most likely reason for the difference is the way in which crises are
             defined in both cases. Frankel-Rose definition of crisis episodes uses the foreign
             exchange market pressure index which itself includes change in Reserves in the
             definition, while “SS1” does not.
         •   The coefficient on “ierr” is positive and statistically significant across most of
             the regressions in both tables. This suggests that having a peg increases the
             chances of being hit by a crisis. This result is also idiosyncratic to this definition
             of crisis episodes.




means that there is a decrease in the probability of observing a 1 instead of a 0 (i.e. observing a sudden stop)
of approximately (-0.0077/0.0239)*100=-32%


                                                                                                            16
        •    The coefficient on “CA / GDP” is systematically insignificant across all
             regressions. This is also different from the case in which the dependent variable
             is “SS1”. Once again the most likely reason is the definition of the crisis
             variable itself. Recall that “SS1” is built upon the assumption that there is an
             outstanding current account deficit that has to be abruptly reduced in the
             presence of a crisis; while in the alternative definition of crises, an episode can
             occur independently of what happens to the current account if the government is
             willing to give up reserves to finance an outstanding deficit.
        •    All of the aforementioned results are even stronger in statistical significance
             when regional dummies are excluded from the regressions.
        The rest of the controls never appear as statistically significant, but all the results
are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of these variables from the regressions. Regional
dummies (not reported) are always insignificant. We find it reassuring that we get very
similar results using two very different definitions of crises. We also get some additional
results in terms of other variables that increase or reduce the probability of a crisis, but we
choose not to emphasize these so strongly because the methodology we propose here only
promises the exogeneity of openness.


        IV. Robustness Checks
        Finally, we perform a variety of robustness checks. We redo all regressions using
linear models rather than probit. All of the aforementioned results are robust to this
alteration. We report these regressions in Tables 5 and 6 in Appendix A.5. In table 7 in the
same appendix we report results for instrumental variables GLS random effects estimates.
Reassuringly, results are both quantitatively and qualitative similar to those in the
comparable Table 6.39
        The next step is to look at an alternative dependent variable, one that combines
crisis episodes with the depth of the crisis, where the latter is measured in terms of the
recessionary impact of an event. We choose to use the sum of output lost during crises (and


39
  Unfortunately, the STATA module used to compute instrumental variables probit (Table 1) does not allow
running random effects instrumental variables probit regressions. So there is no table analogous to Table 5
but for probit regressions. Nevertheless, and somewhat reassuringly, random effects non-instrumental
variables probit models yield almost identical results to those of plain probit (i.e. Table 4).


                                                                                                        17
up to three years after the crisis), excluding from that summation cases where crises were
associated with output gain. We borrow this variable from Frankel and Wei (2004).40 Given
the nature of the dependant variable, which is censored to the left of the distribution at zero,
the natural candidate for the estimation is a Tobit model. We perform Tobit and iv Tobit
regressions and report the typical results in the first two columns in Table 8 in Appendix
A.5.41 We find that openness tends to dampen the contractionary effects of crises, but the
effect is not robust in the IV regressions. We also find that the “Foreign Debt / GDP”, the
“Short Term Debt / Total Debt” and “Liability Dollarization” typically enter regressions
with a positive coefficient, meaning that the presence of all these increases the recessionary
effect of crises. Finally, the “Lag of reserves in months of imports” is typically negative
and statistically significant, meaning that the presence of a large stockpile of reserves tends
to dampen the recession that might come in the aftermath of an external crisis. In columns
3 and 4 of Table 8, we also report IV linear and IV probit results which depict a similar
picture. The only noticeable difference is that in the IV probit regressions the coefficient on
openness is typically statistically significant. All the other controls are never statistically
significant.
        The evidence suggests that openness tends to reduce the contractions that might
follow crisis episodes, but the results are not as robust as those we obtain using sudden
stops or currency crises as the dependent variable. In particular, they are not always strong
in IV tobit regressions.


        V. Conclusion
        In summary, the evidence overall appears to be quite robust. Economies that trade
less with other countries are more prone to sudden stops and to currency crashes.
Controlling for other plausible determinants of these shocks and instrumenting trade
openness by gravity estimates to avoid identification problems, we find a causal link
between lack of openness to trade and the instability of financial flows. In fact out of the
set of controls we tried, only trade openness and the size of current account deficit before


40
  Summary statistics are in Appendix A.3.
41
  The STATA module used to run these regressions is due to Gelbach (1999b) and it implements the method
of Whitney Newey, “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Endogenous
Explanatory Variables”, Journal of Econometrics (1987).


                                                                                                    18
the shock appear as significant predictors of sudden stops. Trade openness, foreign debt,
reserves and the nominal exchange rate rigidity also appear as significant predictors of the
other form of external crises analyzed.
        The effect of trade openness on the probability of sudden stop appears to be not
only qualitatively robust, but also quantitatively significant. A conservative estimate (based
on the average point estimate of the reported and unreported coefficients on trade openness)
yields the surprising result that, all else equal, increasing the trade to GDP ratio by 10
percentage points (i.e. going from Argentina’s current trade share to Australia’s average
trade share) reduces the probability of a sudden stop by approximately 32%. We also find
some evidence that more openness reduces the output cost associated with crises, although
these results are not as robust as those that point to the connection between openness and
the probability of crises.




                                                                                           19
       VI. References


Aizenman, Joshua, (2003), “On the Hidden Links Between Financial and Trade Opening”,
NBER Working Paper No. 9906.

Aizenman, Joshua, and I. Noy (2004), “On the Two Way Feedback between Financial and
Trade Openness”, NBER Working Paper No. 10496.

Alesina, Alberto and Alexander Wagner, (2003), “Choosing (and reneging on) Exchange
Rate Regimes”, NBER Working Paper No. 9809.

Arteta, Carlos, (2002), "Exchange Rate Regimes and Financial Dollarization: Does
Flexibility Reduce Bank Currency Mismatches?" International Finance Discussion Paper
738, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (September).

Arteta, Carlos, (2003), “Are financially dollarized countries more prone to costly crises?”
International Finance Discussion Paper 763, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (March).

Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee (2000), “A Simple Model of Monetary Policy
and Currency Crises”, European Economic Review, 44 (4-6): 728-738.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy (2003), “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
Development and Underinsurance”, Journal of Finance, Vol. LVIII, No. 2: 867-893

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, (2003), “Sudden Stops, The
Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons.” NBER Working
Paper 9828. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Calvo Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis Fernando Mejia, (2003), “On the
Empirics of Sudden Stops”. Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper.

Calvo, Guillermo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2004, “Sudden Stop, Financial Factors and Economic
Collapse: A View from the Latin American Frontlines,” in From the Washington
Consensus Towards a New Global Governance, Barcelona, Sept. 24-26.

Calvo, Guillermo A., (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
Economics of Sudden Stops”, Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1):35-54.

Cavallo, Eduardo A., (2004), “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial
Trade can increase the stability of capital flows”, mimeograph, Harvard University.

Cavallo, Michelle, Kate Kisselev, Fabrizio Perri and Nouriel Roubini, (2002), “Exchange
Rate Overshooting and the Costs of Floating”, mimeograph, New York University.




                                                                                        20
Céspedes, L.F., R. Chang and A. Velasco, (2000), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy”, NBER Working Paper no. 7840.

Céspedes, L.F., R. Chang and A. Velasco, (2003), “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas”, IMF Staff
Papers, Vol. 50, (special issue): 143-156.

Chang, Roberto and A. Velasco, (1999), “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, A
Canonical Model”, FRBA, Vol. 84, no. 2 (Second Quarter): 4-17.

Christiano, L.J., C. Gust and J. Roldos, (2002), “Monetary Policy in a Financial Crisis”,
Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Desai, Padma, and Pritha Mitra (2004), “Why Do Some Countries Recover More Readily
from Financial Crises,” Columbia University, July.

Dooley, Michael, (2000), "Can Output Losses Following International Financial Crises be
Avoided?", NBER Working Paper 7531. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass.

Dornbusch Rudiger (2001), “A Primer on Emerging Market Crises,” NBER Working Paper
No. 8326. Published in Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, S. Edwards and
J. Frankel, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and Rodrigo Valdes, (1995), “Currency Crises and
Collapses”, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 219-293.

Easterly, W., R.Islam and J. Stiglitz (2001), “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth
Volatility,” Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, edited by B.
Plesokovic and N. Stern.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981), “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis”, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, No.2 (Apr., 1981),
289-309.

Edwards, Sebastian, (2004a), “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account
Reversals”, NBER Working Paper No. 10277. American Economic Review 94, no.2, May
59-64.

Edwards, Sebastian, (2004b), “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current
Account Reversals and Sudden Stops,” NBER WP no. 10276, January. In IMF Staff
Papers.

Feenstra, Robert, Robert Lipsey, and Harry Bowen (1997), “World Trade Flows, 1970-
1992, with Production and Tariff Data”. NBER Working Paper No. 5910.

Frankel, Jeffrey (1997), “Regional Trading Blocs”, Institute for International Economics.
Washington, DC.


                                                                                            21
Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, (1999), “Does Trade Cause Growth?”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3: 379-399.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew K. Rose (1996), “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics 41: 351-368.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew K. Rose, (2002), "An Estimate of the Effect of Common
Currencies on Trade and Income", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 117, Issue 2
(May): 437-466

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei (2004), “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy
Lessons,” Chapter 7, in Economic Volatility and Crises: A Policy-Oriented Guide, edited
by Joshua Aizenman and Brian Pinto, World Bank, Washington DC, 2004.

Gelbach, Joseph (1999), “PROBITIV: Stata module to perform instrumental variables
probit”, in Statistical Software Components from Boston College Department of
Economics. Available online: http://econpapers.hhs.se/software/bocbocode/s371401.htm.

Gelbach, Joseph (1999b), “TOBITIV: Stata module to perform instrumental variables
tobit”, in Statistical Software Components from Boston College Department of Economics.
Available online: http://econpapers.hhs.se/scripts/search.asp?ft=tobitiv.
Guidotti, Pablo, Federico Sturzenegger and Agustin Villar, (2003), “On the Consequences
of Sudden Stops”, Economia, forthcoming.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and P. Zoido-Lobatón. (2002), “Governance Matters II—Updated
Indicators for 2000/01,” World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper No.
2772,Washington D.C.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy 105 (2),
211-248.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Perrones (2004), “How do Trade and
Financial Integration Affect the Relationship Between Growth and Volatility?”
International Monetary Fund, August.

Krugman Paul, (1999), “Balance Sheets Effects, the Transfer Problem and Financial
Crises,” in International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honour of Robert P.
Flood, Jr., Isard P., A. Razin and A.K. Rose (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 31-
44.

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2003), “A de facto Classification of
Exchange      Rate    Regimes:       A    Methodological     Note”,      posted    at
http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/contents/ of American Economic Review, Vol. 93 (September),
No. 4.




                                                                                      22
Marshall, Monty G., and Keith Jaggers (2002), “Polity IV Project, Political      Regime
Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2002”. Integrated Network for Societal     Conflict
Research (INSCR) Program. Center for International Development and               Conflict
Management      (CIDCM), University of          Maryland,   College Park          20742.
www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity

Mendoza, Enrique, (2002), “Credit, Prices and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden
Stop”, in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, J. and S. Edwards
(eds.), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin (1998) “Sharp Reductions in Current Account
Deficits: An Empirical Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 6310. European Economic
Review 42 (3--5), May: 897--908.

---------. 2000. “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.”
NBER Working Paper 6620. . In Paul Krugman, ed., Currency Crises. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003), “Effects of
Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” Occasional
Paper No. 220, Research Department, International Monetary Fund.

Rose, Andrew, (2002), “A Reason Why Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and
International Trade”, NBER Working Paper #8853

Sachs, Jeffrey D, (1985), "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance in Latin
America and East Asia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1985:2.




                                                                                      23
                                                                   Numer of Episodes




                                                   0
                                                       1
                                                           2
                                                               3
                                                                      4
                                                                                         5
                                                                                             6
                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                         9
                                            1971
                                            1972
                                            1973
                                            1974
                                            1975
                                            1976
                                            1977
                                            1978
                                            1979




     Source: Author’s computations
                                            1980
                                            1981
                                            1982
                                            1983
                                            1984
                                            1985
                                            1986




                                     Year
                                            1987
                                            1988
                                            1989
                                            1990
                                                                                                             Sudden Stops 1




                                            1991
                                            1992
                                            1993
                                                                                                                              Figure 1: Sudden Stop 1




                                            1994
                                            1995
                                            1996
                                            1997
                                            1998
                                            1999
                                            2000
                                            2001
                                            2002
                                                                          Sudden Stops




24
   Figure 2: Crises Episodes based on “foreign exchange market pressure index”
                             [Frankel and Wei (2004)]

                                                                    Crisis Episodes
                                                                [Frankel and Wei (2004)]

          30




          25




          20
Number
of episodes

          15                                                                                                                   Crises Episodes




          10




              5




              0

              1971   1973   1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987    1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001

                                                                       Year


                                                   Source: Author’s computations




                                                                                                                                     25
                       Table 1: Non - Instrumental variables Probit Regressions

                                                               Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop 1
                         -0.53        -0.86          -3.01      -1.025      -0.898        -0.691      -0.705      -0.831      -0.479
Trade openness t
                      (0.259)**     (0.343)**     (0.998)**    (0.671)    (0.348)**     (0.329)**   (0.278)**   (0.344)**    (0.247)*
Foreign Debt/           -0.080        -0.07         -0.860      -0.995      -0.028        -0.144      -0.063      -0.087
GDP t-1                (0.217)       (0.243)       (0.685)    (0.453)**    (0.238)       (0.243)     (0.236)     (0.235)
Short Term Debt/                      0.951         5.253      1.829         1.168                    0.553      0.9776           0.358
Total Debt t-1                       (0.855)      (2.567)**   (1. 553)      (0.765)                  (0.686)     (0.772)         (0.601)
Liability
                        0.316         0.236                     0.599                     0.399       0.244       0.324          0.302
Dollarization t-1      (0.195)       (0.266)                  (0.229)**                 (0.216)**    (0.242)     (0.268)         0.2455
(1)
Liability
                                                    0.733
Dollarization t-1                                  (1.416)
(2)
Exchange Rate                                                   0.224
Rigidity Index t-1                                             (0.146)
Current Account/        -4.068        -5.417        -9.69       -8.68        -5.60        -4.98       -4.99       -5.50        -3.42
GDP t-1               (1.297)**     (1.902)**     (2.86)***   (2.928)**    (1.888)**    (1.781)**   (1.632)**   (1.862)**    (1.308)**
                                                               -0.0974
FDI/GDP t-1                                                    (0.074)
Ln Reserves in
                                                               -0.121
Months of
                                                              (0.1165)
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                                0.035                     -0.075       0.037        -0.101      0.106                       0.175
per capita t-1                       (0.190)                   (0.223)      (0.193)      (0.136)     (0.134)                     (0.152)
Effectiveness of                      0.141                    0.4143        0.170        -0.059                  0.137           0.065
Government t                         (0.268)                   (0.359)      (0.269)      (0.245)                 (0.201)         (0.187)
     Regional
                        YES            YES          YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                        YES            YES          YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES
     Effects?
                          -2.544       -2.065      -0.244       -1.99        -2.165      -1.255        -2.62       -1.95       -3.21
    Constant
                        (0.63)***     (1.383)      (1.099)     (1.73)       (1.372)      (1.064)    (1.121)**   (0.737)**    (1.08)**
       Obs.                778          464          113         296          447          597          564         508         904
        R2                0.0992      0.1154       0.2927      0.2033       0.1115       0.1178       0.1037      0.1156      0.0872
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                            26
                           Table 2: Instrumental Variables Probit Regressions

                                                             Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop 1
                       -2.45         -3.47        -5.20        -3.99      -3.31         -3.02       -2.78       -3.17        -1.60
Trade openness t
                     (0.813)**     (1.419)**    (2.40)**     (2.12)*    (1.286)**     (1.167)**   (0.931)**   (1.260)**    (0.735)**
Foreign Debt/          0.196         0.687        0.637       -0.475      0.662         0.356       0.500       0.533
GDP t-1               (0.275)       (0.512)      (0.955)     (0.813)     (0.465)       (0.380)     (0.358)     (0.440)
Short Term Debt/                       1.51        1.89      2.735         1.78                     1.01        1.83            0.199
Total Debt t-1                       (1.226)     (1.779)     (2.22)       (1.11)                   (1.01)     (0.984)*         (0.763)
Liability
                       0.591          0.094                   0.638                     0.681       0.127       0.236           0.251
Dollarization t-1    (0.256)**       (0.328)                 (0.448)                  (0.291)**    (0.299)     (0.314)         (0.231)
(1)
Liability
                                                 -2.126
Dollarization t-1                                (1.416)
(2)
Exchange Rate                                                  0.328
Rigidity Index t-1                                          (0.146)**
Current Account/       -7.386        -8.39        -7.674      -16.83        -8.4        -8.186      -7.57       -8.049       -4.67
GDP t-1              (2.06)***     (2.50)***    (3.755)**   (4.58)***   (2.433)***    (2.36)***   (2.18)***   (2.41)***    (1.543)**
                                                              -0.047
FDI/GDP t-1                                                  (0.1572)
Ln Reserves in
                                                              -0.171
Months of
                                                             (0.231)
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                                0.235                   -0.167        0.20        -0.039     0.396                        0.252
per capita t-1                       (0.263)                 (0.353)      (0.247)      (0.164)    (0.223)*                     (0.159)
Effectiveness of                      0.188                    0.636       0.192        -0.293                  0.314           0.160
Government t                         (0.287)                 (0.418)      (0.276)      (0.247)                 (0.255)         (0.192)
     Regional
                        YES           YES         YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES             YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                        YES           YES         YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES             YES
     Effects?
                          -1.73       -2.443       5.88      -0.371        -2.33       -0.132       -3.697      -1.086       -3.04
    Constant
                        (0.723)**    (1.452)*    (3.557)     (3.099)      (1.458)      (1.163)    (1.501)**    (1.010)     (1.067)**
       Obs.               1062           724       262         514          767          934         821         751         1217
Standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                          27
                         Table 3: Non-Instrumental variable Probit Regressions

                                  Dependent Variable: Crisis Episodes [Frankel and Wei (2004) definition of exchange market pressure]
                        -0.57         -0.64         -0.46          -0.59         -0.64        -0.58           -0.37       -0.32         -0.58
Trade openness t
                      (0.269)**     (0.249)**       0.554        (0.307)**     (0.262)**    (0.281)**       (0.208)*    (0.129)**     (0.303)**
Foreign Debt/            0.23          0.21          0.30           0.31          0.34         0.27            0.35                      0.24
GDP t-1                (0.231)       (0.196)       (0.484)        (0.257)       (0.209)      (0.218)       (0.176)**                   (0.233)
Short Term Debt/                        0.39                                     0.30                                                      0.83
Total Debt t-1                        (0.694)                                  (0.711)                                                   (0.877)
Liability
                        0.027          0.062                      0.024                                     0.044       -0.0003
Dollarization t-1      (0.249)        (0.224)                    (0.288)                                   (0.205)      (0.148)
(1)
Liability
                                                     -1.0
Dollarization t-1                                    1.76
(2)
Exchange Rate            0.13                                       0.18         0.15         0.14                                         0.15
Rigidity Index t-1     (0.094)                                  (0.098)**      (0.090)*      (0.097)                                     (0.103)
Current Account/        -0.272         0.004                       -0.95                                                                   0.55
GDP t-1                (1.392)        (1.406)                     (1.54)                                                                 (1.381)
                                                                   0.03                                                                    0.03
FDI/GDP t-1                                                      (0.058)                                                                 (0.032)
Ln Reserves in
                        -0.26          -0.30         -0.35        -0.19         -0.22         -0.25                       -0.21         -0.29
Months of
                     (0.082)***      (0.079)**     (0.3851)     (0.087)**    (0.069)***    (0.077)***                  (0.036)***    (0.083)***
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                                                                                        0.009                                       -0.058
per capita t-1                                                                              (0.1114)                                     (0.139)
Effectiveness of                        0.09                                     0.17          0.25                                        0.25
Government t                          (0.152)                                  (0.153)       (0.158)                                     (0.172)
     Regional
                        YES            YES           YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES             YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                        YES            YES           YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES             YES
     Effects?
                          -0.99        -0.009        0.565        -0.581        -0.486        -0.531       -1.447         -0.599          -0.461
    Constant
                         (0.749)      (0.562)       (1.041)      (1.085)       (0.568)      (1.069)**     (0.61)**       (0.498)         (0.958)
       Obs.                557          690           119          481           622           586          798            1841            561
        R2               0.1186       0.1252        0.2113       0.1201        0.1253         0.1211       0.0894        0.0857          0.1238
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                    28
                           Table 4: Probit Instrumental Variables Regressions

                                  Dependent Variable: Crisis Episodes [Frankel and Wei (2004) definition of exchange market pressure]
                        -1.73          -1.62        -2.53          -1.95          -1.53       -1.77           -0.97       -1.06         -2.07
Trade openness t
                      (0.918)*      (0.747)**      (2.518)       (1.045)*      (0.765)**    (0.946)*        (0.591)*    (0.393)**     (1.025)*
Foreign Debt/            0.59          0.49         -0.17         0.756          0.653        0.616          0.571                       0.75
GDP t-1                (0.373)       (0.274)*      (0.786)       (0.422)*       (0.334)*     (0.35)*       (0.227)**                  (0.416)*
Short Term Debt/                        0.39                                     0.32                                                     0.75
Total Debt t-1                        (0.672)                                  (0.677)                                                  (0.914)
Liability
                         0.18          0.05                        0.21                                    -0.11         0.001           0.015
Dollarization t-1      (0.234)        (0.217)                    (0.274)                                  (0.181)       (0.143)         (0.290)
(1)
Liability
                                                     -1.42
Dollarization t-1                                   (2.679)
(2)
Exchange Rate            0.22                                      0.26          0.19          0.26                                     0.27
Rigidity Index t-1    (0.113)*                                  (0.116)**     (0.099)**     (0.128)**                                (0.125)**
Current Account/         0.66          0.91                        0.34                                                                 0.21
GDP t-1                (1.455)        (1.37)                     (1.677)                                                               (1.72)
                                                                   0.13                                                                 0.13
FDI/GDP t-1                                                      (0.098)                                                              (0.088)
Ln Reserves in
                        -0.37          -0.39         -0.83         -0.30        -0.26         -0.37                      -0.29         -0.30
Months of
                     (0.099)***     (0.089)***      (0.619)      (0.11)**    (0.078)***    (0.110)***                 (0.0436)**     (0.106)**
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                                                                                         0.04
per capita t-1                                                                               (0.104)
Effectiveness of                        0.13                                    0.196          0.27                                       0.35
Government t                          (0.161)                                  (0.159)       (0.165)                                    (0.203)
     Regional
                        YES            YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES             YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                        YES            YES           YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES             YES
     Effects?
                          0.304        -0.392         2.82        0.472         0.139        -1.364        -1.035        -0.684         -0.147
    Constant
                         (0.786)      (0.089)       (2.667)      (0.982)       (0.764)       (0.89)       (0.576)       (0.572)         (1.10)
       Obs.                841           841          331          738           737          1038          1196          2375           580
Standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                   29
       VII. Appendixes

A.1 Sudden Stops

I use four alternative definitions of sudden stops: my preferred definition “SS1”, and three
alternative “SS2”, “SS3” and “SS4”. “SS2” and “SS3” are conceptually equivalent to
“SS1”, but are more restrictive in that they capture fewer episodes. “SS4” is, instead,
equivalent to “SS1” but is less restrictive in that classifies as sudden stops events that don’t
necessarily trigger recessions.

Algorithm used to compute “Sudden Stop 1” (SS1):

   1) Use IFS Financial Account Data (Line 78B) annual data for all available countries
      in the period 1970-2002.
   2) Compute the standard deviation of observations for each decade (70´s, 80´s, 90’s+)
      in the sample and then compute the mean standard deviation for by averaging the
      results obtained for each decade.
   3) Compute the year to year changes in the financial account (FA) for all countries in
      the sample. Unavailable data points are classified as “n.a.”
   4) Filter to keep observations (country/year) that show reductions in the financial
      account between years “t” and “t-1” if at “t-1” FA was in surplus (i.e. keep only
      observations that show reductions in FA surpluses). Observations that don’t pass
      this filter, because they show either a year-to-year increase in the FA; or a year-to-
      year reduction in an outstanding FA deficit are classified as “0”.
   5) Filter again to keep (out of the observations already filtered in step (4)) only those
      that represent a reduction in the FA surplus that is above 2 standard deviations from
      the mean standard deviation computed in step (2). Observations that don’t pass this
      filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from step (4).
   6) Filter again to keep only those observations that are accompanied by a fall in GDP
      per capita in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4) and (5)
   7) Filter again to keep only those that are accompanied by a fall in the current account
      deficit in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4), (5) and (6).
   8) Classify the observations that survive all filters as “1” indicating that they represent
      episodes (country/year) when SS took place. The other observations are classified as
      either “0” which means no episodes were registered during that year in that country,
      or “n.a” which means that some data is missing.
   9) Results:
                              Number of Observations in the Dataset
                   “1” sudden stop         “0” no episode          “n.a.” no data
                         86                     3510                    1651




                                                                                             30
Algorithm used to compute “Sudden Stop 2” (SS2):

   1) Use IFS Financial Account Data (Line 78B) annual data for all available countries
      in the period 1970-2002.
   2) Compute the standard deviation of observations for each decade (70´s, 80´s, 90’s+)
      in the sample.
   3) Compute the year to year changes in the financial account (FA) for all countries in
      the sample. Unavailable data points are classified as “n.a.”
   4) Filter to keep observations (country/year) that show reductions in the financial
      account between years “t” and “t-1” if at “t-1” FA was in surplus (i.e. keep only
      observations that show reductions in FA surpluses). Observations that don’t pass
      this filter, because they show either a year-to-year increase in the FA; or a year-to-
      year reduction in an outstanding FA deficit are classified as “0”.
   5) Filter again to keep (out of the observations already filtered in step (4)) only those
      that represent a reduction in the FA surplus that is above 2 standard deviations from
      the corresponding decade standard deviation computed in step (2). Observations
      that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from step (4).
   6) Filter again to keep only those observations that are accompanied by a fall in GDP
      per capita in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4) and (5)
   7) Filter again to keep only those that are accompanied by a fall in the current account
      deficit in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4), (5) and (6).
   8) Classify the observations that survive all filters as “1” indicating that they represent
      episodes (country/year) when SS took place. The other observations are classified as
      either “0” which means no episodes were registered during that year in that country,
      or “n.a” which means that some data is missing.
   9) Results:
                             Number of Observations in the Dataset
                  “1” sudden stop         “0” no episode         “n.a.” no data
                        68                     3531                   1648




                                                                                           31
Algorithm used to compute “Sudden Stop 3” (SS3):

   1) Use IFS Financial Account Data (Line 78B) annual data for all available countries
      in the period 1970-2002.
   2) Compute the year to year changes in the financial account (FA) for all countries in
      the sample. Unavailable data points are classified as “n.a.”
   3) Compute the standard deviation the year to year changes for each decade (70´s,
      80´s, 90’s+) in the sample and then compute the mean standard deviation for by
      averaging the results obtained for each decade
   4) Filter to keep observations (country/year) that show reductions in the financial
      account between years “t” and “t-1” if at “t-1” FA was in surplus (i.e. keep only
      observations that show reductions in FA surpluses). Observations that don’t pass
      this filter, because they show either a year-to-year increase in the FA; or a year-to-
      year reduction in an outstanding FA deficit are classified as “0”.
   5) Filter again to keep (out of the observations already filtered in step (4)) only those
      that represent a reduction in the FA surplus that is above 2 standard deviations from
      the mean standard deviation computed in step (3). Observations that don’t pass this
      filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from step (4).
   6) Filter again to keep only those observations that are accompanied by a fall in GDP
      per capita in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4) and (5)
   7) Filter again to keep only those that are accompanied by a fall in the current account
      deficit in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4), (5) and (6).
   8) Classify the observations that survive all filters as “1” indicating that they represent
      episodes (country/year) when SS took place. The other observations are classified as
      either “0” which means no episodes were registered during that year in that country,
      or “n.a” which means that some data is missing.
   9) Results:
                              Number of Observations in the Dataset
                  “1” sudden stop         “0” no episode         “n.a.” no data
                        48                     3551                   1648




                                                                                           32
Algorithm used to compute “Sudden Stop 4” (SS4):

   1) Use IFS Financial Account Data (Line 78B) annual data for all available countries
      in the period 1970-2002.
   2) Compute the standard deviation of observations for each decade (70´s, 80´s, 90’s+)
      in the sample and then compute the mean standard deviation for by averaging the
      results obtained for each decade.
   3) Compute the year to year changes in the financial account (FA) for all countries in
      the sample. Unavailable data points are classified as “n.a.”
   4) Filter to keep observations (country/year) that show reductions in the financial
      account between years “t” and “t-1” if at “t-1” FA was in surplus (i.e. keep only
      observations that show reductions in FA surpluses). Observations that don’t pass
      this filter, because they show either a year-to-year increase in the FA; or a year-to-
      year reduction in an outstanding FA deficit are classified as “0”.
   5) Filter again to keep (out of the observations already filtered in step (4)) only those
      that represent a reduction in the FA surplus that is above 2 standard deviations from
      the mean standard deviation computed in step (2). Observations that don’t pass this
      filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from step (4).
   6) Filter again to keep only those that are accompanied by a fall in the current account
      deficit in that country during the same year or the year immediately after.
      Observations that don’t pass this filter are classified as “0” adding to the “0’s” from
      steps (4), (5) and (6).
   7) Classify the observations that survive all filters as “1” indicating that they represent
      episodes (country/year) when SS took place. The other observations are classified as
      either “0” which means no episodes were registered during that year in that country,
      or “n.a” which means that some data is missing.
   8) Results:
                              Number of Observations in the Dataset
                  “1” sudden stop         “0” no episode         “n.a.” no data
                        145                    3450                   1652




                                                                                           33
                       Table A.1: Sudden Stops 1
                       Number of
             Country
                       Episodes
Afghanistan, I.S. of       0
Albania                    0
Algeria                    1        1990
Angola                     0
Antigua and Barbuda        0
Argentina                  1        2001
Aruba                      0
Australia                  0
Austria                    0
Bahamas, The               0
Bahrain, Kingdom of        0
Bangladesh                 0
Barbados                   1        1982
Belgium                    0
Belgium-Luxembourg         0
Belize                     0
Benin                      1        1983
Bolivia                    1        1982
Bosnia & Herzegovina       0
Botswana                   0
Brazil                     0
Bulgaria                   0
Burkina Faso               1        1989
Burundi                    0
Cambodia                   0
Cameroon                   2        1988      1990
Canada                     1        1982
Cape Verde                 1        1990
Central African Rep.       1        1988
Chad                       0
Chile                      3        1982      1983   1998
China,P.R.: Mainland       0
China,P.R.:Hong Kong       0
Colombia                   2        1998      1999
Comoros                    1        1988
Congo, Republic of         2        1984      1996
Costa Rica                 2        1981      1996
Côte d'Ivoire              0
Croatia                    0
Cyprus                     0
Czech Republic             0
Czechoslovakia             0
Denmark                    0
Djibouti                   0
Dominica                   1        2001




                                                            34
Dominican Republic     0
Ecuador                2   1983   1999
Egypt                  1   1990
El Salvador            1   1979
Equatorial Guinea      0
Ethiopia               2   1982   1991
Fiji                   1   1999
Finland                1   1991
France                 0
Gabon                  0
Gambia, The            1   1982
Germany                1   2001
Ghana                  0
Greece                 0
Grenada                0
Guatemala              0
Guinea                 0
Guinea-Bissau          1   1986
Guyana                 0
Haiti                  0
Honduras               0
Hungary                0
Iceland                1   2001
India                  0
Indonesia              1   1997
Iran, I.R. of          0
Iraq                   0
Ireland                0
Israel                 2   1988   1998
Italy                  0
Jamaica                0
Japan                  0
Jordan                 2   1992   1993
Kenya                  0
Kiribati               0
Korea                  1   1997
Kuwait                 0
Kyrgyz Republic        0
Lao People's Dem.Rep   0
Lesotho                0
Liberia                0
Libya                  0
Macedonia, FYR         0
Madagascar             0
Malawi                 1   1981
Malaysia               1   1997
Maldives               0
Mali                   0
Malta                  1   2000



                                         35
Mauritania             0
Mauritius              0
Mexico                 3   1982   1994   1995
Mongolia               2   1990   1991
Montserrat             0
Morocco                1   1995
Mozambique             0
Myanmar                0
Namibia                0
Nepal                  0
Netherlands            1   1981
Netherlands Antilles   0
New Zealand            2   1988   1998
Nicaragua              1   1986
Niger                  0
Nigeria                1   1999
Norway                 0
Oman                   2   1987   1999
Pakistan               0
Panama                 1   2000
Papua New Guinea       0
Paraguay               1   2002
Peru                   1   1998
Philippines            2   1997   1998
Poland                 0
Portugal               1   1992
Romania                0
Rwanda                 1   1994
Samoa                  0
São Tomé & Príncipe    0
Saudi Arabia           0
Senegal                0
Seychelles             1   2000
Sierra Leone           0
Singapore              0
Slovak Republic        0
Slovenia               0
Solomon Islands        1   1998
Somalia                0
South Africa           0
Spain                  1   1992
Sri Lanka              1   2001
St. Kitts and Nevis    0
St. Lucia              1   2001
St. Vincent & Grens.   1   2000
Sudan                  0
Suriname               1   1992
Swaziland              1   1999
Sweden                 1   1991



                                                36
Switzerland            0
Syrian Arab Republic   1   1989
Tanzania               0
Thailand               1   1997
Togo                   0
Tonga                  1   1989
Trinidad and Tobago    1   1984
Tunisia                0
Turkey                 4   1991   1994   1998   2001
Uganda                 0
United Kingdom         0
United States          0
Uruguay                1   2002
Vanuatu                1   1991
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.   1   1994
Vietnam                0
Yemen, Republic of     1   1994
Zambia                 1   1990
Zimbabwe               1   1983




                                                       37
A.2. Gravity Estimates

To compute the gravity estimates we use Frankel and Rose (2002) dataset. It consists of
41,678 bilateral trade observations spanning six different years (1970, 1975, 1980, 1985,
1990, and 1995). All 186 countries, dependencies, territories, overseas departments,
colonies, and so forth for which the United Nations Statistical Office collects international
trade data are included in the data set. The trade data are taken from the World Trade
Database, a consistent recompilation of the U.N. trade data presented in Feenstra, Lipsey,
and Bowen (1997), augmented with data from U.N.’s International Trade Statistics
Yearbook. This data set is estimated to cover at least 98% of all trade.
For each of the six different years for which I have data I compute OLS regressions of the
following form:

Log (Ti,j / Yi) = c +   logdisti,j + logpop2 + comlangi,j + borderi,j + areapi,j + landlock +


Where “Ti,j” is the bilateral trade value between countries “i” and “j”; “Yi” is the real GDP
of country “i”; “c” is a constant term; “logdisti,j” is the log of the distance between the
economic centers of countries “i” and “j”; “comlang” is a dummy variable that takes value
one if “i” and “j” share a common language and is zero otherwise; “border” is a dummy
variable that takes value one if “i” and “j” share a border and is zero otherwise; “areapi,j” is
the log of the product of the areas (in km2) of countries “i” and “j”; and “landlock” takes
values two if “i” and “j” are both landlocked, one if either “i” or “j” are landlocked, and
zero otherwise; and “ ” is the error term.
The gravity estimates are generated by taking the exponent of fitted values and summing
across bilateral partners j. This yields estimates for six different years: 1970, 1975, 1980,
1985, 1990 and 1995. The missing values of the panel are generated by taking the
observation corresponding to the closest year with data. The correlation between trade ratio
and generated IV for the entire panel is 0.52.




                                                                                             38
A.3. Summary Statistics and Data Sources


         Variable              Obs.    Mean      Std. Dev.    Min        Max


SS1                            3596   .0239155   .1528071       0          1


SS1bis (no contiguous
                               3590   .0222841   .1476266       0          1
crises)


SS2                            3599   .0188941   .1361701       0          1


SS2bis (no contiguous
                               3596   .0180756   .1332436       0          1
crises)


SS3                            3599   .013337    .1147293       0          1


SS3bis (no contiguous
                               3597   .0127884   .1123762       0          1
crises)


SS4                            3595   .0403338   .1967683       0          1


SS4bis (no contiguous
                               3587   .0381935   .1916898       0          1
crises)


Trade openness          (A)    4247   .7322445    .432648    .0153068   2.960163



Fitted trade openness   (B)    4261   .1487951   .1497813    .0016543   1.364657


Lagged
                               3454   .3207969   .3902904       0       1.999936
Dollarization (1)        (C)


Lagged
                               897    .2666019   .2752479       0          1
Dollarization (2)       (D)


Lagged ratio of foreign debt
                               1789   .2780933   .4375788       0       5.844839
to GDP                   (E)




                                                                                   39
Lagged current account
                                  3630   -.038277   .1034782   -2.404958    .58553
balance to GDP         (F)


Lagged ratio of foreign debt
                                  1791   .2779454   .4373619      0        5.844839
to GDP                   (G)


Lagged index of exchange
                                  3059   2.411246   .8072297      1           3
rate rigidity          (H)


Voice and
                                  3255   .3525906   .9023457   -1.623367   1.693636
Accountability              (I)


Political Stability/Lack of
                                  3038   .2303492   .8255066   -1.694225   1.69047
Violence                    (I)


Effectiveness of
                                  3038   .3136892   .8409723   -1.320767   2.082198
Government                  (I)


Regulatory Framework        (I)   3224   .3598345   .5851707   -1.500832   1.244778



Rule of Law                 (I)   3224   .2939932   .871838    -1.203638   1.995832



Control of Corruption       (I)   3038   .2972141   .9230486   -1.104606   2.129017


Lag of the log of ratio of
                                  3344   -.086772   1.659605   -8.031686   4.978178
FDI to GDP                 (J)

Lag of the log of ratio of
                                  3687
Reserves in moths of                     .8576736   .9757717   -6.114763   3.238615
imports                    (K)

Lag of the log of real GDP
                                  2798   7.777605   1.55145    4.439352    10.8719
per capita               (L)


Lag of the ratio of short         3429
                                         .1240123   .128602       0        .9990642
term debt to total debt (M)


Polity 2                   (O)    4102   .4193077   7.567316      -10        10



Crisis Episodes            (P)    3039   .1378743   .3448247      0           1




                                                                                      40
Output loss in the aftermath
                                3039         .0035077        .0337175           0                1.08
of a crisis              (Q)

(A) The negative of the trade to GDP ratio over 100. Source: WDI-CD ROM
(B) See Appendix A.2 for an explanation of the methodology employed and data used.
(C) The ratio of foreign liabilities of the financial sector to money. Source: IFS (Line 26C/line 34)
(D) The ratio of “Total Dollar Deposits/Total Deposits. Source: Arteta (2002) and Arteta (2003)
(E) Source: IFS line 89c
(F) Ratio over 100. Source: WDI-CD ROM
(G) Ratio over 100. Source: IMF-IFS
(H) index=1 is (de-facto) flexible exchange rate; index=2 is (de-facto) intermediate arrangement; and index=3
is (de-facto) peg. Source: Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003).
(I) Source: Kaufman et. al. (2002)
(J) Source: WDI-CR ROM
(K) Source: WDI-CD ROM
(L) Source: WDI-CD ROM
(M) Ratio over 100. Source: WDI-CD Rom
(O) Range = -10 to 10 (-10 = high autocracy; 10 = high democracy). Combined Polity Score: Computed by
subtracting AUTOC from DEMOC; normal range polity scores are imputed for coded “interregnum" and
"transition period" special polity conditions, polities coded “interruption" on the POLITY variable are left
blank. Source: Marshall and Jaggers (2002).
(P) Source: Frankel and Wei (2004). The approach in Frankel and Wei (2004) is to use the foreign exchange
market pressure index. This index is defined as the percentage fall in reserves plus the percentage fall in the
foreign exchange value of the currency. The idea is that this index measures the fall in demand for the
country’s currency; it is then up to the monetary authorities to determine whether to accommodate, by letting
the money supply fall, or to depreciate. To avoid treating every year of a multi-year high-inflation period as a
separate crisis, the approach followed by the authors requires that for an event to be considered a crisis
episode, the increase in exchange market pressure must represent an acceleration of at least an additional 10
percent over the preceding period; and they also adopt an exclusion window of 3 years.
(Q) Source: Frankel and Wei (2004).




                                                                                                            41
A.4. Summary Statistics tabulated by SS1




    SS1                   Trade         Fitted          Lagged       Lagged      Lagged        Lagged          Lagged
                         openness        Trade         ratio of       ratio     ratio of   Dollarization   Dollarization
                                       openness         current    short term    foreign         (2)            (1)
                                                        account     debt to      debt to      Arteta’s
                                                        balance    total debt      GDP         Measure
                                                         to GDP
                N           3194             3031        3299         2477        1509          814            2713
              Mean        .7435752         .1391386    -.036689     .1306851    .2696239      .2632213        .343962
            Standard
                          .4238145         .1338924    .1013581     .1251594    .3695807      .2738159        .4002734
     0     Deviation
               Max        2.948319          1.364657     .58553     .9896104    5.303783          1           1.999936
               Min        .0153068          .0016543    -2.40495        0           0             0               0
             Median       .641516          .1028203    -.0292687    .0998124    .1625514      .1679155        .1790431
                N            82                82          84          71          44            26              63
              Mean       -.7233081         -.1138573   -.0910636    .1771209    .3061938      .2553588        .4459254
            Standard
                          .4039229         .1068885    .0922481     .1075558    .3830985      .2475523        .4873929
     1     Deviation
               Max       -.1859836         -.0016543    .0175044    .5749587    1.843943      .8585674        1.864839
               Min       -2.164437         -.6640582   -.5269149    .0100371    .0120837      .0007974        .0051215
             Median      -.5978948         -.0795055   -.0542901    .1715937     .178018      .2060619        .2751537
                N          3276               3113        3383        2548        1553           840            2776
              Mean       -.7430679         -.1384726   -.0380395    .1319791    .2706601      .2629779        .3462761
            Standard
                          .4232809         .1332988    .1014827     .1249182    .3698927      .2729095        .4026407
   Total   Deviation
               Max       -.0153068         -.0016543    .58553      .9896104    5.303783         1            1.999936
               Min       -2.948319         -1.364657   -2.404958        0          0             0                0
             Median      -.6409257         -.1024864   -.0302055    .1011938    .1626635      .1695639         .179754
SS1                 Lagged        Voice and        Political      Effectiveness   Regulatory   Rule of     Control of
                    Index of    Accountability   Stability/lack   of Government   Framework      Law       Corruption
                    Exchange                      of Violence
                    Rate
                    Rigidity
             N         2558          2508             2347             2347          2483        2483         2347
           Mean      2.35731       .3879369         .2489824         .3526585      .3883469    .3380581     .3369313
         Standard
                     .8247772      .9008189         .8401079          .86721       .5761471    .8931987     .9569204
 0      Deviation
            Max         3           1.693636         1.69047        2.082198       1.244778    1.995832     2.129017
            Min         1          -1.623367        -1.694225       -1.320767      -1.500832   -1.203638    -1.104606
          Median        3           .4057957         .164349        .1734646       .4442023    .2741438      .020012
             N          66              69              67              67             69          69           67
           Mean      2.333333        .227192         .0607287        .2434398       .4245789    .2118273     .1812266
         Standard
                     .8289629      .8603037          .80767          .7970953      .4912563    .8233971     .8957398
 1      Deviation
            Max         3           1.628049         1.514361        2.030241       1.232713      1.824      2.085337
            Min         1          -1.357771        -1.694225       -1.320767      -1.169838   -1.203638    -1.104606
          Median        3           .1533591         .0833327        .1636702       .5331683    .0391075    -.1452185
             N         2624           2577             2414            2414           2552         2552        2414
           Mean      2.356707       .3836329         .2437574        .3496271       .3893265    .3346452     .3326097
         Standard
                     .8247325       .899972          .839633         .8653738      .5739639    .8914687      .955443
Total   Deviation
            Max         3           1.693636         1.69047        2.082198       1.244778    1.995832     2.129017
            Min         1          -1.623367        -1.694225       -1.320767      -1.500832   -1.203638    -1.104606
          Median        3           .3913744         .164349        .1734646       .4442023    .2698059      .020012




                                                                                                                       43
SS1                 Polity      Lag of  Lag of  Lag of  Asia-               Europe       Latin     Middle     Africa     South       North
                       2       the log the log the log Pacific                          America     East                  Asia      America
                                ratio  ratio of of real                                 and the
                                of FDI Reserves GDP per                                Caribbean
                                to GDP to Money capita
            N         2888       2739      3320         2307      3222        3222        3222      3222        3222      3222        3222
           Mean     1.601801   -.060504   .858744     7.844113   .129375    .2071875    .2453125   .106875    .2515625     .04      .0196875
         Standard
                    7.589532   1.651816   .9538479    1.558114   .335667    .4053544    .4303396   .3090025   .4339789   .1959898   .1389458
        Deviation
 0
           Max        10       4.348825   3.238615    10.8719       1          1           1          1          1          1          1
                                   -
          Min         -10                 -6.114763   4.439352      0          0           0          0          0          0          0
                               7.811624
          Median        5      .1566815   .9742805    7.625561       0          0           0          0          0          0          0
             N         73         76         82          63         84         84          84         84         84         84         84
           Mean     2.068493   .2983586   .8429953    7.703143   .1585366   .1341463    .3292683   .1463415   .2073171   .0121951   .0121951
         Standard
                    7.142068   1.764806   .9447249    1.304005   .3674911   .3429068    .4728395   .3556233   .4078793   .1104315   .1104315
 1      Deviation
            Max        10      3.106559   2.355545    10.21361       1          1           1          1         1           1          1
            Min        -10     -8.03168   -2.404618   4.608365       0          0           0          0         0           0          0
          Median        4      .4463752   1.094091    7.794864       0          0           0          0         0           0          0
             N        2961       2815       3402        2370       3306       3306        3306       3306      3306        3306       3306
           Mean     1.613306   -.050816   .8583644    7.840365   .1301036   .2053626    .2474101   .1078611   .250457    .0393053   .0195003
         Standard
                    7.578023   1.655657   .9534944    1.55183    .3364686   .4040279    .4315728   .3102521   .4333423   .19435     .1382963
        Deviation
Total
            Max       10       4.348825   3.238615    10.8719       1          1           1          1          1          1          1
                                   -
          Min         -10                 -6.114763   4.439352      0          0           0          0          0          0          0
                               8.031686
         Median        5       .1619896   .9755991    7.632787      0          0           0          0          0          0          0




                                                                                                                                           44
A.5. Robustness Check Tables

                                Table 5: Pooled OLS (Linear) Regressions

                                                           Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop 1
                      -0.024        -0.038      -0.191     -0.021       -0.041        -0.030      -0.033      -0.035     -0.021
Trade openness t
                     (0.013)*     (0.019)**   (0.063)**   (0.0241)    (0.019)**     (0.0159)*   (0.0179)*   (0.017)**   (0.0137)
Foreign Debt/         -0.009         -0.008     0.100      -0.029       -0.003        -0.013      -0.009      -0.009
GDP t-1              (0.0175)      (0.0222)    (0.130)    (0.0193)     (0.022)       (0.0198)    (0.0208)    (0.021)
Short Term Debt/                     0.045
                                               -0.045      0.1186        0.067                    0.035       0.044       0.026
                                    (0.055)
Total Debt t-1                                 (0.162)    (0.0974)     (0.0515)                 (0.0523)     (0.059)    (0.0393)
Liability
                       0.022        0.023                   0.029                     0.025       0.025       0.031      0.0312
Dollarization t-1     (0.017)      (0.030)                (0.0346)                  (0.0189)    (0.0291)    (0.0298)    (0.0276)
(1)
Liability
                                               -0.059
Dollarization t-1                             (0.0944)
 (2)
Exchange Rate                                                0.007
Rigidity Index t-1                                         (0.0113)
Current Account/       -0.22        -0.265      -0.661       -0.343     -0.274       -0.235       -0.275      -0.261      -0.170
GDP t-1              (0.072)**    (0.105)**   (0.298)**   (0.139)**   (0.103)**    (0.088)**    (0.095)**   (0.099)**   (0.065)**
                                                            -0.0009
FDI/GDP t-1                                                (0.0019)
Ln Reserves in
                                                           0.0008
Months of
                                                          (0.0033)
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                              0.003        0.082     -0.008        0.005       -0.006       0.005                   0.010
per capita t-1                     (0.0135)   (0.0444)*   (0.0138)     (0.0125)     (0.0086)    (0.0111)                (0.0099)
Effectiveness of                    0.0046      -0.070     0.0146        0.007       -0.002                   0.005       0.003
Government t                       (0.0215)   (0.0401)*   (0.0247)     (0.0192)     (0.0182)                (0.0179)    (0.0139)
      Regional
                       YES          YES         YES         YES         YES           YES         YES         YES         YES
     Dummies?
    Year Fixed-
                       YES          YES         YES         YES         YES           YES         YES         YES         YES
      Effects?
                     -0.0013        -0.004     -0.277       0.084       0.0007        0.061      -0.0005      0.014      -0.081
     Constant
                     (0.014)       (0.0965)   (0.3261)    (0.1177)     (0.1076)     (0.0758)    (0.1033)     (0.033)    (0.0788)
       Obs.            1122          745        219          599         787           961         869         772        1235
        R2            0.0416        0.0573     0.1903      0.0745       0.0550       0.0500       0.0512     0.0550      0.0373
Robust standard error to clustered heterogeneity reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                  45
                          Table 6: Instrumental Variables Linear Regressions

                                                                Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop 1
                        -0.066        -0.093        -0.233       -0.133      -0.100       -0.063      -0.097     -0.088       -0.060
Trade openness t      (0.02)***     (0.057)**     (0.101)**   (0.064)**    (0.03)***     (0.02)**   (0.032)**   (0.03)**     (0.02)**
Foreign Debt/           -0.006         0.007         0.108      -0.0002       0.012       -0.007       0.008      0.004
GDP t-1                (0.0182)      (0.0239)      (0.1408)    (0.0255)     (0.024)      (0.0201)    (0.0222)   (0.0223)
Short Term Debt/                      0.071        -0.023       0.128        0.088                    0.065       0.082        0.025
Total Debt t-1                       (0.0595)     (0.1705)    (0.1076)     (0.0537)*                (0.0559)    (0.0687)     (0.0399)
Liability
                        0.027         0.016                     0.028                      0.029      0.015       0.024        0.028
Dollarization t-1     (0.0169)       (0.0315)                 (0.0334)                   (0.0190)   (0.0274)    (0.0313)     (0.0284)
(1)
Liability
                                                   -0.073
Dollarization t-1                                 (0.1082)
(2)
Exchange Rate                                                    0.011
Rigidity Index t-1                                            ( 0.0119)
Current Account/        -0.317        -0.380        -0.665      -0.475      -0.395        -0.323      -0.364      -0.361       -0.230
GDP t-1               (0.10)***     (0.145)**     (0.290)**   (0.192)**   (0.1427)**    (0.116)**   (0.123)**   (0.131)**    (0.084)**
                                                               -0.0003
FDI/GDP t-1
                                                               (0.0032)
Ln Reserves in
Months of                                                     -0.0014
                                                              (0.0036)
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                                0.009         0.086      -0.005       0.0112         -0.004     0.015                    0.014
per capita t-1                       (0.0146)     (0.0443)    (0.0157)     (0.0135)      (0.0088)   (0.0126)                 (0.0110)
Effectiveness of                      0.007        -0.072       0.021        0.007        -0.0061                 0.011        0.007
Government t                         (0.0221)     (0.041)*    (0.0255)     (0.0194)      (0.0187)               (0.0192)     (0.0148)
     Regional
                        YES            YES          YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES          YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                        YES            YES          YES         YES          YES          YES         YES         YES          YES
     Effects?
                         0.0363        -0.02        -0.312      0.055        0.049         0.085     0.0158       0.092       -0.063
    Constant
                         (0.027)     (0.1055)      (0.337)    (0.0911)     (0.1178)      (0.0791)   (0.1192)    (0.0557)*    (0.0842)
       Obs.               1040          705          215         559          747           914       800          731         1176
        R2               0.0421       0.0571       0.1923      0.0769       0.0548        0.0508     0.0491       0.0546      0.0337
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                        46
               Table 7: Instrumental Variables GLS Random-Effects Regressions
                                                              Dependent Variable: Sudden Stop 1
                       -0.066       -0.094       -0.233       -0.105      -0.100         -0.069      -0.105       -0.088       -0.060
Trade openness t
                     (0.026)**    (0.0417)**    (0.138)*    (0.0437)** (0.0387)** (0.0344)**       (0.0423)**   (0.040)**    (0.0302)**
Foreign Debt/          -0.006        0.007        0.108        0.008       0.012         -0.003       0.012        0.004
GDP t-1               (0.0155)     (0.0235)     (0.0945)     (0.0235)    (0.0223)       (0.0188)    (0.0223)     (0.0219)
Short Term Debt/                    0.071        -0.023        0.063        0.088                     0.066        0.082        0.025
Total Debt t-1                     (0.0692)     (0.1807)     (0.0704)     (0.0632)                  (0.0633)     (0.0647)     (0.0486)
Liability
                       0.027        0.016                      0.015                    0.029         0.014        0.024        0.028
Dollarization t-1    (0.0149)*     (0.0251)                  (0.0251)                 (0.0168)*     (0.0234)     (0.0247)     (0.0192)
(1)
Liability
                                                 -0.073
Dollarization t-1                               (0.0875)
(2)
Exchange Rate                                                  0.011
Rigidity Index t-1                                            (0.013)
Current Account/       -0.317       -0.380       -0.665        -0.413      -0.395       -0.340       -0.382       -0.361       -0.230
GDP t-1              (0.095)***   (0.1325)**   (0.3354)**   (0.142)**    (0.129)**    (0.1085)**   (0.119)***   (0.1275)**   (0.0888)**
                                                              0.0007
FDI/GDP t-1                                                  (0.0033)
Ln Reserves in
                                                               0.003
Months of
                                                             (0.0030)
Imports t-1
Ln GDP                              0.009         0.086        0.009        0.011        -0.003      0.0167                     0.014
per capita t-1                     (0.0148)    (0.0468)*     (0.0148)     (0.0141)     (0.0094)     (0.0141)                  (0.0102)
Effectiveness of                     0.007       -0.072        0.006        0.007        -0.008                    0.011        0.007
Government t                       (0.0186)    (0.0417)*     (0.0187)     (0.0172)      (0.015)                  (0.0166)     (0.0123)
     Regional
                       YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
    Dummies?
   Year Fixed-
                       YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
     Effects?
                        0.024        0.064       -0.312        0.001       0.050         0.078       -0.029        0.092       -0.083
    Constant
                      (0.0999)     (0.1748)     (0.338)      (0.1786)     (0.1701)     (0.1274)     (0.1505)     (0.1440)     (0.1124)
      Obs.              1040          705         215           705          747          914         800           731         1176
       R2              0.0435       0.0583      0.1931        0.0576       0.0564       0.0503       0.0499       0.0557       0.0345
Standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                     47
                                      Table 8: Output Loss Regressions
                                   Non-IV Tobit                     IV-Tobit              IV-Linear              IV-Probit
                                           Dependent Variable: Output loss in the event of a crisis [Frankel and Wei (2004)]
Trade openness t                             -0.37                     -0.31                 -0.007                   -1.93
                                           (0.179)**                  (0.357)                (0.006)                (1.097)*
Foreign Debt/GDP t-1                          0.14                     0.20                   0.006                   0.92
                                            (0.089)                  (0.109)*                (0.007)               (0.356)**
Liability
                                             0.21                      0.076                  0.004                   0.57
Dollarization t-1
                                           (0.118)*                   (0.104)                (0.005)               (0.276)**
(1)
Ln Reserves in                            -0.082                       -0.108                -0.002                  -0.34
Months of Imports t-1                    (0.044)*                     (0.045)*               (0.002)               (0.130)**
Short Term Debt/                            0.70                         0.64                 0.008
Total Debt t-1                          (0.349)**                    (0.346)**               (0.019)
 Regional Dummies?                         YES                           NO                   YES                      NO
 Year Fixed-Effects?                        NO                           NO                   YES                     YES
                                           -0.92                        -0.72                 0.002                  -0.026
        Constant
                                       (0.270)***                    (0.255)**              (0.0099)                (0.867)
           Obs.                             750                          868                   729                    1081
            R2                            0.1791                         n/a                0.04902                    n/a
Standard errors reported in parenthesis.
*** Statistically Significant at 1%
** Statistically Significant at 5%
* Statistically Significant at 10%




                                                                                                                               48
