NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNEMPLOYMENT MW INSURANCE

Sherwin Rosen

Working Paper No. 1095

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

March 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1/1095
March 1983

Unemployment and Insurance

Abstract

This paper elaborates equilibrium properties of contract labor

markets when cost barriers limit labor mobility in response to demand

and productivity shifts. Unemployment is sustained because the marginal
value of labor is not equated across all firms; however the equilibrium
contract optimally allocates a worker's time between market and noninarket

uses, given transactions cost—mobility constraints. Contracts provide
full unemployment insurance for risks that are diversifiable by pooling

among firms. Nondiversifiable (macro) risks are only partially shifted,
largely through self—insurance (contingency saving). Increasing diversi—
fiable risk has social value, similar to the value of an option. Increasing
nondiversifiable risk has negative value because it reduces lifetime con-

sumption. The main empirical implication of contract theory is shown to
be closely related to the permanent income hypothesis and establishes

linkages between labor activities and consumption behavior. It is a
theory of consumption rigidity rather than wage rigidity. Another empirical
implication is that unemployment incidence is proportional to comparative
advantage in norunarket production. Layoffs are ordered by workers' relative
productivity in norimarket compared with market sectors. The theory is used

to analyze some features of the U.S. employment system. Its empirical
support is briefly reviewed.
Sherwin Rosen
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
(312) 962—8166

UNEMPLOYMENT AND INSURANCE

*

Sherwin Rosen

University of Chicago

I.

INTRODUCTION
This paper analyzes equilibrium in labor markets characterized

by stochastic environments and transactions cost barriers to labor
mobility, bbthof which lend social value to enduring employment

relationships. Instantaneous wage competition plays little economic
role in allocating workers to firms in these circumstances. Instead
firms compete for workers through long term attachments and implicit
contractural commitments which specify a worker's employment status
and consumption in each state of the world.1 Patterns of wage payments
serve a redistributive role of transferring workers' consumption claims
across states, a function not at all performed by wages in a standard

market. The competitive contract sustains unemployment because differences in marginal products of labor across firms persists in equilib-

rium. The contract provides complete consumption insurance when risks
are diversifiable over the economy at large. Full unemployment compensation is efficient and level consumption is guaranteed in all states of
nature, because risks can be shifted and redistributed at no social cost.
Nondiversifiable macro risk must be self—insured, since these risks are

not so easily shifted. Self insurance necessarily is incomplete because
it must be accomplished through contingency savings, which require the
equivalent of inventory holdings that reduce average per capita consumption.

1

2

The practical interest of models of this type is related to their
value in explaining employment fluctuations and certain types of unemploy-

ment. Its possible relevance is strengthened by recent empirical findings
that most adult workers in the U.S. economy (and elsewhere) have long—term
attachments with their employers, and that a large fraction of layoffs
are temporary, with workers ultimately returning to employment in their
primary firms.2 My goal is to spell out the complete implications of a
simple form of the theory, to delimit its range of applicability, and to

better inform empirical work on this topic. This development points to
integrating consumption behavior with employment and unemployment activity

as an important focus of future empirical research. I show that the
theory of implicit contracts is intimately related to the permanent income

theory of consumption. The theory also has some novel implications about
the incidence of unemployment. It has less implications about wage
rigidity than in commonly believed.
The basic framework of analysis considers an economy in which a
single consumption good is produced in either of two sectors. One is
home production,. where a worker acts independent of all others.

The

other is a market sector where the worker is employed as one member
among many of a competitive firm which produces and sells in the market.
A firm is viewed as a collective and voluntary association, a type of
club or mutual assurance society that acts in the best interests of its
members.3 Each firm is characterized by a production function and an
organizational (set—up) cost which is shared among its members. The

value of production in the firm is stochastic, while the value of home
production is deterministic.

3

The model makes no distinction between work and leisure. A person
works in either the market sector or at home. Home production may be
given the interpretation as the value of leisure, if the reader prefers,
though it is assumed that whatever is done in the nonmarket sector is

perfectly substitutable with the market good. This simplification has
certain expository virtues: it allows me to concentrate on alternative
production possibilities of a single good rather than analyzing complex

joint production—consumption allocations among goods. Furthermore, it
implies that work in the home or market sector is an all—or—nothing

affair. It thus allows firms' employment policies to take the form of
layoffs. Indivisibilities and set—up costs in either production or labor
supply are required to generate layoffs in the standard economic model

and are difficult to handle. The one—good assumption,

while unrealistic,

therefore has some realistic implications that are more than justified
on the basis of analytical tractability.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II derives the
contract market equilibrium, assuming homogeneous workers and fully

diversifiable risk among the firms. The latter implies that aggregate
output is essentially deterministic. Risk averse workers gain from
divorcing consumption from the day to day fortunes of their particular
firms, and a social arrangement can be found to exploit these gains.
It takes the form of an insurance or mutual fund in which firms in
effect pool their stochastic outputs into an aggregate deterministic

sum and withdraw equal shares. This simple point is the bare essence
of the theory of implicit contracts. Insured consumption implies a
form of real wage rigidity and the simultaneous existence of layoffs,

4

which are among the basic data to be explained. Comparative statics
of the basic model are worked out in section III which derives a
surprising implication that the value of firm specific risk is positive.
Section IV examines the incidence of unemployment and layoff policies

among heterogeneous workers. The optimum layoff policy is shown to be
ordered on workers' comparative advantage in the home compared to the

market sector. However, contracts may be subject to the problem of
adverse selection. Section V extends the model to include common, non—
diversifiable or macro risk. Since these risks cannot be pooled, self
insurance rather than market insurance is shown to be the optimal response.
Section VI uses the model to analyze some features of official unemploy-

ment compensation schemes. The argument is summarized in the context
of existing empirical work in section VII. The reader may wish to
start with that section to get the general flavor of the results before
getting into the details.

II. THE OPTIMALITY OF UNELOThENT INSURANCE
This section illustrates the basic ideas and results in the simplest

possible way. Market equilibrium is analyzed

assuming that all workers are

identical in both preferences and production opportunities

and that there

is no macro uncertainty. Envision a competitive market with a large number
of firms in which the value of production in each firm is subject to

random shocks. The shock, which itself gives rise to the possibility of
gains from contracts, can be thought of as an independent draw with replacement from an identically distributed urn.

There are so many firms that an

unlucky draw by one is sure to be counterbalanced by a lucky one by another.

5

In effect the entire distribution is realized among all firms together, so

the average shock is zero for all practical purposes. This is the most
favorable case for analyzing an insurance arrangement because all risk is
completely diversifiable under these circumstances.
The structure of production, preferences and contracts is discussed

in section II.A. Competitive equilibrium in the labor market is derived.
in section II.B. Complete insurance is:shown to be the optimal and competi-

tive market solution to the contracting problem. Some properties of the
solution are discussed in section II.C, and modifications required for the
introduction of a temporary labor market as well as a contract market are
set forth in section II.D.

A. Construction of the Model
1. Technology. A worker eriploved in the nonmarket (home) sector
produces k units of the consumption good. This output is not traded and
is self—consumed as it is produced. All workers have identical skills.
The technology of each firm in the market sector is described by
a production function x =

sf(m),

where x is output, m is labor services

employed during the period, and s is a nonnegative independent and
identically distributed random variable affecting total factor productivity.

f(m) is strictly concave: f'(m) > 0 and f"(m) <

0.

In addition, each firm

pays an (amortized) set up cost of b, shared among all members. The good
x is traded in the market. Establishing a collective market organization
obligates its members to take a drawing out of the distribution of s in

each period. Total factor productivity s is distributed as G(s) for each
and every firm. G(s) is the fraction of firms who realize total factor
productivity no larger than s, and is known to all agents. Furthermore,

6

to

keep the analysis as straightforward as possible7 there is no private

information. All members of the firm, and indeed all members of the
economy, have costless knowledge of the value of s drawn by any particular
firm, should they choose to learn it.

2. Contracts. Upon gaining membership in a firm, a worker is
entitled to a wage payment of w(s) if s is drawn and the firm's employment

policy requires the person to work at the firm. On the other hand, the
firm may make a payment of w(s) if s is drawn and the worker is laid off

and sent home to work in the nonmarket sector. The payment w(s) is temporary
severance or layoff pay. It is a form of unemployment compensation.

Notice

that payments are conditioned on s, which is feasible because of costless
state verification and public information: everybody observes s at each firm.
The firm has access to a competitive insurance market,

possibly the government, which enables it to buy insurance at actuarially

fair rates. Hence it need not meet contractual obligations w(s) and
w(s) out of current sales. In good states wage payments are less than
sales because some receipts are paid as insurance premiums. In poor
states it collects an indemnity: total payout to members exceeds
sales. Total receipts of the insurance company always, equal total payout,.

and all of its obligations are fulfilled with certainty. This is feasible
by virtue of no macro uncertainty and costless state verification. Alter—
natively and equivalently, the insurance arrangement could be rationalized
as a muthal fund in which every firm owns a share of the market portfolio
of other firms.

In each period the entire output is claimed by the

mutual, with remittances back to each firm sufficient to meet its
contractual

obligations.

7

Labor services employed by the firm are also contingent upon the
state: rn(s) =

p(s)n,

where n is the firm's labor force (membership) and

P(s) is the fraction of the membership who are employed. 1

p(s) is the

unemployment rate of the firm in state s. It is also the layoff rate in
In distinction to an auction market equilibrium, transport

state s.

costs require workers to confront lotteries when contemplating market

activity. The state of nature cannot be known in advance, and instantaneous
arbitrage is too costly. Should a low state be drawn, it may be preferable
for a fraction 1 — p of workers to engage in nonmarket production rather
than market production. It niay be prefereable for all members of the
firm
0.

to

engage in market production when a high state is drawn. Consequently

p(s) .l.

3. Preferences. All workers are risk averse and have identical
strictly concave preferences in consumption, u(c), with u'(c) >0 and
u"(c) <

c(s) =

0.

For employed persons c(s) =

w(s),

and for unemployed persons

k + w(s). Wage payments, unemployment pay, and home production are

all identified with consumption. Perfect substitution between market and
nonmarket production justifies this equivalance.

B. Competitive Equilibrium.
Labor immobility rules out organized labor market exchanges as

viable economic institutions. Equilibrium must be described instead as
competition among firms for members; that is to say, by competition for

labor market contracts. Competition for workers (members) guarantees
that the equilibrium contract maximizes expected utility of a representative
person in each firm, subject to the aggregate
overall economy that total output is constant.

conservation laws in the

8

Expected utility of a worker is

Eli =

(2.1)

f[p(s)u(w(s))

+ (l—p(s))u(k + (s))]dG.

It is convenient to bypass the insurance market in evaluating the firm's

constraint. The conservation law for the mutual fund requires that
expected production of each firm

must cover the organizational set up

costs and contractual consumption obligations it has made to its members

must be nil. Thus

Expected:

profit for each firm

(2.2)

f{sf(p(s)n) — np(s)w(s)

The

optimal

—

n(l

—

p(s)(s)JdG

=

b.

contract defines functions w(s), p(s), p(s) and a membership

n that maximizes (2.1) subject to (2.2): the market solution may be
found as a simple optimization problem. Let A be the Lagrange multiplier
associated with constraint (2.2). 1 shall not carry along explicit
multipliers on nonnegativity and other constraints, since these will

be clear in context. Since s is observed by everyone, all contract
features (other than n) are state dependent, in principle. The optimum
policy is found by differentiation, state by state, under the integral sign.

1. Optimal Wage and Unemployment Compensation. Differentiate (2.1)
along with constraint (2.2) and associated multiplier A, with respect to

w(s) and i(s) to obtain marginal conditions for wages and unemployient pay

(2.3)

EU/w(s) = [u'(w(s))

(2.4)

EU/(s) = {u'(k + (s)) — AnJ(l

—

Anip(s)

= 0
—

p(s))

=

0.

Recalling that consumption c is identical with income, (2.3) and (2.4) imply

u'(c) = An is independent of s. Therefore, both w(s) and p(s) are indepen—

9

dent of s. This is a fundamental result. It says that consumption conditional on employment or unemployment status is independent of the (condi-

tional) state s. It is an immediate consequence of risk aversion. Moreover, (2.3) and (2.4) imply an even stronger result: u'(w) =

This

implies w =

k

u'(k

+ i).

+ w for all s. Workers demand full insurance and no

macro uncertainty means that full insurance is feasible.

The key result is that consumption is independent of the state of

the world and employment status. Level consumption is shared among all
persons in the economy. This clearly bears a resemblence to the permanent
income hypothesis. As a corollary, the worker is indifferent to home or
market production. Unemployment, in the sense of home production, is
voluntary in this model when unemployment insurance is complete.

2. Optimal Employment Policy. State independence of consumption
and wages simplifies the objective function to

(2.5)

EU =

u(k + ) +

A{f[sf(p(s)n) — n

—

p(s)nk]dG — b}.

Differentiate (2.5) with respect to p(s):

(2,6)

DEU/p(s) =

nX[sf'(p(s)n)

—

kJ.

The first term in the bracketed expression is the marginal product of labor

in state s. The second term is the opportunity cost of labor in home
production. The firm uses the real social opportunity. cost of labor to
calculate its optimal layoff policy, not the actual wage or unemployment

compensation. However, account must be taken of the constraint 0

p(s)

1.

For a given membership n, (2.6) implies that the internal shadow supply curve
of labor services to the firm appears as in figure 1.

It is infinitely

10

elastic at the nonmarket opportunity cost k up until p(s) = 1, at which point
it becomes completely inelastic because all members are fully employed,
and additional workers are not available due to transactions costs.

The

dashed lines show two critical values of s, defined by

sf'(O) =

k

sf'(n)

k.

(2.7)

It is apparent from figure 1 that the optimum employment policy is

dependent upon s and follows the form

p(s) = 0,

0 < p(s) < 1,

(2.8)

p(s) =

1,

for s

sf'(O) < k

for s < s < s

sf' (p(s)n) =

for s >

sf'(n)

k

> k.

All available workers are employed if the shock is sufficiently large (s

s).

All members are laid off and the firm temporarily shuts down if the shock is
sufficiently small (s

s). In between some fraction of the membership is

employed, and the other fraction is unemployed. The firm's unemployment
rate (1 —

p(s))

is decreasing in s.

3. Optimum Membership in the Firm. The result in (2.8) allows
the integral in (2.5) to be broken up and written as

S
(2.9)

EU = u(w + k) +

X{![sf(pn)

— pnk]dG + ![sf(n) — nk]dG —

n — b}

11

where the dependence of p on s has been suppressed to economize on notation.
Differentiating (2.9) with respect to n and continually exploiting marginal
conditions (2.8) yields

EU/n

(2.10)

=

X{f[sf'(n)

— k]dG —

=0

5

a2EU/an2 =

(2.11)

ft1(n)

f sdG < 0.
S

Negativity of (2.11) implies that (2.10) defines a local maximum. Assume
in all that follows that k is sufficiently small relative to the mean value
of sf'(m) that it pays to supply some work to the market sector and not
specialize in home production (i.e., that it pays to become a member of
a firm).
Using (2.10) and the equilibrium condition w =

(2.12)

=

f[sf'(n)

k

+ w, we have

k]dG

S

(2.13)

w =

!sf'(n)dG

S
+ fkdG
0

The equilibrium wage paid to employed members equals the expected marginal

product of labor in both home and market sectors. The wage is the expected
value of the maximum of home productivity and market productivity of a

worker. The indemnity paid to the unemployed is the expected surplus value
of a unit of market labor at full employment.
Equation (2.12) defines an equilibrium relationship between
Substituting (2.12) and (2.13) into (2.2) and simplifying yields

and n.

12

S

(2.14)

V(n)

np(s)k]dG + [f(n) —

f[sf(p(s)n) —

nf'(n)] !sdG

where p(s) is defined by optimality conditions in (2.8).

with respect to n yields V/n =

—nf"(n)fsdG,

= b

S

Differentiating V(n)

which is positive. Further—

S

more, urn V =

0.

Therefore the equality in (2.14) must hold at some

positive value of n. Strict concavity of f(m) requires b > 0 if the firm

is to be of nontrivial size. Nonzero b lends an element of increasing
returns to work in the market sector, analogous to u—shaped average

cost curves in conventional theory. It pays to form a group to economize
on fixed set up costs b and share them with other members. It is easy

to show that n is increasing in b: the larger the set up costs the greater
the incentive to share them among more coworkers.

C. Competitive Euilibrium Is Pareto Optimal
The assumption of perfect substitution between market and nonmarket

production makes it easy to calculate the Pareto optimal distribution of

employment and firm membership. Market production per firm
sf(pn) and home production per firm is (1 —

p)kn.

in

state s s

The number of firms is

N/n, where N is the size of the population. Therefore, per capita income
in the population is

I =

{!.[sf(Pn) + (1

—

p)nk)dG —

b}/n

Maximizing I with. respect to P(s) yields conditions identical to (26) and
(2.8), and maximizing it with respect to a yields a condition identical

with (2,14). Therefore competition for contracts achieves Pareto optimality.

13

Equivalence between competition and social efficiency is in any case clear
from the fact that there are no extenalities in this problem as formulated,
and the firm uses the correct opportunity cost of labor in calculating p(s).
It is important to notice, however, that the contract. solution is

not efficient relative to a full auction market equilibrium that would occur

in the absence of transaction costs. The reason for this is that the contract equilibrium does not equate the marginal product of labor across all

uses. To be sure, the marginal product of labor is equated to home productivity within firms for which 0 < P(s) < 1.

But firms which have drawn

large values of s display marginal productivities in excess of k and also

different from each other: marginal product is not necessarily equated
between firms. If moving resources around the economy were costless
it would pay to shift labor out of home production and away from low demand

firms and move it to firms which have high demand. Costs of mobility
do not make it worthwhile to arbitrage these differences. Hence the
contract solution is Pareto optimal relative to positive transport costs,

not to an unattainable equilibrium that would emerge were there no

transport costs. This departure from the standard optimality conditions
(equal marginal product everywhere) represents a perfect index of unemploy-

ment in this economy. It shows that some market imperfection or transactions cost is a necessary condition for unemployment in competitive
equilibrium.

It should also be pointed out that the solution shown above differs

from most of the literature. Most previous writers have arbitrarily constrained unemployment compensation to be zero. But if market work is
inherently more productive than home production, which must be the typical
state of affairs, it is optimal for i

> 0.

It is also feasible, at least

14

for the iid, diversifiable part of firms' risks. Arbitrarily setting w

= 0

leads to erroneous results and conclusions.
To see the precise difference between the two solutions, solve
the constrained maximum problem above with the additional constraint
=

0.

Letting A' be the multiplier associated with constraint (2.2) the

condition for w(s) remains similar to (2.3):

(2.16)

p(s)fu'(w(s)) —

X'n]

=

0.

Equation (2.16) shows that the wage is a constant in all states given

that the person is employed. The difficulty is that this wage is not
necessarily equal to k. The marginal product of p(s) in the w = 0
constrained problem is, after some simplification

(2.17)

- u(w)-

u(k) u (w)

EU/p(s) =

—

Here the term = (u(w)

u(k))/u'(w)

sf'(p(s)n).

is interpreted as a risk premium,

the amount of consumption a person would be willing to give up to increase

the probability of employment. Approximating

in Taylor's series up to

second order yields

(2.18)

w -

=k

-

(r/2)(k

— w)2 <

k

where r is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. The situation is
analogous to that depicted in figure 1, except now the firm acts as if
the opportunity cost of labor is w —

up to the full employment level

instead of k. But (2.18) shows that w —

is less than the true opportunity

cost of labor, k. Therefore a firm that cannot offer unemployment compen—

15

sation inefficiently overemploys its labor force. All workers as a whole
would be better off if market production was a bit smaller and home pro-

duction was a bit larger. That is, unemployment is not large enough in
the no unemployment compensation equilibrium.4
In the world in which we live insurance is not complete because it

cannot be provided at actuarially fair premiums. The insurance company
must ascertain whether an adverse event has occurred, claims must be

verified and settled, premiums must be collected, and so forth. In short,
the rates charged must cover the costs of providing insurance. It is an
elementary proposition that risk averse agents do not buy full insurance
when the load factor is positive;, nor is it socially optimum for them

todo so. In that (realistic) case a contract equilibrium does not
provide complete insurance either. Workers bear some residual risk of
unemployment. Following the logic above, unemployment is not voluntary

——

it is involuntary since workers are better off (in the sense of a

larger consumption standard) while employed. The shadow price of labor
is somewhat smaller than k, with the difference reflecting the risk
premium due to the difference in consumption between employed and unemployed

states. Employment is somewhat excessive relative to the case were insurance
actuarially fair. Nonetheless, coverage is pushed to the limits of its cost
and the tendency toward consumption equalization remains, though it is not

quite complete. Since the effects of nonactuarial insurance premiums on
the solution are clear enough, I shall largely ignore them in the interest
of analytical simplicity, even though they provide more realism in the

analysis. Readers can supply these qualifications as desired.

16

Much has been made in the literature of presumed rigidity in wages

implied by the optimal contract. I believe this emphasis is misplaced.
The proper implication and prediction is that the optimal contract makes
consumption independent of both the state of nature and employment status.

This is really a theory of permanent consumption. Thus the inefficiency
resulting from constraining

to zero is really due to a constraint on

the worker's ability to transfer consumption claims from employed to

unemployed states. This is the reason that employment is excessive in
that case. Excessive employment is an imperfect substitute for insurance
and if insurance is feasible and available at cost, it should be complete.
Some may argue that the optimal solution appears artificial, not

the constrained one. After all, private unemployment insurance is not
widely observed as a main feature of labor market contracts. An easy
response is that most data and experience refer to periods when official
unemployment compensation has been the rule rather than the exception.

But there is a more fundamental answer. The optimal contract determines
consumption in each state of the world and there is a sense in which

the actual wage is indeterminate. Thus consider a temporal version of
the model described above. Then GNP and total employment follow a
constant, zero—growth path. The overall unemployment rate is constant
too. As the problem has been written, the market for state contingent
claims has been short—circuited by allowing the firm to buy insurance on

the worker's behalf. It is transparent that having each worker transact
in that market is conceptually equivalent.

The firm would not make

a payment to the unemployed. The wage paid to each employed worker would
exceed the worker's consumption, with the difference going to an insurance

company as the actuarial premium. The worker would collect the indemnity

17

himself to maintain consumption while unemployed. Barring transactions
costs in the insurance market such a scheme is a perfect substitute for

the one stated above. The point is that it is consumption that is
"downwardly rigid.," It is also "upwardly rigid." Once a market for
state contingent claims is considered, this kind of model says very little,

if anything, about rigidity of wage payments. It of course says nothing
whatsoever about nominal wage rigidity since all necessary primitives in

this model are in real terms. If consumption rigidity is identified

with wage rigidity, it is real wage rigidity that is predicted by a
contract, not money illusion.

This discussion should clarify the intimate connection
between an intertemporal version of this model (Baily, 1974) and the

static version (Azariadis [1975]). Both models are logically equivalent
when there is no macro uncertainty, but it is something of a misnomer to
characterize the intertemporal version by savings and dissavings behavior.

With no uncertainty in the economy at large, total consumption equals total
output arid aggregate saving is zero. Those workers in firms who have

experienced a lucky draw (positive "savings") in effect subsidize those

who have experienced an unlucky draw (negative "savings"). They are
willing to do so because they are sure to need a subsidy at some time

in the future. It is inefficient for aggregate savings to be positive
because consumption is reduced below the maximum sustainable level.

Thus, if one wants to describe

this kind of scheme as contingency

saving, the market clears when aggregate saving and the rate of interest

are zero. The situation is altered when macro uncertainty is present.

18

D. Simultaneous Contract and Auction Markets
The model considered above has been structured on the assumption
that transaction costs of seeking out alternative job prospects when laid

off exceed the returns from search. For completeness, an intermediate
case is sketched where transactions costs are positive but not so large

as to preclude working on an alternative jobwhen laid off, rather than
in the

nonniarket sector.
Suppose the round trip transport costs of seeking out another

job are T > 0. I implicitly assumed above that (T) was infinite.
Think Of an economy with the same technology and stochastic structure as
before, except now the labor market may allow a certain dual structure.

Each worker remains a primary member of a firm, but finite T allows exis-

tence of a market for temporary labor. A worker laid off from primary
employment may enter the temporary labor market during the period,

after which he returns to the primary firm before s is drawn again. Let
the market clearing wage in the temporary labor market be .

Contract

details in the prmary firm remain unchanged, with wage

w paid to employed primary members and unemployment insurance payments

of w to laid off members. The net wage received in the temporary market
is

T. Evidently the condition required for someone to participate in

the temporary market rather than in the home sector is
or

k + T.

+ k w + — T,

If the inequality is strong there is never any unemployment

(home production), so the interesting case is

k + T. This defines

the reservation price and level of the elastic supply curve to the

temporary labor market. Consumption is again identical whether the
worker is employed at home, in the primary market, or in the temporary

market: w = w + k = w

+ — r,

assuming actuarial insurance rates.

19

Let T(s) denote temporary employees hired by the firm in state s.

The constraint becomes

ffsf(pn + T) — wpn —

(l

—

p)n

—

T]dG

Upon substituting the inequalities for w, , and

![sf(p(s)n + T(s)) —

(2.19)

Since the worker consumes

knp(s)

—

(k

=

b.

above, this reduces to

+ T)T(s) —

n]dG = b.

+ k with certainty, the optimum contract deter-

mines functions p(s), nand T(s) that maximize utility u( + k) subject to
(2.19). Differentiation reveals that

nX[sf'(p(sn) +

ETJIap(s)

EU/T(s)

=

A[sf'(p(s)n

T(s))

—

kJ

+ T(s)) — (k

+ 'r)J.

These show that the supply curve of labor to the firm is a step function,
illustrated in figure 2. The first step refers to primary employees, for

which the appropriate shadow price is k. To this is appended the incremental supply of temporary employees, the second step, at reservation
price k + T.

above, and

therefore

k.

three critical values of s: s and s defined

defined by f'(n) = k + T.

The optimum employment policy

has the following features: when s <

shuts down.
o < p(s) <

Now there are

For

s < s < s the firm

1, and p(s)

is

For s between s and ,

employs

s the firm

temporarily

permanent members only,

determined by equality of marginal product with
p(s)

= 1

and all permanent members are fully

employed. Temporary employment is zero. Finally, for s >

all permanent

members are fully employed and the firm hires temporary help up to the
point

where the marginal product of labor equals k + T.

20

Given this characterization of employment, the integral in the

constraint may be broken into these same intervals of s. Differentiation
with respect to n and simplification yields the analogue of (2.12)
A
S

(2.20)

f[sf'(n) — k}dG + !TdG.
S

S

Figure 2 reveals that

is increasing in T. Therefore (2.20) approaches

(2.12) as T tends to infinity. Derived demand for temporary labor implicit
in figure 2 yields a deterministic aggregate across firms, from which it
is easily verified that the temporary market actually clears at wage k + T,
and (2.20) holds in market equilibrium.

Comparative statics reveals that

< 0, 3w/ST > 0, and n/T > 0.
These results are explained by the fact that temporary mobility of labor
promotes efficiency (greater national income) and that mobility is lessened

by greater transport costs. The market is more efficient when T <

because

the marginal product of labor is equated among a subset of firms with

larger values of s. Remaining inefficiency is reduced to that analogous
to "gold points" among firms with intermediate drawings of s.

The fact

that w and w fall with T is directly attributable to lower per capita

income and consumption as t increases. Firm size grows as T rises because
substitution with temporary labor is more expensive. Unemployment rises
with T because the probability of finding alternative temporary employment

is reduced: the auction labor supply schedule is shifted upward and the
level of activity in that market is reduced.

21

While it is strictly speaking outside the scope of the model, it

is useful to relate this to the timing of shocks s. A longer horizon is
appropriate if shocks are of a slower moving, longer frequency variety.
Effective T falls because transport costs are amortized over a longer

period. This increases supply to the temporary market and reduces
unemployment. If the shocks are of a more temporary character, T effectively
increases and unemployment rises because it is not worthwhile to move. A
similar hueristic interpretation can be given in the presence of serially

correlated firm disturbances (given no common component). However, the
temporary market becomes more and more permanent as the persistence of

the firm shock increases, so the interpretation of a firm as a voluntary

"club" with permanent attachment loses its appeal and virtue. Persistent
shocks are analogous to changes in relative demands and have not been
modeled here.5

III. COARATIVE STATICS
Comparative static propositions are readily found from the reduced

system (2.12) and (2.14). To simplify I shall assume that T is infinite
and ignore the temporary labor market. Details, but not the qualitative
nature of the results are affected by this assumption. Relevant
exogenous parameters are k, b, and properties of the distribution G(s).
Each is considered in turn, assuming complete contractual insurance.

A. Changes in Home Productivity (k)
Differentiating (2.12) and (2.14) with respect to k and solving
yields
5

(3.1)

Dn/k = .fp(s)dG/{f"(n)fsdG] > 0
S

5

22

/k =

(3.2)

—!p(s)dG — !dG

<

0.

Furthermore, since (3.2) is nothing more than the negative of the expected
employment rate, it follows that 0 >
consumption across states, w = w

/k

Using the equality of

+ k,

w/k =fdG + 1(1 — p(s))dG >

(3.3)

> —1.

0

0

and it follows that 0 <

w/k <

1.

Firm size increases as home productivity k rises, from (3.1). The
supply schedule of labor to the firm in figure 1 shifts upward and the

inelastic section binds at a larger value of n. The fraction of the firm's
labor force employed for any realization of s never increases and actually

falls for all values of s between s and

(which themselves increase):

the equilibrium unemployment rate increases. The unemployment compensation payment falls (see (3.2)): market goods are relatively more expensive,
so production is smaller on average and smaller unemployment payments are

supported. Nonetheless, the wage paid while working rises (see (3.3)).
Because ii

is

larger, market production is larger in the more favorable

states so these payments can be sustained. Moreover, per capita consump—
tion rises (in all states) because production possibilities in the overall
economy have improved: the value, of market production has remained unchanged

and the value of home production has increased. Therefore expected utility
rises. In sum, an increase in home productivity shifts production toward
the nonmarket sector thereby increasing the equilibrium unemployment rate.
Consumption and utility rise and workers are better off.

23

B. Organizational Costs (b)
It already has been noted (see (2.14) and discussion) that an
increase in b increases firm
tion of s,

size.

Given the value of k and the distribu-

figure 1 implies that the equilibrium unemployment rate

rises. Workers must be worse off because in a sense production possibilities have become less favorable. Nonmarket production possibilities
are unchanged but market production is more expensive. Per capita consumption and utility fall. The comparative statics show that

= aw/ab =

f"(n)(an/b)fsdG

< o.

S

C. Mean Preserving Spread
Following Rothschild and Stiglitz {1970], parameterize the
distribution function as follows:

(3.4)

dG(s; a) E g(s a) =

h(s)

+ ay(s)

where a is a positive number and y(s) is a mean preserving spread, a
step function that spreads weight into the tails of G(s) as a increases.
If y(s) is a mean preserving spread it must have the following properties,

by definition
5

Y(s)

fy(v)dv, with !Y(v) = 0, and
0

0
(3.5)

5

!Y(v)dv
0

> 0

for s less than max s.

24

Substitute (3.4) into (2.12) and (2.14) and differentiate with respect to

a to obtain

(3.6)

n(/a) f[sf(Pn) — pnkjy(s)ds.
0

Integration by parts reveals the sign of this expression (see Diamond and

Rothsèhild (1978)). To prepare for the integration, define

(3.7)

Q(s)

sf(p(s)n) —

p(s)nk.

Then
dQ/ds =

Q'(s)

=

f(pn) + (sf'(p)

k)n(p/as).

—

Marginal conditions (2.8) and figure 1 show that Q'(s) = 0 on (0, SI;
Q'(s)

f(pn) on (s, ); and Q'(s) =

for all s. In addition, Q"(s) =
zero otherwise. Therefore Q"(s)

f(n)

for s >

nf'(pn)(pIs)

. Therefore,

Q'(s) > 0

on (s, ) and Q"(s) equals

0 for all s as well. Using (3.7) and

(3.5), integrating (3.6) by parts twice yields
5
(3.8)

n(3/a) —fQ'(s)Y(s)ds = fQ"(s)[JY(dv)]ds
0

0

0.

0

Since Q" is nonnegative and the term in brackets is positive by definition,

w increases with the spread of the distribution G(s). w also increases
with spread because w = w + k.6

Increasing riskraisespercapita coñsinnpcion aridimakes oepple
better off. The surprising conclusion that risk has positive rather than
negative value is related to the theory of option pricing. The opportunity
to work in the nonmarket sector with known values allows truncation of the

lower tail of i±e market productivity distribution. Increasing risk puts

25

more weight in the tails and allows greater selectivity toward the more
favorable states of market productivity.

A similar development to the one above leads to the following
expression for the effects of risk on firm size:

S
!{f'(pn)(p/2s)[J'Y(v)dv1 —
(3.9)

f'(n)Y(s)}ds

0

an/aa — 0

nf" (n)!sdG
S

The denominator is negative, but the numerator cannot be signed since both

terms in the integral are nonnegative. The effect on n depends on the
particular form of y(s). Therefore increasing risk may either increase
or decrease equilibrium unemployment.
These results assist in analyzing equalizing differences in

unemployment risk. They indicate that the problem is more complex than
appears on the surface. Consider two industries, both subject to stochastic
shocks, one with larger variance in its disturbance than the other. So long
as the shocks are independent and diversifiable, the optimum contract

specifies complete consumption insurance in both Industries. If workers
are found in both of them then expected utility must be equalized and mean
values of production must adjust to offset greater expected utility in the

high variance sector. Relative output prices change to make this so. The
risky industry in this sense is expanded beyond what it would be in the
absence of transactions costs and labor market contracts.
That the optimum contract offers complete insurance implies no

systematic sorting of workers by tastes to industries. A worker's
consumption is independent of location in equilibrium so there is no scope

26

for risk aversion to affect the allocation of workers to market sectors.

Whether or not an equalizing difference is observed in wages depends on
whether the observed wage is net or gross of the insurance premium necessary

to sustain unemployment insurance payments. Equalizing

differences are not

observed if these payments are made by the firm on their workers' behalf.
Even if workers make these payments themselves, failure to sign expression
(3.9) does not allow unambiguous predictions on whether the equalizing

difference with resoect to observed unemployment i positive or negative.
It is important to recognize the limited scope of this result.

Effectively we are dealing here with purely transitory, fully diversifiable

risks. The statements above are confined to them alone.

If insurance is

incomplete or if shocks are sufficiently permanent to induce workers to
move to other industries or firms, the picture is different.

For example,

it is no longer true that allocation of workers to sectors is independent

of risk aversion. Rather, the least risk averse workers and those with
the greatest comparative advantage in the nonmarket sector are assigned

to the riskier firms. Still, this analysis indicates that equalizing
differences are sensitive to the precise nature of disturbances and to
precisely how risks are shifted and shared across the economy at large,
a point that seldom makes its way into discussion of this subject.

IV. THE INCIDENCE OF UNEMPLOYMENT
Suppose now that there are two groups in the population, one with
home productivity of k1 and the other with home productivity k2

>

k1.

Assume the k—identity of workers is public information. Then one possible
labor market equilibrium is complete segregation of types within firms.
Firms of type 1 consist of only k1 members and firms of type 2 contain

27

only k2 members. The comparative statics proves that workers in type 1
firms exhibit less unemployment and receive lower wages and larger
unemployment compensation than workers in type 2 firms.

A. Integration
However, there may

be

gains from integrating a firm and combining

worker types. For example, a type 2 firm might find it advantageous to
eliminate some of its members and take on some members of type k1. This
converts the internal supply function of figure 1 to the two—step function
illustrated in figure 3.

The potential gain is that the k2 members can

better select their market working time toward states where market productivity

is especially large: in less advantageous states they can better exploit
their comparative advantage in the nonmarket sector and let the k1ts do

the work instead. This possibility is related to the option virtues of
increasing risk discussed above. It is also related to the economics of
peak load pricing. Workers with larger values of k may serve as reserve,
stand—by production capacity, to be called upon only when demand is

especially large. Notice that gains from integration are present only
when transactions costs make a club/contract equilibrium feasible. Integration or segregation among types is irrelevant if mobility is costless
and the marginal product of labor is always equated among firms.

When is integration advantageous? The simplest way to answer the
question is to assume a segregated equilibrium and ask whether someone
can organize -an integrated firm and make a profit by paying segregated

wages. If so, then complete segregation is not viable. Labor services
in such a firm are rn(s) =

p1(s)n1 + p2(s)n2, where the subscripts denote

types of workers. Segregated wages are determined as above and satisfy

28

w. =
1

.+

1

That development implies that rent from integration is

k..

1

(4.1)

ETr

= ![sf(p1n1 +

-

p2n2)

p1n1k1

—

p2n2k2

—

1n1

—

2n2]dG

- b

where w satisfies (2.12). Differentiate (4.1) with respect to p iCs):
i

(4.2)

Eir/p

=

[sf'(p1(s)n1

+ p2(s)n2) —

kj]ni,

i

1, 2.

Equation (4.2) and figure 3 suggest four critical values of s in

an integrated firm. The marginal conditions for pt(s) are

s : S0

s0

(4.3)

<

s

p1
0 <

S1

s1 < s S s2

p1

p1

sf'(O) <

0,

p2 =

5 1 and p2 = 0 ,

1 and p2 =

0,

sf'(P1n1) =

k1 <

sf'(n1)

S

p11andO<P25i
p1 =

s > s3

= 1,

sf'(n1 + n2) >

k

Only when the state is more favorable than s2 are k2 workers brought on

line and set toorkin the market sector. The terms in (4.3) are defined
in the obvious way by the equalities implicit in figure 3. Using those

gives marginal

intervals and differentiating (4.1) with respect to
conditions for membership of each type.

(4.4)

E7T/n2 =

f[sf'(n1
S3

+

n2)

-

k2]dG

-

=0

29

53

S2

E7rRn1 =

(4.5)

—

ftsf'(n1)

k1}dG

+ f[sf'(n1 + p2n2) —

k1JdG

S2

Si

+ f[sf'(n1 + n2) k1}dG

= 0.

-

S3

Examine first the possible size of this integrated firm. Let n
be the optimum size of a segregated type 2 firm. Substituting (2.12)
into (4.4)

E/n = f[sf'(n)

(4.6)

-

k2jdG

-f[sf'(n) -

k2]dG

S3

where

.n =

n1

+ n2 is the size of the integrated firm, and 2 is the minimum

full employment value of s in a segregated firm. (4.6) indicates three

possibilities for n. Suppose n <

n.

and

Then s3 <

(4.6) is positive,

so n should grow. The firm cannot have less thann2 members. It cannot
have more than n2 members either. Otherwise 53 >

s2

and (4.6) is negative

and the firm should shrink. Therefore n = n,. in an integrated firm that
pays segregated wages (here s3

s2 and (4.6) is zero, so the marginal

condition is satisfied). Intuitively, the reason for this is that workers
of type k2 are "marginal:" the extensive margin for membership is
determined as if the firm contained only k2 workers. Therefore the question
of integration comes down to determining whether or not it pays to
replace some k2Ts with an equal number

of k1ts

while keeping total membership

constant.
It is easy to verify that ETr

in

(4.1) is concave in n1 and n2 when

(4.3) holds. Therefore we only need inquire about the sign of E'lT/n1

30

near n1 = 0 to ascertain whether integration is profitable. Comparison of

figures 1 and 3 reveals that s1 =

Eir/n1 =

(4.7)

f[sf'(O)

—

i'

at

and s2 =

n1 = 0 so that

+
k1]dG + (k2 — k1)!dG
*

where the derivative is evaluated at n = n2 and n1 = 0.

—

w1)

The first term

in (4.7) is the net value of market production contributed by an increment
labor. The second' term is the incremental value of nonmarket production

of

achieved by replacing a worker of type k2 with a worker of type k1. The
third term is the added unemployment compensation expense required for a
type 1 worker over a type 2 worker.

Recall the comparative statics result above w/k = —!p(s)dG

where
—

is the expected employment rate and

1)—a(k2

—

<

1.

—

Therefore; write

k1) with 0 <a 1. Substituting this into (4.7) shows

that a sufficient condition for profitability of integrated production is
1 —

C(s2)

>

a.

It always pays to integrate if C(s2) = 0 (i.e., a segregated

firm never shuts down). Other cases are much more complicated. Detailed
analysis shows that the profitability of integration depends onthe precise form

of G(s) in the interval (s1, s2). Integration may not pay if G(s) exhibits
sufficient weight in that region. Intuitively, the reason is that the segregated k2 firm engages in so much home production in that case that substituting
a k1 does not release a sufficient amount of a k2's time to make it worthwhile.

B. Market Equilibrium
The equilibrium configuration of firms is determined by both the
profitability of integration (properties of C(s)) and the number of

workers of each type. There is a taxonomy of cases:

31

1. Integration not advantageous. Here integration does not
increase per capita consumption. Each firm is segregated to own types.
k2 firms are larger, and their members enjoy greater per capita consumption.

They pay higher wages to employed members and lower compensation to unemployed

members. They also have larger unemployment rates than k1 firms.

2. Integration with k2 members in excess supply. Segregated and
integrated firms coexist. The former contain k2 members only. Wages and
consumption of k2Ts are determined by those paid in segregated firms. k1
workers earn rents attributable to the gains from integration. The unemployment rate of k2Ts is always larger than that of k1's. It is also larger in
integrated firms than in segregated firms, but k2 workers are indifferent
because their consumption is fully assured and idential in the two types

of firms. It can be shown that all firms are the same size, whether
integrated or not. This size is n2 because k2's are the marginal workers.

3. Integration, with k1 members in excess supply. Segregated
firms contain k1 types only. Now k2 workers capture all rents from integra—

don. While k1 workers exhibit greater unemployment rates in segregated
firms than in integrated ones, their wages, unemployment compensation, and

consumption are the same in either case. k2Ts still exhibit a larger
unemployment rate than do k1's. It can be shown that the equilibrium
size of integrated firms is less than n (since now k1Ts are the marginal
types). Segregated firms may be larger or smaller than integrated firms.

4. All firms integrated. This is a knife edge case in which the
fraction of types in the economy exactly matches the desired fraction in

integrated firms. The rents from integration are shared among both types,
but the rent shares are indeterminate.

32

In all cases the incidence of unemployment is greatest among workers
exhibiting comparative advantage in nonmarket production, illustrating the

general principle that production should be allocated efficiently. Society
gives up less if workers with larger home productivity bear the brunt of
unemployment. Furthermore, high nonniarket productivity workers in integrated
firms display a type of employment and layoff behavior that is temporally

ordered, according to a "first fired, last hired" rule. Integrated firms
contain subclasses of reserve employees who come on line only in the best
possible states and who are sent home before other workers in bad states.

The employment policy is ordered so that lower home productivity employees

are only laid off after the pool of reserves has been exhausted. Notice,
however, that in distinction to the usual caricature, here type 2 workers

receive higher wages and consumption than others. This counter intuitive
result is explained by the fact that k2 workers are more valuable than

workers in the production of total income. Their inherent market skills
are the same, by assumption, and they are more skillful and valuable in

household production. Hence they are more productive overall.

Another parameterization is possible; for example, distinguish among

workers by market skill, but assume identical home productivity. Then
labor services may be written as m(s) =

p(s)nz,

where z is the parameter

describing efficiency of labor in market production. Reworking the results
reveals that the employment policy depends on comparing sf(m(s)) with klz
rather than with k. While some details vary, it is the comparative advantage
ratio k/z that is relevant for comparative statics. The effects of a change
in z are opposite in sign to those of a change in k. Given two types of

labor, z1 and z2, with z >

z2, the same considerations as above apply to

33

possibilities for integration. Given k, low skilled workers have the
comparative advantage in home production. They exhibit greater average
unemployment than high skilled workers, and serve

the "buffer stock"

function in integrated firms. They are the first to be fired and the last
to be rehired. They also earn less than the more highly skilled workers
because they are less skilled. Yet it is comparative advantage k/z that
is the key parameter, not absolute advantage.7 For example, if k and z
are positively correlated then it is not so clear which group serves the
buffer function, and the employment policy is not ordered on z or k alone.

C. Adverse Selection
Equilibrium contracts require wage and employment discrimination

among workers with different values of k. The analysis so far has assumed
that each worker's nonmarket productivity is common knowledge. What
happens when k is not publically known? Do workers have incentives to
reveal their true values and self—select the proper categories? If not,
contracts are potentially subject to adverse selection and may not be

efficient. Assuming a self—selection equilibrium, it is necessary to
ascertain whether members of one group privately gain by masquerading

as members of the other. If they do not then the equilibrium described
above is in fact the market equilibrium.

The analysis is easy when market equilibrium is completely segre-

gated. Consider the incentives of k1. Consumption is w1 =
states if the truth is told. Consumption is

+ k1 in all

in employment states and

+ k1 in unemployment states if k1 passes himself off as a k2. Consumption
is larger in the unemployment state (since w2 >
w1) and less in the

34

+ k1) by lying than by telling the

unemployment state (since w2 + k1 <
truth. Define
S2

=

1(1

—

p2(s))dG

as the unemployment probability for a k2 in the separating equilibrium. k1
reveals the truth if expected utility of w1 for certain exceeds expected
utility of the gamble (w2, w2 + k1; (1 —

p2),

p2). Since workers are risk

averse we need to compute the actuarial value of the gamble to ascertain
incentives for truthful revelation of k1.
The actuarial value of the gamble compared with truth telling is

A =p( + k1)
•(4.8)

= p2(w2 + k1 — w1) + (1 — p2)(w2 — w1)
=

because w. =

+ (1 + p2)w2 —

+ (1 -

.+

p2)(k2

-

k1)

in the assumed equilibrium. We know from a result

above that w/k = —(1 — p)

=

0.

<

Furthermore,

!(pIak)dG

0.

>

Hence the function (k) is convex. Writing again (w2 —

w1)

—c.(k2 —

k1)

and

substituting into (4.8) yields

(4.9)

A =

(k2

—

k1)(l

—

Convexity of w(k) implies a >

—

p2

(1

—

a).
p2)

—— see figure 4. Therefore A <

0

and k1 does not gamble. A parallel argument fOr k2 shows comparable incen—

35

tives for truth telling. Therefore self—selection is indeed the market
equilibrium and there is no cheating.

The analysis is significantly more complex when the market equilibrium

involves integrated production because of the existence of rents. Rents
to one group increase incentives for risk taking and lying on the part of
the other group and appear to increase possibilities for adverse selection.

A definitive answer remains to be given in these cases. It is clear from
the analysis in section EVA., however, that rents are increasing in (k2 — k1)
and also in the weight that G(s) places in the interval of realizations of
Hence if there is a problem of adverse selection, it is

s above

a more probable outcome the greater the difference in home productivities

between groups. It is a less probable outcome the greater the weight of

G(s) in the interval i' s2). Also, it is less probable the greater the
risk aversion among workers.

V. MACRO-UNCERTAINTY
The analysis above has abstracted from aggregate disturbances.

Modifications required for aggregate risk that might resemble business
cycles are briefly considered in this section.
The simplest way of introducing aggregate risk is through a
variance—components specification of the shock s:

(5.1)

=

+

sit

where i refers to firms and t refers to time. Uer:e
disturbance common to all firms in period t and
component in period t of the type considered above.

is an economy—wide
is a firm—specific
(A multiplicative

specification leads to no additional conceptual issues.)

36

The fundamental implication of (5.1) is that market insurance can
be guaranteed only up to the firm specific component E.t.

Lucky realiza-

tions of p systematically shift the average worker toward market production

and away from home production. Therefore aggregate market consumption
available to be redistributed among all workers varies with p and any attempt
to fully insure all uncertainty (in the cross—section sense discussed
above) exposes an insurance fund to the risk of bankruptcy.
insurance is feasible only for the diversifiable

Perfect market

component of s. Risk

averse decision makers must use a form of self—insurance to cope with
aggregate risk p.

It is obvious that self—insurance must take the form of personal

0.

savings and dissavings over time. This point is transparent when C
Then the law of large numbers applies only across time, and not at all

across firms. The conceptual framework appropriate for that case is the
familiar model of intertemporal allocation of consumption and labor

supply imder uncertainty. Concavity of preferences leads ..to the desirability of smoothing consumption relative to income. Workers allocate
labor between market and nonmarket activities in proportion to realizations
of

They must hold a stock of capital (e.g., an inventory of goods) in

order to achieve a smooth consumption path. Stocks are built up in
periods of favorable realizations of u. Capital is consumed when
realizations are unfavorable. Under general conditions regarding holding
•costs of contingency reserve capital it is well known that complete

smoothing of consumption over time is not achieved. That is, it is
hardly ever optimal to hold capital at such a large level that the
probability of stock—out is zero.

37

The fact that macro distrubances are not diversifiable across
firms but are diversifiable across time is the basis for advantageous

self insurance, which must take the form of contingency saving and

dissaving behavior.8 There are real social costs involved here:
the larger the variance of aggregate disturbances, the larger the
contingency stock required to reduce the variance of consumption risk and

the lower the expected per capita consumption. In distinction to the
positive value of increasing diversifiable risk analyzed above, increasing
aggregate risk definitely reduces expected utility and consumption and

has negative value. Nonetheless, the main empirical implication of macro
risk is very similar to that of idiosyncratic micro risk. Both imply
social arrangements that reduce fluctuations in consumption relative to

income. Both imply a form of the permanent income hypothesis. The fact
that self—insurance is incomplete (because of inventory holding costs)

suggests some residual influence of transitory income on consumption and

incomplete smoothing of consumption. This requires a slightly weakened
form of the permanent income hypothesis. Similarly, loading charges or
other imperfections that constrain complete

insur.aitce

of

diversi—

fiable micro risk also imply some effects of transitories on consumption.

VI.

UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT

A. General Considerations

This section uses the model developed above to analyze certain features of the U.S. unemployment compensation system (some of these features

are shared by systems in other countries.) In fact most unemployment
insurance observed in the world today is provided by governments, yet the

38

model at our disposal is one where private contracts are optimal and cannot

be improved by public intervention. Since private supplements to public
programs are not extensive, nor were private schemes widely observed prior
to the inception of government programs, it is very unlikely that private

insurance was merely displaced and offset by public insurance. Therefore
some discussion of the scope and limitations of the present framework of
analysis is warranted.

Moral hazard and adverse selection are potential sources of

competitive market failure in the provision of insurance. They readily
explain why individual specific unemployment policies are not traded,

say in the manner in which life insurance policies are written. The
insured event —— unemployment ——

is

substantially under the control and

discretion of economic agents. An insurance company would have great
difficulty detecting actions that firms and workers undertake to affect
the probability distribution of unemployment status and could not vary

premiums conformably. Workers would not face the correct social costs
of their actions at the margin, leading to the problem of moral hazard.
The insurance company would also have difficulty assigning individuals to
appropriate risk classes, of separating inherent risks from tastes for
leisure and home productivity, leading to the problem of adverse selection.
These considerations explain why unemployment insurance must be

written at the level of the firm. The firm is the agent of workers in
regard to unemployment and layoff decisions. This is, after all, the
key insight of the theory of implicit contracts. Since the firm is the
proximate decision maker in these matters, considerable decentralization
and internalization of conflicting interests is achieved by making the

39

firm

pay for its decisions. The firm has the correct incentives for

undertaking action if it pays the full costs at the margin of the risk

it imposes on the insurance fund. This will be so if premiums are geared
to actuarial experience. This is, in a sense, just a restatement of the
model described above. To be sure, incomplete information always implies
inisciassificationg and incomplete internalization in practice. But that

is true of all insurance. It is insufficient reason for a complete
breakdown of the market mechanism.

Therefore, I believe the rationale for the large role of the State

in these schemes must be found in other causes. Chief among them is the
inability of an insurance company to withstand large runs on the bank
attributable to connnon nondiversifjable risks associated with business

cycles (e.g., the variance component p in section V). For the same
reasons as were previously discussed, the company would have to hold

substantial excess reserves to reduce the risk of ruin and bankruptcy

to tolerable proportions. It is hard to imagine how private unemployment
insurance could have withstood claims payable in the Great Depression,

for example: state funds run substantial negative balances in recessions
even in very recent experience. The greater the excess reserves, the
smaller the insurance value and the closer the arrangement comes to

contingency savings rather than to true insurance. Capital market imperfections might then imply a large role for the state, but that is

beyond the scope of this article. Yet another cause lies in the fact
that employment contracts are often broken in the real world. Some contracts are not permanent. Permanent demand shifts as well as technical
changes make it economically worthwhile to move resources to higher

40

valued uses. Possibilities of bankruptcy of firms, which are not trivial
concerns in these circumstances, limit the liability a private insurer

can expect from those it insures. And, since after a contract is permanently
severed the worker becomes his own agent for seeking out new contract

opportunities, decentralization and internalization virtues of insurance

contracts with firms are seriously diluted
We should stand on relatively safe ground in using this
model to analyze the- consequences of unemployment compensation schemes

for workers who are subject to long term contracts and who have more or
less permanent attachments with their firms.

The analysis that

follows is best applied to those workers who face threats of temporary

layoff and ultimate recall. It has become increasingly apparent that
a large fraction of American workers essentially have long term contractual
relationships with their firms, perhaps as many as 50 percent of the

experienced male adult labor force (Hall [1981]). However, this class of
workers accounts for a muth smaller fraction of unemployed workers, many
of whom have permanently lost their jobs or who are either new entrants

or re—entrants into the labor force(Hall (1980)). It is still a plausible
conjecture that the two specific, features analyzed below carry over •to

most classes of workers.

B. Unfair Insurance and Income Tax Exemptions
Unemployment insurance in the United States, while difficult to

describe because of program. variations across the various states that
administer it, is based on relatively simple information and accounting
rules designed to be self—financing and informed by actuarial practices.

Premiums paid by a firm are increasing in the extent of prior claims by

41

its employees. Systems of this sort are said to be "experience—rated.t'
However, thorough—going actuarial balance is not achieved because of

built—in implicit taxes and subsidies across risk classes. Firms
exhibiting systematically large claims (e.g., the construction industry)

are effectively subsidized by mandated ceilings on tax rates. Those with
systematically small claims are effectively taxed by mandated minimum pay-

ments. The federal government comes into the picture because UI benefits
are partially exempt from income taxation. This in itself promotes
excessive demand for temporary layoffs by contractural employees. The
supply of layoffs is increased in those firms receiving subsidies on their
premiums because layoffs impose costs Qfl the system not borne by these

firms and also because the subsidy encourages entry into risky industries.

It is worth stressing that this kind of critique is addressed at repairing
program details and not at the question of unemployment insurance per Se.

We have already seen that full unemployment insurance is socially optimal
and that unemployment is actually too small when insurance is constrained.
The tax/subsidization features of the current system promote socially

excessive unemployment, which is far different from saying that unemployment insurance itself promotes excessive unemployment.
These factors can be introduced into the present model as follows:
let t1 denote the rate of income taxation on earnings, t2 the rate of

income taxation on unemployment insurance payments and y the subsidy or
tax rate on the actuarial premium paid by a firm.9 The firm still strives
to maximize expected utility subject to a zero expected profit condition.

Only additional parameters enter the calculations. Assuming homogeneous
workers for simplicity, we have

42

E = f[pu(w(1

—

+ (1 —

t1))

p)u((1

—

t2)

+ k)]dG

(6.1)

+ X{f[sf(pn) — wpn —

yn(1

—

p))dG — b}.

Home production k Is not subject to tax. Marginal conditions for w and w

are

aEU/w

(6.2)

—

=

(1 —

u'(w(l —

t1))

u'((l -

t2)

(6.3)

t1)u'(w(].

p)[(l

—

—

— An] = 0

t1))

t2)u'((l

—

-

-

t2)

+ k) — yAnJ = 0

and together imply

(6.4)

+i = (1

t2)/y(1

t1)

q.

(6.2) and (6.3) reveal that consumption is leveled within employment or

unemployment states. However, (6.4) shows that consumption Is inefficient
between states unless q = 1.

w(1 —

(6.5)

t1)

—

{(1

—

t2) + k]

0

as q

1.

Y < 1 represents the actuarial subsidy inherent in the official system while
y > 1 represents the tax. t2 = 0 for many workers in the present system,
so q > 1 is more the rule than the exception. Then, (6.5) shows that
optimal consumption Is larger when the worker is in the nonmarket sector

than in the market sector. Workers are better off when unemployed, which
flags a potential problem with the system.
It is convenient to provide a benchmark case and focus on the role

of Income taxation. Setting y = 1 (actuarial insurance) we see that q = 1
If t2 =

t1.

Excessive demand for layoffs on the part of workers is

43

neutralized if unemployment compensation benefits are taxed as ordinary
inconie because consumption is state—independent. Nonetheless, the firm

uses the incorrect social opportunity cost of labor. The constraint in
(6.1) becomes

(6.6)

f[sf(pn)

— Pwn

—

—

(1

P)wnldG — b =

![sf(pn)

—

pk/(l

Comparing (6.6) with (2.5) reveals that the firm uses k/(l —

—

t1)

t1)

— wnjdG —

as the

shadow price for determining p. It should use k. Labor is valued in
excess of its social opportunity cost and the firm tends to inefficiently
undereniploy its workforce, promoting inefficient nonmarket production at

the expense of more efficient market production.

This is akin to the

conventional distortion of income taxation on labor leisure choices given

that nonmarket production (leisure) cannot be taxed.
In much of the existing system t2 = 0 and y

writing t1 =

t,

(6.7)

EU =

1. Therefore,

expected utility is:

u( + k) + [u(w(1 — t)) — u( + k)]fp(s)dG.

The constraint remains the same as in (6.1). Differentiating (6.7) subject
to the constraint with respect to p yields

(6.8)

EU/ap =

Xn[y

(w —

—

y)

+

where
=

[u(w(1

= u(w(1

-

t))

—

—

u(

+ k)]/S(1—t)u'(w(l —

t))— u( + k)]/u'( + k).

t))

b.

44

The dependence of consumption upon employment status brings the risk

premium q back into the picture. q > 1 implies

< 0, by (6.5): the

risk premium is negative because unemployment is the preferred state.
The shadow price of labor in the firm (using the construction analogous
to figure 1) is w —

— y.

series expansion around w(l —

Approximating (6.4) by first order Taylor

t)

reveals that the shadow price of labor

used by the firm is approximately

(k + { -

(6.9)

2/r](q

-

l)/q

-

fq)/(l -

t)

where r is again the coefficient of absolute risk aversion evaluated at
c =

w(l

—

t).

The negative risk premium works toward an excessive

internal valuation of labor. The entire expression is sure to exceed
k if risk aversion is sufficiently large. Consequently income taxes and
UI subsidies tend to promote excessive nonmarket production and increased
measured unemployment.
We saw in section IV that the Incidence of unemployment falls

most heavily on workers with comparative advantage in home production
in an optimum unemployment insurance system and that UI payments should

fall with k. The existing system appears to at least approximate this
solution in its benefit formula. Benefits are proportional to a person's
prior covered earnings record, up to a ceiling. Most states also impose
waiting periods and all have benefit duration restrictions. All these
factors work toward reducing the benefit rate for workers with larger

home productivity or greater tastes for leisure because such workers are
likely to have smaller covered earnings records and a greater incidence

of unemployment spells as well as longer durations of spells. While this

45

topic has been studied far less than the effects of income taxation and
incomplete experience rating, we might well expect less adverse conse-

quences of departures from optimal tailoring of benefits to individual
workers, because errors in official program parameters are more likely
to be "undone" In private contracts through offsetting adjustments in
other payments.

There has been much empirical work on:the effects ofTJI on measured
unemployment.'0 The estimates suggest that imperfect experience rating

and income tax distortions may increase unemployment rates by as much

as 15 percent. It should be pointed out that programs in other Western
economies have less experience rating than in the United States, so this

effect is exacerbated. The political economy of why these programs take
the form of such imperfect experience rating and income tax subsidies is
an open question.

vii. SUNMARY AND CONCLUSIONS: IS CONTRACT THEORY RELEVANT?
The main implications of this paper may be summarized as follows:

A. The Role of Transactions Costs
Existence of transactions costs promote contract equilibria in
labor markets because they lend elements of specificity to employment

relationships that make enduring commitments worthwhile. It is analytically
convenient to view this relationship as voluntary membership in a productive

"club" which shares productivity and output risks among members and redis-

tributes them across the larger economy. Insurance of this type can be
guaranteed only up to the limits of aggregate nondiversifiable risk in

46

the economy. It is also limited by long term shifts in relative demands
because the degree of durability of membership is reduced. The model I
have presented identifies transactions costs with a transport sector and

restrictions on mobility. However, a long tradition of labor market
research has investigated inherent specificity through various forms of

firm specific human capital. Long term commitments also provide more
appropriate incentives for the creation of specific capital, which has

been ignored here. The main empirical claim for applicability of contract
theory lies in recent empirical evidence that a large share of employment

relationships are very durable and that at least half of all layoffs are
temporary.

A contract equilibrium is not fully efficient relative to an
"auction market" because the marginal product of labor is not equated in

all possible uses. The comparison is irrelevent in any case because
auctions are not viable forms of market organization in the presence of

transactions costs. Competition for membership and long term contracts
are the optimal forms of organization in that case. Interfirm and inter—
sector differences in marginal products persist in equilibrium and arbitrage is incomplete because costs of eliminating these differences

exceed the benefits of doing so. Thus a full contract labor market
supports an equilibrium level of unemployment which is efficient and
socially optimal under the circumstances.11

B. Unemployment Compensation
Unemployment insurance is complete in the pure theory of contracts.

This has been a source of misperception and error in recent writing on the

47

subject. The theory is most relevant for diversifiable risk. Risk averse
workers demand full insurance to insulate consumption from firm—specific
risk and state—Independence of consumption is feasible through risk pooling

and actuarially rated insurance arrangements. Equilibrium unemployment
is not large enough when insurance is artificially restricted because

workers are not allowed to transfer consumption claims across employment

states. Nonmarket production is inefficiently suppressed when insurance
is incomplete.

Market insurance is less feasible to the extent that aggregate
shocks account for a significant fraction of total variance, or if relative

demand shocks are long term and permanent. Then contract theory loses
its predictive power because self—insurance through contingency reserve

capital is the main mechanism for transferring consumption claims across
common states, and contracts are broken if shocks persist among firms.

Departures from actuarial principles interact with income tax
provisions to promote inefficiency in official unemployment insurance

programs. Taxation of benefits reduces excessive demand for temporary
layoffs but does not eliminate distortions caused by nontaxation of non—

market production. Volumes of evidence suggest that departures from
actuarial balance across firms promotes excessive employment instability
in the economy and may add a percentage point or two to the natural rate.

Less evidence is available on the fact that socially efficient unemploy-

ment compensation requires an inverse relationship between benefits
and home productivity among persons.

Still, contractual demands for unemployment compensation are only

part of the picture. The role of these payments in assisting permanent job

48

changes, moving labor resources to their highest valued uses and smoothing
consumption over business cycles has not been integrated into most empirical
studies of unemployment insurance systems.12 Furthermore, persistent and

systematic departures from optimal features of these programs throughout
the world suggests that some factors have been omitted from our present
analysis and understanding of these programs.

C. The Value of Risk
Increasing diversifiable risk is valuable in a contractual labor

market. Availability of a productive nonmarket sector allows truncation
of the least favorable, and greater selectivity of market time to more

favorable states, similar to the value of an option. This conclusion
remains valid when home productivity is stochastic, so long as market

and nonmarket shocks are not perfectly correlated. It must be tempered
to the extent that market and nonmarket goods are imperfect substitutes.
It is obvious that the option value of truncation and selectivity is

increasing in the elasticity of substitution between market and nonmarket

goods. Increasing risk has no value if labor supply is sufficiently
inelastic.

On the other hand, increasing nondiversifiable risk has negative

value. Increasing macro risk reduces welfare because it requires larger
contingency stocks for self insurance and reduces average per capita
consumption.

The empirical counterpart of these issues lies in the measurement

of equalizing wage differences for employment risk. This problem is a
subtle and sophisticated one, since measurement should be sensitive to
the sources of risk and to personal characteristics, including home

49

productivity. Estimates are few and far between, but show relatively small
risk premia after allowing for official unemployment compensation, suggesting
that market insurance may be reasonably complete.'3

D. Wages and Comsumption
The theory of implicit contracts has few, if any implications about

wage rigidity. This seems so widely misunderstood that it bears special
emphasjs. The theory has plenty to say about consumption rigidity.

Indeed,

the role of insurance in a contract equilibrium is to level consumption

across states of nature. Hence the positive predictions of the theory
are closely related to the permanent income hypothesis, and, when risks

are fully diversifiable the two are observationaily equivalent. This
theory cannot lend any support whatsoever to theories of nominal wage

rigidity, money illusion or related paraphenalia, since contracts are

written in real terms. In those forms of the theory where consumption
is identified with real wage and related payments by firms, consumption
rIgidity carries over to real, not nominal wage rigidity.

Consumption and the allocation of time between market and non—
market uses are uniquely determined in the optimal contract, but there
is a deeper sense in which wages are not uniquely determined because
they play no allocative economic role in the pure theory of contracts.
Insurance divorces the allocative role of prices and the distribution

of consumption across states. Existence of a contract equilibrium is
predicated on transactions costs sufficiently large to maintain unarbi—

traged productivity differences among firms. Wages therefore don't
allocate labor among market activities once durable contracts have been

struck. The only other possible role for wages is to allocate a worker's

50

intensive margin of time between market and nonmarket uses. However,
the existence of layoffs appears to require indivisibilities and non—

convexities in either production or preferences that make

marginal changes in hours of a given worker nonoptimal. Instead firms
make these adjustments at the extensive margin (layoffs and rehires)

on their workers' behalf4 This of course does not deny the role of
relative changes in wages and consumption opportunities in allocating
labor across sectors of the market economy in response to longer run
changes in demand and production techniques, but that requires a
rather different type of theory.

Returning to the consumption predictions of the model, the
permanent income hypothesis needs some adjustments when load factors
render insurance incomplete, when there is macro—risk, and also when

market and nonmarket production are imperfect substitutes. Imperfect
substitution implies positive correlation between leisure and consumption,

with allowances for work—related consumption items and good—specific

complementarities with leisure in home production functions. Macro—
risk and nonactuarial premiums imply periodic departures from complete
consumption smoothing because self—insurance through savings necessarily
is incomplete.

Empirical investigations of consumption and permanent income are
too well known to require extensive coinmenatary. Recent estimates show

extra sensitivity of consumption to transitory income5 The theory here
suggests systematic differences between workers who are subject to
temporary layoff and those who have permanently lost their jobs, but the

data are not detailed enough to make these distinctions. Nor has the

51

relationship between transitory Income and undiversifiable risk been

thoroughly investigated at the individual level. Empirical studies of
the consumption behavior of the unemployed show the remarkable power of
the permanent Income hypothesis and also corroborate excess sensitivity

of consumption to transitory Income for some workers. These data also
do not distinguish between workers who are on temporary or permanent
layoff status.

E. The Incidence of Unemployment
A final empirical implication of contract theory is that
unemployment incidence is proportional to comparative advantage in non—

market relative to market production. Under general conditions it pays
firms to Integrate employment and production among workers with differential

comparative advantage. Those most efficient in household production serve
as

contingency reserves whose services are employed only In the most

favorable states. Whether or not this leads to problems of adverse selection
is not resolved at this time.
Surely the bulk of evidence is consistent with the incidence

predictions of the model. The ordering of optimum employment policies
by comparative advantage is consistent with widely observed layoff

practices by seniority in both union and nonunion firms. It helps
explain why prime age married males exhibit the lowest unemployment
rates in the population by far, why single workers are more likely to be

unemployed than married workers, why unemployment rates of females have
been traditionally larger than those of males, and why unemployment among

youth exceeds that among nonyouth. To the extent that human capita1 is

52

not neutral between market and nonmarket skills it may also help account
for differential incidence of unemployment by market skill, though these
issues must be qualified for production substitution possibilities among

these groups. It does less well in accounting for black—white differences,
thought it is not necessarily inconsistent with them. However, these
predictions are similar to those arising from older specific human
capital models (labor as a quasi—fixed factor) and it appears difficult
to differentiate between them.

REFERENCES

Abowd, J. M. and 0. Ashenfelter, "Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary
Layoffs and Compensating Wage Differentials," in S. Rosen (ed.),
Studies in Labor Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press
for National Bureau of Economic Research, 1981), p. 141.
Atkinson, A.B., "Unemployment Benefits and Incentives," in J. Creedy..(ed.),

The Economics of Unemployment in Britain (London: Butterworth,
1981).

Azariadis, C., "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria," Journal
of Political Economy 83 (1975): 1183.

________

"On the Incidence of Unemployment," Review of Economic Studies 43

(1976): 115.

________

"Implicit

Contracts and Related Topics. A Survey," In

Z. Hornstein, J. Grice, and A. Webb (eds.), The Economics of
the Labour Market (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1981).

Baily, M.N., "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand," Review of
Economic Studies 41 (1974): 37.

________

"The. Labor Market in the 1930s," mimeo, Brookings Institution, 1981.

Bronars, S., "Compensating Wages and Layoff Risk in U.S. Manufacturing
Industries," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1983.

Burgess, P. and J. Kingston, "Changes in Spending Patterns Following
Unemployment," Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 81—3,
U.S. Department of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Service, 1981.

Chari, V.V., "Involuntary Unemployment and Implicit Contracts," unpublished
paper, Northwestern University, 1980.

Diamond, P. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,"
Journal of Political Economy 90 (1982): 881.

Diamond P. and H. Rothschild, Uncertainty in Economics (New York: Academic
Press, 1978), p. 123,

Feldstein, H,, "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal
of Political Economy 84 (1976): 191

Gordon, D.F., "A Neoclassical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment," Economic
Inquiry 12 (1974): 431.

Gordon, R.J., "Why U.S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs from that in
Britain and Japan,"Econoinjc Journal 92(1982): 13.

Grossman, H.I., "Risk Shifting, Layoffs and Seniority," Journal of Monetary
Economics 4 (1978): 661.

Grossman, S.J. and 0.D. Hart, "Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard and Unexnploy—
merit," American Economic Review 71 (1981): 301.

Hall, R.E., "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy," American
Economic Review 73 (1982): 716.

________

"Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity 1 (1980): 91.

Hall, R.E. and E.P. Lazear, "Exces Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to
Demand," N.B.E.R. Working Paper, 1982.

Hall, R.E. and F.S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory
Income," Econometr-Lca 50 (1982): 461.

Hamermesh, D.S., "Social Insurance and Consumption," American Economic
Review 72 (1982): 101.

Hart, 0.D., "Optimum Labor Contracts under Asyimnetric Information: An Introduction," Review of Economic Studies 50 (1983): 3.

Hayashi, F., "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Testing by
Instrumental Variables," Journal of Political Economy 90 (1982): 895.

Holmstrom, B., "Contractural Models of the Labor Market," American Economic
Review 71 (1981): 308.

________ "Equilibrium Long Term Labor Contracts," Quarterly Journal of
Economics

(1983):

Hutchens, R.M., "Layoffs and Labor Supply," ILR Working Paper, Cornell
University, 1982.

Ito, T., "Implicit Contract Theory: A Critical Survey," unpublished paper,
University of Minnesota, 1982.

Lilien, D.M., "The Cyclical Pattern of Temporary Layoffs in Manufacturing,"
Review of Economics and Statistics 62 (1980): 24.

________

"Sectoral

Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of Political

Economy 90 (1982): 777.

Lucas, R.E. and E.C. Prescott, "Equilibrium Search and Unemployment,"
Journal of Economic Theory 7 (1974): 188.

Mortensen, D., "Specific Capital, Bargaining and Labor Turnover," Bell
Journal of Economics 9 (1978): 572.

Miyazaki, H. and H.M. Neary, "The Illyrian Firm Revisited," Bell Journal
of Economics 14 (1983):

Nickell, S., "Research into Unemployment: A Partial View of the Economics
Literature," Centre for Labour Economics, London School of
Economics, 1982.

Rosen, S., "Employment Variation on Class—I Railroads in the U.S.,"
Econometrica 36 (1968): 511.

Rothschild, N. and Stiglitz, J., "Increasing Risk: I. A Definition," Journal
of Economic Theory 2 (1970): 225.

Topel, R.H., "Experience Rat'ing of Unemployment Insurance and the mci—

dence of Unemployment," merican Economic Review 73 (1983):
Topel, R.H. and F. Welch, "Unemployment Insurance: Survey and Extensions,"
Economica 47 (1980): 351.

\
k

\
sf' (m)

Nsf'(m)
n

FIGURE 1

np(s)

\

\
k+T.

N

\
k

N

\
\sf'(m)

Nsf?(m)
np(s) + T(s)

n

FIGURE 2

\
\
\

\

\

\

\

k2

\
\

\

\
\

\

\

\

\

\S3f? (in)
\s2f'm.

\s1f'On)
\s0r(rn)

p1(s)n1÷ p2(s)n2
ni

fl1+n2

FIGURE 3

—('—pi)

— (L—p2)

(k)

K

k1

FIGURE 4

FOOTNOTES

*This paper was written while I was a visiting scholar at the

Hoover Institution. I am indebted to the National Science Foundation
for financial support, and to Stephen Bronars, Karl Brunner, Glenn
Cain, Robert 3. Gordon, Charles Kahn, John Kennan, Walter Oi, and
Robert Topel for comments on an early draft.
'Azariadis (1975, 1981), Baily (1974), and Gordon (1974) are

the chief architects of implicit contract theory.
2See especially Feldstein (1976), Hall (1982), and Lilien (1980).

3Miyazaki and Neary (1983) use a similar construction to analyze

some puzzling features of the economics of labor—managed firms. The
standard approach to contracts maximizes expected profits subject to

an expected utility (supply) constraint. I follow the dual approach here,
which lends itself to the "club" interpretation.
4

The point that the optimum contract provides full insurance and
unemployment is voluntary has only recently been recognized. See Cliari
(1980), Grossman and Hart (1981), Holinstrom (1981), and Ito (1982).
5The pure theory of contracts is clearest when disturbances are

iid, for it always pays a laid off worker to return to his primary firm

if

it was optimum for him to join it in the first instance:

contracts

are never broken. Establishing a contract equilibrium is much more
complicated if disturbances are serially correlated or if relative
demand shifts are more permanent, f or then it is optimal for workers

to move, for firms to disband, and for contracts to be broken. A

full. treatment of contract equilibrium in this case remains to be achieved.

Bonding and permanent severance pay arrangements are necessary for efficiency

(e.g., see Hall and Lazear (1982)) but are hardly observed. H. Grossman
(1978) considers some of these issues where bonds are infeasible. A more
complete treatment is available in Holmstrom (1983). Lucas and Prescott
(1974) deal with noncontract equilibrium when shocks are serially corre-

lated. Bronars (1983) formulates a more workable approximate solution
when industry disturbances are also covarlant.

more elegant proof is as follows: define R(s,m) =
Then the model is summarized as max{E(niax R(s,m)J —
Xl

mn

nw} = b.

sf(m)

— km.

This equation

determines rn(s), ' and n simultaneously. max R(s,m) is a convex function

of s, so its expectation increases when a mean preserving spread is applied

to s, and the term In curly brackets is increased by a mean preserving

spread, given n. Allowing n to vary optimally in response increases the
left—hand side of the equation even more, given i. Therefore,

must

increase to preserve the equality. I am indebted to John Kennan for thIs
proof.

7A model based on this skill parameterization is presented by

Azariadis (1976), though it is not recognized that comparative advantage

is the key parameter. Analysis is very sensitive to the assumption of
perfect substitution among skill types. If skilled and unskilled labor
are imperfectly substitutable in market production, the optimum policy
is not ordered by skill, the result breaks down, and other considerations
such as substitution elasticities enter.

8Strictly speaking, partial market insurance still may be

supported by the Arrow—Borch conditions determining risk sharing among

agents with different degrees of risk aversion. Fluctuations in output
necessarily make this type of insurance incomplete, and it is ignored
in this paper.

9The logic of experience rating is a bit more subtle than is

generally appreciated by economists. Having a firm's tax rate vary
with prior claims is like having auto premiums rise when an accident

occurs. If premiums always followed experience there would be no
insurance. The maximum tax therefore provides true insurance against
large losses. Experience rating is like a 'deductable, so full experience

rating is inappropriate. The difficulty with the system is that the experience rating schedule and maximum tax are the same for all firms, irrespective

of their risk class. Mean activity of firms in risky industries puts the
bulk of their experience beyond the limits of the schedule, and that Is

why they are subsidized. A more appropriate scheme would discriminate
among risk classes and shift the experience rating schedule according to

average experience in the firm's industry. Note also that benefits are
taxable as ordinary income for high income workers in the existing system,
but that is ignored here.
10Th1s work builds on Feldstein (1976). The U.S. literature is

surveyed by Topel and Welch (1980) and the British literature by Atkin-

son (1981). Topel (1983) presents the best evidence on the effects of
incomplete experience rating. A useful survey of British literature
on the economics of unemployment and its relation to unemployment compensation is provided by NIckell (1982).

11very recent

work on contracts relaxes the common informat ion

assumptions (Hart (1983)). Incentive compatibility constraints of private,
asymmetric information imply second—best type inefficiencies. However,
since first order empirical implications of contracts with asymmetric in-

formation are very similar to those with common information, I conjecture
that it will be very difficult to distinguish between them from any data.
12For example, search may be inefficient without public interven-

tion. See Mortensen (1978) and Diamond (1982). Lilien (1982) shows
that intersectoral shifts within the market economy account for an increased
fraction of observed unemployment in recent years.
13The only estimates known to me are Abowd and Ashenfelter (1981),
Bronars (1983), and Hutchens (1983).
14The precise composition of changes in demand between hours per

worker and the number of workers has not received sufficient attention

(however, see Rosen (1968)). We have no complete theories on why hours
don't bear more of the burden of adjustment. For an extreme example, from
1929 to 1932 hours per week of employed persons in manufacturing fell by
13 percent while employment fell by almost 40 percent and the unemploy-

ment rate practically tripled. See Baily (1981). Gordon (1982) shows
that hours bear more and

employment bears less of the burden of adjust-

ment in Japan than in the United States, but these differences remain to
be fully explained.

15See Hall and Mishkin (1982) and Hiyashi (1982). Burgess and
Kingston (1981) and Hamermesh (1982) are among the few studies that have
focused on consumption behavior of the unemployed.

