                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       USING TONTINES TO FINANCE PUBLIC GOODS:
                                BACK TO THE FUTURE?

                                            Andreas Lange
                                             John A. List
                                            Michael K. Price

                                         Working Paper 10958
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10958


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




Thanks to seminar participants at several universities who provided comments that improved the manuscript.
Andreas Lange gratefully acknowledges funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under
grant LA 1333/2-1. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Using Tontines to Finance Public Goods: Back to the Future?
Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 10958
December 2004
JEL No. H41

                                              ABSTRACT

The tontine, which is an interesting mixture of group annuity, group life insurance, and lottery, has

a peculiar place in economic history. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it played a major

role in raising funds to finance public goods in Europe, but today it is rarely encountered outside of

murder mysteries. This study provides a formal model of individual contribution decisions under a

tontine mechanism. We analyze the performance of tontines and compare them to another popular

fundraising scheme used today by both government and charitable fundraisers: lotteries. Our major

theoretical results are that (i) the optimal tontine for agents with identical valuations of the public

good consists of all agents receiving a fixed "prize" amount in the first period equal to a percentage

of their total contribution, (ii) contribution levels in the optimal tontine are identical to those of risk-

neutral agents in an equivalently valued single prize lottery, (iii) contribution levels for the optimal

tontine are independent of risk-aversion, and thereby outperform lotteries when agents are risk-

averse, (iv) if agents are sufficiently asymmetric in their valuation of the public good, equilibrium

contribution levels are larger under tontines than any lottery. In particular, one can obtain full

participation in the tontine mechanism compared to only partial participation in a lottery. These

insights highlight that the tontine institution can be a useful tool for fundraisers in the future.

Andreas Lange                                             Michael K. Price
University of Maryland                                    University of Maryland
alange@arec.umd.edu                                       mprice@arec.umd.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics and AREC
2200 Symons Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu
    tontine: An annuity scheme wherein participants share certain benefits and on
    the death of any participant his benefits are redistributed among the remaining
    participants; can run for a fixed period of time or until the death of all but one
    participant. Webster's Online Dictionary



I. Introduction
         The oldest standing bridge in London (Richmond Bridge), numerous public

buildings and other municipality projects throughout the U.S., Britain, the Netherlands,

Ireland, and France, and several wars, including the Nine Years’ War, all share a

common thread: they were wholly, or partially, funded by tontines. The idea of the

tontine is believed to have originated in 1652, when an expatriate banker, Lorenzo Tonti,

proposed a new mechanism for raising public funds to Cardinal Mazarin of France.1

Tonti advertised his idea as “A gold mine for the king….a treasure hidden away from the

realm.” The salesmanship of Tonti coupled with the difficulties associated with raising

taxes in seventeenth century France led to an enthusiastic endorsement from King Louis

XIV. While the idea, and many affiliated derivatives, prospered as major tools for

financing public goods for several decades, tontines have since been banned in Britain

and the United States due to the potential incentive for investors to kill one another in

order to increase their shares.2

         In essence, a tontine is a mixture of group annuity, group life insurance, and

lottery. While the use and economic operation of each of these components is understood

as a vehicle for individual investment/leisure, as a means to fund public goods, the


1
  Similar mechanisms are believed to have been employed in the Roman Empire several centuries earlier.
Tonti’s mechanism should not be confused with the tontines in Western Africa, which are small, informal
savings and loan associations similar to ROSCAs (Rotating Savings and Credit Associations).
2
  As an aside, this allure of the tontine has led to a fantastic plot device for detective story writers (the
interested reader should see, e.g., The Wrong Box by Robert Louis Stevenson, which was made into a film
in 1966 starring Peter Cook, Dudley Moore, Ralph Richardson, Michael Caine, and Tony Hancock).


                                                   1
tontine itself has largely been ignored. It is well established that relying upon voluntary

contributions for the provision of public goods generally results in the under provision of

such goods relative to first-best levels. Numerous mechanisms have been proposed to

alleviate the tendency of agents to free-ride (see e.g., Groves and Ledyard 1977; Walker

1981; Bagnoli and McKee 1991; Varian 1994; Falkinger 1996).

        This study adds to the literature on voluntary provision of public goods by

formally investigating the performance and optimal design of the tontine. In this spirit,

we provide information about the history and modeling results of tontines in order to

encourage usage of the best characteristics of the institution in the future. We begin by

outlining the conditions that define an optimal tontine—one that maximizes total group

contribution levels—when symmetric risk-neutral agents have quasi-linear preferences.

Properties of tontines are also explored upon relaxation of symmetry and risk neutrality.

We then compare the performance of the tontine to a popular fundraising scheme used

today: lotteries (see, e.g., Morgan 2000 and Lange et al. 2004).3

        Our main findings are as follows: (i) the optimal for tontine for agents with

identical valuations of the public good consists of all agents receiving a fixed “prize”

amount in the first period equal to a percentage of their total contribution, (ii)

contribution levels in this optimal tontine are identical to those of risk-neutral agents in

an equivalently valued single prize lottery, (iii) contribution levels for the optimal tontine

are independent of risk-aversion, and (iv) with sufficient, and plausible, risk-aversion or

asymmetry in individual valuations of the public good, tontines yield higher contributions


3
 Relatedly, Engers and McManus (2002) and Goeree et al. (2004) explore the use of auctions to raise
money to finance public goods, and Andreoni (1998) and List and Lucking-Reiley (2002) explore the
voluntary contributions mechanism with and without announcements of “seed” money.



                                              2
than the optimal lottery.    Further, one can obtain full participation in the tontine

mechanism compared to partial participation in the lottery mechanism. These results

have clear implications for empiricists and practitioners in the design of fundraising

campaigns. Further, they provide useful avenues for future theoretical work on voluntary

provisioning of public goods.

       The remainder of our study is crafted as follows. Section II provides a brief

historical overview of tontines. Section III describes a theoretical model of the tontine

and compares the performance of an optimal tontine with that of lotteries. Section IV

concludes.

II. Tontines throughout History
       Lorenzo Tonti was a Neopolitan of little distinction until his sponsor, Cardinal

Mazarin of France, who was responsible for the financial health of France, supported his

position in the court of the French King in the 1650s. In this position, Tonti proposed a

form of a life contingent annuity with survivorship benefits, whereby subscribers, who

were grouped into different age classes, would make a one-time payment of 300 livres to

the government. Each year, the government would make a payment to each group

equaling five percent of the total capital contributed by that group. These payments

would be distributed among the surviving group members based upon each agent’s share

of total group contributions. The government’s debt obligation would cease with the

death of the last member of each group.             Although the plan was supported

enthusiastically by Louis XIV, Tonti’s plan was rejected by the French Parliament for

two reasons: (i) the uncertain nature of total government debt obligations and (ii) the

proposed rate of return was low in comparison with rates on life annuities (Weir, 1989).




                                          3
       While the Netherlands started a successful tontine in 1670, it was not until 1689,

when France was engaged in the Nine Years’ War, that France offered its first national

tontine.   The design was quite similar to that originally proposed by Tonti.        Later

offerings in France coincided with peaks in national capital demand during periods of

war and were generally successful in raising the sought-after capital. During France’s

four major wars of this period, national tontine offerings raised approximately 110

million livres from around 110,000 individuals.

       Contrary to the relative success enjoyed by France, tontine offerings in England

often failed to raise the desired capital. England provided its first national tontine in

1693; this initial tontine generated but a tenth of the one million pounds set as its goal.

Yet England did successfully use the tontine to fund many public projects, including

construction of the Richmond Bridge, claimed to be the oldest standing “London” Bridge.

Unlike many of the early French tontines, English tontines frequently allowed agents to

purchase numerous shares.

       While the use of tontines to finance government projects was predominately a

European endeavour, the notion that tontines could be used as a means to finance national

debt has a historical basis in the U.S as well. Faced with growing principal liability on

national debt, Alexander Hamilton proposed a national tontine in the U.S. in his 1790

Report Relative to a Provision for the Support of Public Credit (Jennings et al., 1988).

Hamilton’s proposal was to reduce principal repayments on national debt by converting

old debt with principal that was repayable at the discretion of the government into debt

demanding no return on principal.




                                          4
       The structure of the tontine that Hamilton proposed was inspired by a tontine

originally proposed by William Pitt in 1789. The proposed tontine included six age

classes, and shares in the tontine would be sold for $200 with no limit on the number of

shares that any agent could purchase. Individuals could subscribe on their own lives or

on the lives of others nominated by them.         However, Hamilton proposed a freeze

component on debt repayment: the annuities of subscribers who passed away would be

divided among living subscribers until only twenty percent of the original subscribers

remained. Once this threshold was reached, the payments to remaining survivors would

be frozen for the duration of their lives (Dunbar, 1888).

Tontine Insurance in the United States
       While tontines proper were not used after the eighteenth century, an adaptation of

the tontine was implemented in the U.S. life insurance market in 1868. Tontine insurance

was introduced in 1868 by the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S. Under

tontine insurance, premiums served two distinct purposes: (i) provision of standard life

insurance benefits and (ii) creation of an individual investment fund. Under tontine

insurance, policyholders deferred receipt of the dividend payments of standard premium

insurance policies. The deferred dividends were pooled and invested by the insurance

company on behalf of the policyholders for a specified time period. At the end of this

period, the fund plus the investment earnings were divided proportionately among the

entire active, surviving policyholders. Investment earnings could be received as either

cash or as a fully paid life annuity. Beneficiaries of policyholders that passed away

before the end of the tontine period received the specified death benefits, but had no

claim on the tontine fund money (Ransom and Sutch, 1987).




                                           5
          Conceptually, tontine insurance had several advantages relative to a standard life

insurance policy.        Policyholders were able to secure life insurance plus create a

retirement fund. Survivors could receive a generous rate of return on these investments if

a large proportion of other group members were to pass away or allow their policy to

lapse. Tontine insurance provided an opportunity for young individuals to save for

retirement by providing a low-risk, high-yield investment fund available on an

installment plan.       Unfortunately, corruption by the insurance companies led to the

prohibition of tontine insurance sales by 1906 (Ransom and Sutch, 1987).

III. Tontine Theory
          To model a tontine as an instrument to fund public goods, we must define the

utility structure of agents and their probability of survival in a particular period. For the

former, we consider n agents i = 1,..., n whose utility is assumed additively separable in

monetary wealth and the benefits from the public good:

                                                   ui = yi + hi (G ) ,

where yi is a numeraire and G the provision level of the public good. We assume hi (G )

to be increasing and concave ( hi '(i) > 0 , hi ''(i) ≤ 0 ).4 We make the standard public good

assumption—that it is socially desirable to provide a positive amount of the public good,

i.e.,   ∑ h '(0) > 1
          i i


          Given an initial endowment w of wealth (income), the choice facing the agent is

to determine the amount bi of wealth to invest in the tontine. Investment bi in the


4
  For studies that relax the assumption of utility being dependent upon only the level of the public good see
Sugden (1982; 1984) and Andreoni (1990); these theories suggest that if one were to rewrite utility such
that it is a function of both the level of the funds raised and own individual contributions, then the standard
result of free-riding behavior can be reversed.



                                                    6
tontine provides the agent with an uncertain monetary return xi that is dependent upon

her own contributions and those of all other members of a group:

                                        ui = w + xi − bi + hi (G ) .


                                                                                                            ∑
                                                                                                                T −1
              We assume that the tontine pays Pt ≥ 0 in period t with a total of                                t =0
                                                                                                                       Pt = P .

Payments are covered by the players’ contributions, i.e., the level of public good

provision equals the total contribution minus the aggregate prize level:

                                        G = B − P = ∑i =1 bi − ∑ t =0 Pt
                                                            n           n −1




              In each period t, some individuals might die (exit the game). All survivors

receive a payment that is determined by their relative contribution level. That is, for a

                                                                                                              bi
total tontine payment Pt in period t, a surviving player i receives a payment                                    Pt where
                                                                                                              Bt

Bt is the sum of the contributions made by the remaining players in period t.

              We assume that each agent has a perish probability in period t given by µt where


∑
      T
      t =1
             µt = 1 . The probability that an agent will die no later than period t is denoted by

M t where M t = ∑ s =1 µt . The probability of agents’ deaths is i.i.d. Finally we assume
                               t




for simplicity that agents are risk-neutral and payments are perfectly substitutable across

periods. Denoting the set of k ≤ n participating agents (with positive contributions) by

S0 ( k = # S0 ),5 the ex ante expected utility of a player i is given by

                                                                                  ⎡                      bi       ⎤
               EU i = w − bi + hi ( B − P) + ∑t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )k −l ⎢∑ S ⊆ S \i ,# S =l
                                              T −1      k −1

                                                                                                      B − B( S ) ⎥⎦
                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                  ⎣       0




5
    We will later show that all agents participate: k = n if there is (at least) one t for which Pt > 0 and
0 < Mt < 1.


                                                                7
We immediately obtain the following equilibrium conditions:

                                                                     ⎡                   B − B( S ) − bi ⎤
            1 − hi '( B − P) = ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )k −l ⎢∑ S ⊆ S \i ,# S =l
                                 T −1      k −1
                                                                                                             for i ∈ S0
                                                                     ⎣       0
                                                                                         ( B − B( S ))2 ⎥⎦
                                                                     ⎡                       1       ⎤
            1 − hi '( B − P) ≥ ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )k −l ⎢∑ S ⊆ S \i ,# S =l
                                 T −1      k −1
                                                                                                         for i ∉ S0
                                                                     ⎣       0
                                                                                         B − B( S ) ⎥⎦
                                                                   ⎡                k − l −1 ⎤
        k − ∑ hi '( B − P) = ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )k −l ⎢∑ S ⊆ S ,# S =l
                               T −1      k −1

            i∈S0                                                   ⎣       0
                                                                                    B − B( S ) ⎥⎦
                                                                                                                (1)

In the following we will first consider the case of symmetric risk-neutral agents. Both

assumptions are relaxed in later sections.

III.1 Tontines for symmetric risk-neutral agents

       If all agents value the public good identically ( hi (G ) = h(G ) ), we can concentrate

on symmetric equilibria.           Here, all n agents contribute at a level b such that total

contributions B=nb is given by the symmetric version of first-order condition (1):

                                                       ⎡ n−1 ⎛ n ⎞                     n − l − 1⎤
                        B(1 − h '( B − P)) = ∑ t =0 Pt ⎢∑ l =0 ⎜ ⎟ M t l (1 − M t )n−l
                                              T −1
                                                                                                ⎥ .             (2)
                                                       ⎣        l
                                                               ⎝ ⎠                      n −  l  ⎦

       We now consider the optimal design of a tontine. In particular, we address the

question of how an organization—government or private charitable fundraiser—with a

fixed prize budget, P = ∑t =0 Pt , should allocate this prize money across t ≥ 0 distinct time
                                T −1




periods so as to maximize total contributions. We obtain the following result:

Proposition 1 (Optimal tontine—Symmetric risk-neutral agents)
   If agents are symmetric and risk-neutral, contributions to the public good using a
   tontine are maximal if all the payments are made in the first period, i.e., before
   anybody has passed away.

Proof of Proposition 1:




                                                      8
Contributions to the public good are clearly increasing in the right-hand side of the

equilibrium condition (2). Thus, we obtain:

                                          ⎡ n−1 ⎛ n ⎞                     n − l − 1⎤
                            ∑          Pt ⎢∑ l =0 ⎜ ⎟ M t l (1 − M t )n−l
                                T −1
                                                                                   ⎥
                                t =0
                                          ⎣       ⎝l⎠                       n−l ⎦
                                        ⎡ n −1 ⎛ n ⎞                     n − l − 1⎤
                            = ∑ t =0 Pt ⎢∑ l =0 ⎜ ⎟ M t l (1 − M t )n −l
                                T −1
                                                                                  ⎥
                                        ⎣       ⎝l⎠                        n−l ⎦
                                        ⎡ n −1 ⎛ n ⎞                     n − 1⎤
                            ≤ ∑ t =0 Pt ⎢∑ l =0 ⎜ ⎟ M t l (1 − M t )n −l
                                 T −1
                                                                              ⎥
                                        ⎣       ⎝l⎠                        n ⎦
                              n −1
                            ≤        P
                                n

which coincides with the right-hand side if all payments are made before any agent has

perished, i.e., P = P0 .É

         The optimal tontine for symmetric agents, therefore, has a simple structure: All

agents receive a rebate proportional to their contributions relative to those of the total

group. This optimal structure implies that agents are not subject to any risk – all subjects

receive their payment with certainty. Given the contribution of all other agents, the

                                                                          bi
payoffs for an agent i under the tontine are given by                        P , where P denotes the prize
                                                                          B

level.

                                                                                       bi
         The certain payoff is therefore given by w − bi + h( B − P) +                    P which can also be
                                                                                       B

interpreted as the expected payoff in Morgan’s (2000) risk-neutral one-prize lottery. All

of his results therefore apply. In particular, using his δ -financing rule, the tontine will




                                                        9
always be carried out and the contributions will increase in the prize level, P, (see

Morgan 2000, lemma 5).6

        Reconsidering the first-order condition for a symmetric equilibrium (2), the
individual ( b ) and the total ( B ) contribution levels for the optimal tontine are given by
                                                                                n −1
                                nb = B                  B (1 − h '( B − P)) =        P.                 (3)
                                                                                 n
Note that the tontine raises a positive amount of money for the public good net of prize

payments, as

                                                  n −1
                                P(1 − h '(0)) >        P     ⇔      nh '(0) > 1 ,
                                                   n

which coincides with the condition for a public good.

        We summarize these results as follows:

Proposition 2 (Contribution levels for optimal tontines—Symmetric players)
    For symmetric players, the optimal tontine will always be carried out and raises
    contributions in excess of the prize-level P. The provision level of the public good
    is increasing in P.


Historically, tontines clearly have not reflected the optimal features derived in

Proposition 1. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, tontine “prize” payments

were made over a long time span. That is, the tontines differed significantly from the

optimal tontine in that repayments were made annually to the surviving subscribers

instead of making all repayments before anybody died. In the oft-used tontine repayment

system, however, subscribers could die in any period s (even before any payment was


6
  The optimal tontine that we study in this paper provides a rebate (subsidy) on individual contributions to
the public good. This feature resembles the study relating government subsidies and contributions to a
public good by Andreoni and Bergstrom (1996). In their case, however, subsidies are financed by taxes,
whereas in our model the rebates are taken out of the contribution to the public good. The provision of the
public good therefore does not depend on the possibility of enforcing tax payments. To balance the budget,
subsidy rates in our model are not exogenously fixed but endogenously given by the individual relative to
total contributions.


                                                   10
received) and thus would forego payments in all periods t > s with positive probability.

To model this aspect of the mechanism, let us assume that the aggregate prize amount P

is spread evenly across T ≤ T − 1 periods. In other words, Pt = P / T for 1 ≤ t ≤ T .

Then, the contributions in equilibrium are given by the first-order condition:

                                                     P T ⎡ n −1 ⎛ n ⎞ l                        n − l − 1⎤
                     B(1 − h '( B − P)) =              ∑ t =1 ⎢ ∑ l = 0 ⎜ ⎟
                                                                            M t (1 − M t )n −l
                                                                                                 n −l ⎦
                                                                                                        ⎥ ,   (4)
                                                     T        ⎣         ⎝l⎠

for which we obtain the following result:


Proposition 3 (Suboptimal tontines – Effect of T and n)
   Contributions to the public good using a tontine that pays a fixed prize-level in
   T ≤ T − 1 periods are decreasing in T . For any given T , they converge towards
   the contributions to an optimal tontine (or lottery) if the number of (potential)
   participants, n, increases.

Proof of Proposition 3:
In order to show that contributions decrease in T , it is sufficient to show that the right-

                              ⎛n⎞ l              n −l n − l − 1
                     ∑
                         n −1
hand sides of (4),            ⎜ ⎟ M t (1 − M t )                , are decreasing in t. As we know that
                         l =0
                              ⎝l⎠                       n−l

M t increases in t, we must demonstrate that:

                 ∂                    n!                          n − l −1
                     ∑
                          n −1
                                                M l (1 − M ) n −l
                ∂M        l =0
                                 l !( n − l ) !                     n−l
                                            n!                                          n − l −1
                     = ∑ l =0
                                n −1
                                                      M l −1 (1 − M ) n −l −1 (l − nM )          < 0.
                                       l !( n − l ) !                                     n−l

It is clear that for (n − 1) / n ≤ M all the summands are negative. For (n − 1) / n > M ,

however, we obtain:




                                                          11
                           n!                                          n − l −1
           ∑
               n −1
                                     M l −1 (1 − M ) n −l −1 (l − nM )
               l =0
                      l !( n − l ) !                                     n−l
               n − nM − 1 n −1       n!
           ≤
                 n − nM
                         ∑ l =0
                                l !( n − l ) !
                                               M l −1 (1 − M ) n −l −1 (l − nM )

               n(1 − M ) − 1 ⎡ n − 2 (n − 1)!                                           n!                          ⎤
                               ∑                                            ∑
                                                                  n −l −1     n −1                             n −l
           =                 ⎢                       M l
                                                         (1 − M )         −                       M l
                                                                                                      (1 − M )      ⎥
                (1 − M ) 2 ⎢⎣ l =0 l !( n − l − 1) !                          l =0
                                                                                   l !( n − l ) !                   ⎥⎦
                 n − 1 − nM n −1
           =−              M < 0.
                   1− M

        To prove the convergence result, we compare the right-hand side of the optimal

tontine with the one that pays in all periods 1 ≤ t ≤ T :

                            P T ⎡ n −1 ⎛ n ⎞ l                        n −l n − l − 1
                                                                                     ⎤
                              ∑     ⎢ ∑     ⎜
                            T t =1 ⎣ l =0 ⎝ l ⎠
                                                ⎟ M    t  (1 − M  t )
                                                                             n−l ⎦
                                                                                     ⎥
                                                     n −1
                                                 P
                                                         n
                                n 1 T ⎡ n −1 ⎛ n ⎞ l                               n − l − 1⎤
                            =
                              n −1 T
                                      ∑ t =1 ⎢ ∑ l = 0 ⎜ ⎟
                                                              M t (1 − M t ) n −l
                                                                                      n−l ⎦
                                                                                            ⎥.
                                             ⎣         ⎝l⎠

It is therefore sufficient to show that

                                                   ⎛n⎞ l               1
                                          ∑
                                              n −1
                                              l =0 ⎜ ⎟
                                                       M (1 − M )n −l
                                                   ⎝l⎠                n−l

converges to zero for all 0 ≤ M < 1 when n goes to infinity. This is easily demonstrated

numerically. É

        Proposition 3 highlights that the inefficiency of tontines that pay in later periods is

less severe when many participants are expected to participate. As a further feature of

such tontines, the expected payments in period t , conditional on agent survival, are

clearly small in the beginning (as the likelihood of others’ survival is high) but increase

rapidly toward the terminal period. As an investment instrument for retirement funds, the

tontine therefore provides advantages compared to other instruments. In particular, if one



                                                         12
relaxes the assumption of risk-neutrality and perfect substitutability across periods, the

tontine is quite practical economically if agents have decreasing external income (salary,

pension) and can use the tontine to flatten their temporal payoff streams.



Example 1

We consider contributions to a linear public good when the probability of dying is

                                   1
uniformly distributed: µt =          for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T . Assume that there are n = 50 symmetric
                                   T

agents and T = 50 periods. Figure 1 shows the contribution level to the T -tontine

relative to the contribution level to the optimal tontine. For the T = 50 -tontine, Figure 2

illustrates the expected payments in period t given survival (payments relative to payment

in period 1).
                                                         12
            10       20       30        40     50
                                                         10
0.98
                                                          8

                                                          6
0.96
                                                          4
0.94
                                                          2


0.92                                                              10    20   30    40     50


Figure 1:                                                Figure 2:

Total contributions as a function of   T (normalized) Expected payments in period t given survival
                                                         (normalized)




Figure 1 reveals that contributions remain above 90 percent of the optimal levels even if

one spreads the tontine payment over the whole potential lifespan of agents. Figure 2




                                                    13
shows that expected payments in period t, given that the agent survives until then,

increase rapidly toward the end of an agent’s lifespan.

III.2 Tontines and risk-aversion

           Lange et al. (2004) have shown that contributions to lotteries are decreasing in the

level of risk-aversion. For the optimal tontine, however, players are not exposed to any

risk. The optimal tontine is therefore a more efficient instrument for fundraising than any

lottery.



Proposition 4 (Tontines for risk-averse players)
    Individual contributions under the tontine that pays only before any agent has
    died are independent of the risk posture of agents. If agents are risk-averse but
    symmetric with respect to their valuation of the public good, it dominates any
    lottery as a fundraising instrument.


Besides this superiority of tontines for risk-averse agents, a fundraiser does not need any

prior beliefs over the risk preference of a potential donor pool when designing the

fundraising instrument.

III.3 Tontines with heterogeneous agents

           We have seen in the previous section that the optimal tontine for symmetric risk-

neutral players coincides with a single-prize lottery or—equivalently—a rebate scheme.

In this section, we consider the performance of tontines for agents with heterogeneous

valuation of the public good. Conditions are derived under which the rebate scheme, i.e.,

the degenerate tontine, is optimal.

           Reconsidering the individual first-order conditions (1), first observe that if there is

(at least) one t for which Pt > 0 and 0 < M t < 1 , all players will contribute. The intuition

is that there is a chance that in period t only one agent will survive. An agent can secure


                                               14
himself this prize Pt > 0 by contributing. More formally, looking at the first-order

condition for i ∉ S0 , the right-hand side is clearly infinite (consider S = S0 \ i ).



Proposition 5 (Participation in tontines):

If there is period t for which Pt > 0 and 0 < M t < 1 , then all players contribute to the

tontine.



Even a slight deviation from the degenerate tontine ( P0 = P ) (alias the rebate scheme)

towards Pt > 0, P0 < P can therefore lead to a discontinuous change in participation and

therefore contribution levels. In general, we obtain the following result when a tontine

should pay out part of the prizes in later periods:



Proposition 6 (Tontines—Heterogeneous agents):

If agents are sufficiently heterogeneous with respect to their valuation of the public good,

the optimal tontine pays Pt > 0 for some t > 0 with 0 < M t < 1 . In particular, if a set S0

of players participates for P0 = P , then contributions can be increased by changing to

Pt > 0 ( Pt + P0 = P )

(i)     if k < n , i.e., there is (at least) one agent i ∉ S0 who does not contribute if

           P0 = P :

                                                    1                        H −1
                                 hi '( B − P) ≤         ∑
                                                  k − 1 j∈S0
                                                             h j '( B − P) =
                                                                             k −1

(ii)    if k = n for P0 = P and



                                              15
                                                      n − l −1                           1− H / n                   n −1
                    ∑
                  0≤l ≤ n −1
                               M t l (1 − M t )n −l                ∑
                                                        n − l S ⊆ S0 ,# S = n−l 1 − H + (n − 1) H ( S ) /(n − l )
                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                                      n

         where H ( S ) = ∑ i∈S hi '(i) and H = ∑ i∈S hi '(i)
                                                                       0




Proof:

We analyze the tontine that pays Pt = ε and P0 = P − ε . Here, the first-order conditions

(1) are given by:

                                              B − bi                                ⎡                B − B( S ) − bi ⎤
                                                     + ε ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )n−l ⎢∑ S:i∉S ,# S =l
                                                           n −1
         1 − hi '( B − P) = ( P0 − ε )
                                               B 2
                                                                                    ⎣                ( B − B( S ))2 ⎥⎦
                                                                                                                           (5)
                                     n −1                                ⎡           n − l −1 ⎤
     n − ∑ hi '( B − P) = ( P0 − ε )      + ε ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )n−l ⎢∑ S:# S =l
                                                n −1

         i                            B                                  ⎣           B − B( S ) ⎥⎦

Case 1

                                                                                                H −1
Consider first the case in which there is i ∉ S0 with hi '( B − P) <                                 . Then there is a
                                                                                                k −1

discontinuity in participation and contribution at ε = 0 when Pt = ε and P0 = P − ε . We

therefore study the limit of the first-order conditions (5) from above ( ε                                      0 ) and get

k ( S0 ) > k (S0 ) , where S0 is the set for which bi = limε                      0
                                                                                      bi (ε ) > 0 . Now we have

                                                            B − bi
                                 1 − hi '( B − P) = P                  if bi > 0
                                                             B2
                                                                           k ( S0 ) − 1
                                  k ( S0 ) − ∑ i∈S hi '( B − P) = P                     ,
                                                      0
                                                                                B

from which the claim follows immediately.

Case 2

                                                                                H −1
Consider now the case in which there is hi '( B − P) ≥                               for all i at P0 = P . Then, the
                                                                                k −1

first-order conditions (5) also hold for P0 = P (as all individual first-order conditions (1)



                                                               16
hold with equality). For Pt = ε and P0 = P − ε , we study the derivative of B with respect

to ε at ε = 0 :

        ∂B                   1              ⎡ n −1                               ⎡            n − l −1 ⎤ ⎤
                                                   + ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )n −l ⎢∑ S :# S =l
                                                       n −1
           (ε = 0) =                        ⎢ −                                                             ⎥
        ∂ε           n −1                       B                                             B − B( S ) ⎥⎦ ⎦
                      B2
                          P − ∑i
                                 hi ''( i ) ⎣                                    ⎣


              ∂B
Therefore,       (ε = 0) > 0 iff
              ∂ε

                                        ⎡           n − l −1 ⎤                                 ⎡             n − l − 1⎤ n − 1
        ∑           M t l (1 − M t )n−l ⎢∑ S:# S =l              = ∑ l =0 M t l (1 − M t )n −l ⎢∑ S:# S =n−l
             n −1                                                    n −1
                                                               ⎥                                                       >
                                                                                                              B(S ) ⎥⎦
                                                                                                                              .
             l =0
                                        ⎣           B − B( S ) ⎦                               ⎣                         B


Using the equilibrium conditions

                                                          B − bi                               n −1
                             1 − hi '( B − P) =                  P       and         1− H =         P,
                                                           B2                                   B

we obtain the claimed relationship,

                                                          n − l −1                           1− H / n                   n −1
                        ∑
                      0≤l ≤ n −1
                                   M t l (1 − M t )n −l                ∑
                                                            n − l S ⊆ S0 ,# S = n−l 1 − H + (n − 1) H ( S ) /(n − l )
                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                          n

and completes the proof. É

       We have demonstrated above that the tontine with P0 = P coincides with a single-

prize lottery. Let us therefore finally compare the conditions in Proposition 5 with those

under which one can improve upon the single-prize lottery by offering multiple prizes.

As shown by Lange et al. (2004), one can improve upon the single prize lottery by

providing (at least) a second prize if:

                                              bi                                          1      (k − 1)2
                        (k − 2) ∑                   >k         ⇔        (1 − H / k ) ∑         >          .
                                      i∈S0   B − bi                                i∈S0 1 − hi    k −2




                                                                   17
On the one hand, we immediately see that one can design a tontine that outperforms any

                                                 1      (k − 1)2
lottery if k < n          and (1 − H / k ) ∑          <          .                  Alternatively, if k = n and
                                          i∈S0 1 − hi    k −2

                 1      (n − 1)2
(1 − H / n)∑          >          , one can increase the contributions to the lottery by offering
           i   1 − hi    n−2

a second prize, but cannot improve upon the degenerate tontine if

                                                     n − l −1                           1− H / n                   n −1
                   ∑
                 0≤l ≤ n −1
                              M t l (1 − M t )n −l                ∑
                                                       n − l S ⊆ S0 ,# S = n−l 1 − H + (n − 1) H ( S ) /(n − l )
                                                                                                                 <
                                                                                                                     n

for all t. This, for example, would be the case if M t is close to one for all t. In such

cases, the right-hand side of the inequality would be close to zero.

       We therefore can summarize our findings in the following Proposition:

Proposition 7 (Tontines vs. lotteries—Heterogeneous agents):

       If agents are risk-neutral and heterogeneous with respect to their valuation of the

public good, then there exist situations in which appropriately designed tontines

outperform lotteries and vice versa.



       Note that in real-world applications there will always be agents who have no

valuation, or only a below average valuation, for specific public goods. In such cases,

one can always improve upon a single prize lottery by using a tontine with Pt > 0 and

0 < M t < 1 ; in this case all agents will contribute under the tontine.

III.4 Tontine as a fundraising instrument

       A charity that seeks to fundraise using a literal version of the historical tontine to

replace lotteries might find the simulation of the “probabilities to die” problematic since

in each round one must have a random draw for all survivors. The structure of the tontine


                                                              18
can be used, however, to design a fundraising instrument (which we also call tontine)

whose implementation is quite simple.

        For this, we abstract from the independent and identical probabilities of dying

considered in the previous section. Instead, sequentially draw one of the k participating

persons which must leave the game. That is, in period t the number of players is k-t. For

the payments, the sequence of “dying” is decisive.7                         Each sequence has the same

probability given by 1/ k ! if k players contribute. As in the previous section, a certain

amount of money is distributed among the remaining players according to their share in

each period (i.e. before the next person leaves).

        Compared to the preceding analysis, we only have to change the probability of a

certain set S of players having passed away until period t from M t # S (1 − M t )n − # S to

   ⎛ k ⎞
1/ ⎜ ⎟ . The first-order conditions (1) therefore convert to
   ⎝#S ⎠

                                            k −1 ⎡                   B − B( S ) − bi ⎤ ⎛ k ⎞
             1 − hi '( B − P) = ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 ⎢∑ S ⊆ S \i ,# S =l
                                  T −1
                                                                                       /⎜ ⎟    for i ∈ S0
                                                 ⎣       0
                                                                     ( B − B( S ))2 ⎥⎦ ⎝ l ⎠
                                            k −1 ⎡                       1       ⎤ ⎛k ⎞
             1 − hi '( B − P) ≥ ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 ⎢∑ S ⊆ S \i ,# S =l
                                  T −1
                                                                                  /⎜ ⎟         for i ∉ S0
                                                 ⎣       0
                                                                     B − B( S ) ⎥⎦ ⎝ l ⎠
                                          k −1 ⎡                k − l −1 ⎤ ⎛ k ⎞
         k − ∑ hi '( B − P) = ∑ t =0 Pt ∑ l =0 ⎢∑ S ⊆ S ,# S =l
                                T −1
                                                                             /⎜ ⎟
             i∈S0                              ⎣       0
                                                                B − B( S ) ⎥⎦ ⎝ l ⎠

while all the qualitative results remain valid. In particular, payments should be made

before anybody leaves the game ( P0 = P ) if agents have similar valuation of the public

good. If agents are sufficiently heterogeneous, one can improve upon this degenerate

tontine—and possibly upon any lottery—by choosing P0 < P .


7
 For example, given identical contributions, a person who leaves last gets the highest payment, the person
who leaves first receives the lowest payment.


                                                     19
IV. Concluding Remarks

       This article provides a theoretical exploration of tontines, a popular method of

financing public goods that was introduced more than three centuries ago. Even though

tontines were once quite popular—the name “tontine” remains prominently displayed on

several publicly funded projects around the world—little is known about their formal

structure and whether it would be apropos to reintroduce tontines today.

       In this study, we highlight the best characteristics of the tontine that might be

utilized in future fundraising drives by deriving the optimal tontine and formally linking

the tontine to a popular modern fundraising scheme used by both government and

charitable fundraisers: lotteries. We show that the optimal tontine generates contributions

that are equivalent to those under a single prize lottery when agents are symmetric and

risk neutral. For symmetric risk-averse agents, contributions under the optimal tontine

strictly dominate contributions raised under any lottery type. Further, the design of an

optimal tontine is independent of underlying risk posture and generates contributions that

weakly dominate those of any lottery. If agents are sufficiently asymmetric, tontines

yield higher contribution levels than the optimal lottery—having a chance of being the

only survivor in a period with positive payment provides incentives for all players to

contribute. If a fundraiser also seeks a high participation rate in order to collect the

names of potential contributors for future fundraising drives, then the tontine has an

additional “hidden” advantage in that it maximizes participation rates.

       While this article has addressed the performance of tontines as a fundraising

mechanism, there are a number of outstanding issues. For example, under the optimal

tontine each agent receives a positive monetary payment with certainty. The ex post




                                          20
allocation of wealth is thus more equitable than that which results from any k-prize

lottery. Given that inequality-averse preferences have been found to be prevalent among

agents in laboratory experiments (see, e.g., Fehr and Schmidt, 1999; Bolton and

Ockenfels, 2000), there are reasons to suspect that contribution levels under a tontine

would exceed even those predicted by our model. We hope that future work examines

this issue in greater detail and evaluates the performance of tontines in the laboratory and

in the field.




                                          21
                                    References

Andreoni, James. “Toward a Theory of Charitable Fund-Raising”. Journal of Political
       Economy, 106(1998): 1186-1213.
Andreoni, James and Ted Bergstrom. “Do Government Subsidies Increase the Private
       Supply of Public Goods?”. Public Choice, 88(1996): 295-308.
Andreoni, James "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm
       Glow Giving", Economic Journal, 100 (1990): 464-477.
Bagnoli, Mark and Michael McKee. “Voluntary Contribution Games: Efficient Private
       Provision of Public Goods”. Economic Inquiry, 29(1991): 351-366.
Bolton, Gary and Axel Ockenfels. “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity, and
       Competition”. American Economic Review, 90(2000): 166-193.
Dunbar, Charles. “Some Precedents Followed by Alexander Der Hamilton”. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 3(1888): 32-59.
Engers, Maxim and Brian McManus. “Charity Auctions”. Working Paper, University of
       Virginia. (2002).
Falkinger, Joseph. “Efficient Provision of Public Goods by Rewarding Deviations from
       Averages”. Journal of Public Economics, 62(1996): 413-422.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus Schmidt. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation”.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1999): 817-868.
Goeree, Jacob, Emiel Maasland, Sander Onderstal, and John Turner. "How (Not) to
       Raise Money". Working Paper University of Georgia Terry School of Business
       (2004).
Groves, Theodore and John Ledyard. “Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution
       to the Free Rider Problem”. Econometrica, 45(1977): 783-809.
Jennings, R., D. Swanson, and A. Trout. “Alexander Hamilton’s Tontine Proposal”.
       William and Mary Quarterly, 45(1988): 107-115.
Lange, Andreas, John A. List, Michael Price, and Shannon Price. “Using Lotteries to
       Finance Public Goods: Theory and Experimental Evidence,” UM Working Paper.
List, John and David Lucking-Reiley. “Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on
       Charitable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign”.
       Journal of Political Economy, 110(2002): 215-233.
Morgan, John. “Financing Public Goods by Means of Lotteries”. Review of Economic
       Studies, 67(2000): 761-784.
Ransom, Richard and Roger Sutch. “Tontine Insurance and the Armstrong Investigation”.
       The Journal of Economic History, 47(1987): 379-390.
Sugden, Robert. “On the Economics of Philanthropy,” Economic Journal, 92 (1982):
       341-350.
Sugden, Robert. “Reciprocity: The Supply of Public Goods through Voluntary
       Contributions,” Economic Journal, 94 (1984): 772-787.
Varian, Hal. “Sequential Contributions to Public Goods”. Journal of Public Economics,
       53(1994): 165-186.
Walker, Mark. “A Simple Incentive Compatible Scheme for Attaining Lindahl
       Allocations”. Econometrica, 49(1981): 65-71.
Weir, David. “Tontines, Public Finance, and Revolution in France and England, 1688-
       1789”. The Journal of Economic History, 49(1989): 95-124.



                                       22
