                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INSTITUTIONS AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
                         DURING EARLY ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT INVENTORS
                          OF THE UNITED STATES, 1790-1930

                                           B. Zorina Khan
                                         Kenneth L. Sokoloff

                                        Working Paper 10966
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10966


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2004




We would like to express our appreciation to Marigee Bacolod, Yael Elad, Maria Loyola, John Majewski,
Brian Rivera, Dhanoos Sutthiphisal, Steven Tse, Matthew Wiswall, Elaine Ycasas, and Tamara Zavalyenko
for expert research assistance. We also gratefully acknowledge valuable discussions with Naomi Lamoreaux,
Stanley Engerman, Larry Epstein, Phil Hoffman, Christine MacLeod, Gavin Wright, as well as participants
at presentations at the NBER, Oxford University, the University of California, Los Angeles, the CESifo
Conference on Institutions and Growth held in Venice, Italy in July 2004, and the 2004 annual meetings of
the American Economic Association. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
 © 2004 by B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Institutions and Technological Innovation During the Early Economic Growth: Evidence from
the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790-1930
B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 10966
December 2004
JEL No. N10, N71, O31, O34

                                             ABSTRACT


Employing a sample of renowned U.S. inventors that combines biographical detail with information
on the patents they received over their careers, we highlight the impact of early U.S. patent
institutions in providing broad access to economic opportunity and in encouraging trade in new
technological knowledge. Through setting low fees and establishing administrative procedures for
application, the United States deliberately created a patent system that allowed a much wider range,
in socioeconomic class terms, of technologically creative individuals to obtain property rights to their
inventions than did European patent institutions. Moreover, by requiring that applications be
examined for novelty by technical experts, and by enforcing patent rights strictly, the U.S. system
reduced uncertainty about the validity of patent rights, and in that way lowered the cost of transacting
in them. Creating secure assets in new technological knowledge and facilitating access to markets
in technology in this way both stimulated specialization at invention and further enhanced the
opportunities available to technologically creative individuals who would otherwise have lacked the
capital to directly extract returns from their efforts. Indeed, we show that until the late 19th century,
the 'great inventors' of the U.S. generally had backgrounds that permitted them only limited formal
schooling, and made extensive use of their abilities under the patent system to extract returns from
trading their patent rights. The usefulness of the 19th century U.S. patent system to inventors with
humble origins may have implications for the design of intellectual property institutions in
contemporary developing countries.

B. Zorina Khan                                          Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Bowdoin College                                         UCLA
Brunswick, ME 04011                                     Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                                and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu                                       sokoloff@ucla.edu
       Intellectual property institutions have long played a central role in discussions of

economic growth. In recent years there has been a revival of concern with the impact of patent

institutions on the rate and direction of inventive activity, and on technological change more

generally. Much of the analysis has focused on the most direct effects of granting an exclusive

property right in technological knowledge: the enhanced returns that inventors can extract by

enjoying a state-mandated monopoly on their discoveries; and the higher costs that users of new

technologies or consumers of final goods have to bear as a result of a society’s recognizing

property rights in technical information. For some decades, the dominant stream of thought held

that the dynamic gains associated with more rapid rates of technological progress, induced by

offering greater material incentives to investors in research and development, outweighed the

static losses suffered because of slower diffusion. Scholars and policymakers have become

increasingly skeptical about this calculus, however, with particular scrutiny of whether it is

applicable to developing countries. Their chief concerns are that strengthened intellectual

property rights in developing-country contexts might lead to a high volume of licensing or

royalty fees from these societies to the highly industrialized countries, and that there might not be

much of a return in terms of higher domestic rates of invention or productivity growth.

       This paper draws on economic history to highlight another feature of intellectual property

whose significance has received little attention. We argue that defining and enforcing a tradable

asset in new technological knowledge is extremely important for fostering a market in

technology, and for extending and increasing incentives for investment in inventive activity to

segments of the population that would otherwise find it difficult to directly extract returns from

their technological creativity. The paper explores this feature in the context of an assessment of

the evolution of intellectual property systems, and its impact on the course of technological



                                                                                                     1
progress in one of the early industrializers, the United States. The historical perspective is

valuable for appraising current issues, even though the effects and appropriateness of specific

institutions such as patent system vary with the frontiers of technology as well as other

circumstances which certainly change dramatically over time. In our view, the repercussions of

providing broad access to property rights in new technological knowledge may be much more

relevant and favorable for developing economies today than is generally realized.

        In order to demonstrate just how revolutionary the United States patent system was in

providing broad access to a secure and well-defined asset in new technological knowledge, the

second section of this paper discusses the development of patent institutions in Britain and

France, relative to America. Section III presents evidence regarding individuals who made

contributions to the technological frontier in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This

part of the paper describes the composition of a sample of ‘great inventors’ and their patterns of

patenting from 1790 through the 1930s. We examine patterns of geographical location, mobility,

nativity, and access to privileges such as schooling at institutions of higher learning. Moreover,

the data allow us to determine whether specific classes of ‘great inventors’ differed in their

tendency to rely on the use of their patent as an asset that allowed them to extract returns from

their technological creativity. We conclude with a brief discussion of how the U.S. innovation of

a modern patent system diffused over the 19th century, and the relevance to developing countries

today of that country’s experience with the role of institutions in fostering democratic invention.



       II. EARLY PATENT SYSTEMS

       A fundamental and enduring concern of organized society is the design of institutions that

encourage private actors to undertake investments conducive to improvements in social welfare.

It is therefore hardly surprising that there is a long history of public policies crafted to stimulate


                                                                                                         2
would-be inventors, innovators, and investors to contribute to the advance and diffusion of

technological knowledge. Appreciation of the potential importance of such policies grew over

the late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as it became clear that ongoing technological

progress was feasible, capable of altering the fate of nations, and responsive to material

incentives. A wide variety of schemes were introduced and debated at one time or another, but by

the end of the nineteenth century patent systems, and especially the model provided by the U.S.,

emerged as the dominant method by which national governments promoted the growth of new

technological knowledge. An institution that had been rather obscure a century before had come

to be regarded as a virtual necessity for any country with plans to industrialize or modernize.1

         As emerging nations decided to establish or revise their patent institutions, they were able

to draw from the examples and experiences of the three leading industrialized countries of the

early nineteenth century, each of which was also something of a pioneer in formulating public

policy toward technology. Britain – the first industrial nation – stands out for having established

a patent system which has been in operation for a longer period than any other in the world.2

Patents were granted “by grace of the Crown” and were subject to any restrictions that the

government cared to impose, including the expropriation of the patent without compensation. To

a large degree by design, patent institutions offered rather limited incentives to inventors with

only modest resources or to creators of incremental inventions. Specific features of the British

system made it difficult for an inventor who did not already command capital to obtain and use a

patent as a well-defined asset to mobilize that capital from others, or to extract a return to his

1.
  Especially after the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851, there was a continued fascination with issues about patent
systems, including whether patent systems were desirable for all countries, how they should be designed, and (for
individuals) how to make money from them. See Machlup and Penrose (1950) for an excellent account of one part
of the debate. Mark Twain was not far from the mainstream when he spoke through the “Connecticut Yankee in
King Arthur’s Court”(p. 70): “[T]he very first official thing I did, in my administration – and it was on the very first
day of it too – was to start a patent office; for I knew that a country without a patent office and good patent laws was
just a crab and couldn’t travel any way but sideways or backways.”



                                                                                                                       3
technological creativity by selling it off. The orientation of the British system reflected a

widespread view amongst that country’s elite that significant (in the sense of technologically

important, not being easily discoverable by many people, and thus worthy of property protection)

contributions in technical knowledge were unlikely to come from individuals who did not already

have access to the means to absorb the cost of a patent or to exploit the invention directly through

a commercial enterprise.

        The Statute of Monopolies in 1624 offered a grant of a patent for fourteen years for “the

sole making or working of any manner of new manufacture within this realm to the first and true

inventor.”3 But in Britain the interpretation of the “first and true inventor” included importers of

inventions that had been created abroad, and seems to have also intruded on the determination of

whether employers were entitled to patents on the ideas of their workers.4 Not only were fees set

extremely high (five to ten times annual per capita income well into the 19th century), but

potential patentees were well advised to obtain the help of a patent agent to aid in negotiating the

numerous steps and offices that were required for a cumbersome process of application in

London. Before 1852 patent specifications were open to public inspection on payment of a fee,

but they were not printed, published or indexed.5 The complicated system also inhibited the

diffusion of information and made it difficult, if not prohibitive, for inventors outside of London

to conduct patent searches.

        The defects of the British system led to numerous investigations and calls for institutional

reform, especially after 1829. But it was not until the Crystal Palace Exhibition in 1851, where

2
  The standard references for the early British patent system are Christine Macleod (1988) and H I Dutton (1984).
3
  21 Jac. I. C. 3, 1623, Sec. 6.
4
  See Macleod (1999) for a discussion of how craftsmen in Britain had to rely on other methods of extracting returns
from their ideas about how to improve on technical practice.
5
   Since the patent could be filed in any of three offices in Chancery, searches of the prior art involved much time
and inconvenience. It is hardly surprising that the defenders of the early patent system included patent agents and
patent lawyers. Patent fees also provided an important source of revenues for the Crown and its employees, and



                                                                                                                  4
American inventors shocked observers with their creativity and called attention to their

innovative patent institution, that actual legislation was enacted to meet some of the longstanding

criticisms. In 1852 the British patent laws were revised in the first major adjustment of the

system in two centuries. The patent application process was rationalized into one single Patent

Office, and the fee structure was adjusted. A renewal system was adopted, making it cheaper to

initially obtain a patent, but one taken to full term remained just as costly as before. The 1852

reforms undoubtedly instituted improvements over the former opaque procedures, but the system

remained one based on registration rather than examination, and procedures continued to

discourage the technologically creative who did not already have substantial capital to draw on.

        This absence of an examination system was, we argue, extremely important. Without

examination, there was great uncertainty about what a patent was really worth. Before the 1852

reform, for example, the lack of access to information about the specifications of patents already

granted made it difficult to identify whether a purported invention (even one that had been

patented) was truly novel and would stand up to challenge. The legal system added to the

prevailing uncertainty, and was biased against “mere” improvements. Patents were valid only for

inventions that were novel (which was of course difficult to determine before 1852) and useful,

and courts did not hesitate to enforce both of these conditions. Utility under the patent law was

regarded as unrelated to the commercial success of the patented invention. Since the legal

system was unpredictable, patent rights could not be regarded as settled unless the patent had

been contested in court with a favorable outcome.6 Moreover, as the law did not offer any relief

to the purchaser of a patent that ultimately proved invalid or worthless, potential purchasers were


created a class who had strong incentives to block proposed reforms.
6
  According to an editorial in 1862, “there can be no doubt that a large amount of property is bound up in patent
rights, and that the utmost uncertainty exists as to the legal value of that property” (Newton’s London Journal, cited
in Coulter, p. 140). Other constraints on the market for inventions related to policies towards assignments. Ever
vigilant to protect an unsuspecting public from fraudulent financial schemes on the scale of the South Sea Bubble,


                                                                                                                         5
well advised to engage in extensive searches before entering into contracts.7 When coupled with

the lack of assurance inherent in a registration system, the purchase of a patent right involved a

substantive amount of risk and high transactions costs -- all indicative of a speculative

instrument. It is therefore not surprising that the prevalence of assignments and licenses was

significantly lower than in the U.S. (see Figure 1).8

         France provides another example of European institutions to promote invention and

technical change. French policies consisted of an extensive array of rewards and incentives, and

illustrate the relative benefits and costs of alternative routes to statutory grants of patent rights.9

Although offering some striking contrasts with the approach taken by Britain, overall they were

alike in offering quite limited incentives for technologically creative individuals without either

comfortable means or high status to invest in developing their ideas. The cost of obtaining

patents was again very high relative to per capita income (much higher than in the U.S., though

lower than in Britain). Similarly, the reliance on a registration system, limited public disclosure

of technical specifications, and the absence of a centralized way of tracking of assignments and

patent ownership, all made it difficult for patentees to use their patents as secure and well-defined

assets to mobilize capital or to extract significant returns through selling or licensing off his/her

rights. France was distinguished by its readiness to make extensive use of other means of

rewarding inventors and innovators, but those sorts of returns were uncertain, especially since the

processes involved in identifying those deserving of support tended to favor individuals who


ownership of patent rights was limited to five investors (later extended to twelve).
7
  The case law on licenses was more convoluted. See for instance Lawes v. Purser, 6 Ell. and Bl. 930, where a
licensee refused to continue payments on the grounds that the patent was void. It was held that the licensee could
not make such a defense as long as the contract for the invalid patent had been executed without fraud.
8
  The markedly higher ratio of assignments to patents in the U.S. is all the more significant, both because the British
figures are biased upward by the inclusion of licenses, and because the higher costs of obtaining a patent in Britain
should, at least in principle (if screening by cost was a good substitute for screening by examination), have led to
patents of higher average quality.
9
  Excellent assessments of such issues during the Enlightenment include Liliane Hilaire-Perez’s thesis, “Inventions



                                                                                                                      6
already established economically, professionally, or socially.

         Before the Revolution, the advance of technology was encouraged by the state granting

inventors or introducers of inventions titles, pensions that sometimes extended to spouses and

offspring, loans (some interest-free), lump-sum grants, bounties or subsidies for production,

exemptions from taxes, or monopoly grants in the form of exclusive privileges. Alternatives to

formal privileges illustrate the advantages and disadvantages of awards that were administered by

the state on a case- by- case basis. These primarily nonmarket methods of allocation tended to

be administratively costly and were imbued with the potential for corruption. It is, and was,

evident that a system of grants and privileges could be arbitrary and based on non-economic

criteria. Eighteenth-century correspondence and records provide numerous examples of awards

that were made based on court connections. Members of the scientific community who

examined applications were not necessarily qualified to assess the potential value of many of the

inventions. Moreover, the administrative and opportunity costs of such a system were nontrivial

on the part of both supplicants and the state bureaucracy. Inventors were also aware that

promises extended to them as inducements were not necessarily enforceable once the inventor

had made fixed investments or made his discovery.10                The technologically creative who were

lacking in wealth, status, or connections to individuals who enjoyed these privileges, were at a

pronounced disadvantage.

         It was this complex network of state policies towards inventors and their inventions that


et Inventeurs en France et en Angleterre au XVIIIe siecle,” and L'  invention technique au siecle des Lumieres, Paris :
Albin Michel, 2000.
10
   The famous English textile inventor, John Kay, illustrates the asymmetries involved in individual bargains struck
with state authorities. Kay settled in France because of promises to subsidize the transfer of technology and
substantially aided in the diffusion of textile machinery. The Society for the Encouragement of Arts and
Manufacturing in England promised him a generous award to return there, but then reneged once he was in London.
Kay wrote early in 1761 to Prudaine de Montigny, Conseiller d’Etat in London, to explore the possibility of
receiving French financial aid if he again immigrated to Paris. Later that same year, Kay wrote to M. de Brou,
Intendant de Rouen, to complain that he was still not receiving the pension he had been promised.


                                                                                                                      7
was replaced after the outbreak of the French Revolution. The modern French patent system was

established according to the laws of 1791 (amended in 1800) and 1844. The Revolutionary

Assembly intended to avoid the excesses involved in previous grants of privileges, and

proclaimed that it had drafted the outlines of a system that constituted a distinct break with the

past. But in effect, as Alexis de Tocqueville pointed out, many features of the institutions of the

ancien regime survived the revolution, and this was no less evident in the workings of the patent

system.11 The 1791 statute stipulated patent fees that were costly, ranging from 300 livres

through 1500 livres, and the high price of protection led to difficulties for inventors from

ordinary backgrounds. Patentees filed through a simple registration system without any need to

specify what was new about their claim, and could persist in obtaining the grant even if warned

that the patent was likely to be invalid. Indeed, on each patent document the following caveat

was printed: “The government, in granting a patent without prior examination, does not in any

manner guarantee either the priority, merit or success of an invention.”12

         The French patent statutes included a statement regarding the right of the public to view

patent specifications, which echoed the “bargain” theory of patents that underlay American and

11
   See the Decret du 30 Decembre 1790, in the Code des Pensions, p. 45. Although the legal rhetoric implied that the
primary intent of the legislation was to recognize the natural rights of inventors, the actual clauses led to results that
were different and reflected former mercantilist policies. In an obvious attempt to limit international diffusion of
French discoveries, until 1844 patents were voided if the inventor attempted to obtain a patent overseas on the same
invention. On the other hand, the first introducer of an invention covered by a foreign patent would enjoy the same
“natural rights” as the patentee of an original invention or improvement, although the term would expire at the same
time as any foreign patent on the item. In order to qualify for a patent of importation, the applicant had to have
obtained practical knowledge of how the item worked through personal risk and effort, although he was not obliged
to prove that the invention had been patented elsewhere nor to even state its country of origin. The rights of
patentees were also restricted if the invention related to items that were controlled by the French government, such as
printing presses and firearms.
12
   Since France during the ancien regime was likely the first country to introduce systematic examinations of
applications for privileges, it is somewhat ironic that commentators point to the retention of registration without
prior examination as the defining feature of the “French system.” In 1968 a partial examination system was adopted
which was similar to the early British reforms along these lines, since it did not include a search for novelty, merely
a test for accordance with the law: “[il] se situe a mi-chemin entre la libre deliverance et l’examen prealable ... en
effet, l’administration n’avait pas les moyens de pratiquer un tel examen.” (P. 21, La Procedure Francaise de
Delivrance des Brevets d’Invention, Yves Marcellin, Editions Cedat, Rosny-Sous-Bois.) The changes were made to
give value to patents and to protect the interests of third parties. It was only in 1978 that an examination for novelty



                                                                                                                        8
British grants. In return for the limited monopoly right, the patentee was expected to describe

the invention in such terms that a workman skilled in the arts could replicate the invention and

this information was expected to be “rendue publique”. However, since no provision was made

for the publication or diffusion of these descriptions, in effect the statutory clause was a dead

letter. At least until the law of April 7 1902, specifications were only available in manuscript

form in the office in which they had originally been lodged, and printed information was limited

to brief titles in patent indexes.13 Moreover, the state remained involved in the discretionary

promotion of invention and innovation through policies beyond the granting of patents such as

cash awards and purchase of patent rights. As a result, inventors had an incentive to direct their

attention to rent seeking activities as well as to productive efforts to commercialize their

discoveries. Patent assignments were filed in the office of the Prefect for the district, but since

there was no central source of information it was difficult to trace the records for specific

inventions. Like patents themselves, assignments and licenses were issued with a caveat emptor

clause. This was partially due to the nature of patent property under a registration system, and

partially to the uncertainties of legal jurisprudence in this area. In short, according to an

informed 19th century observer, patent rights evinced a “remarkably hazardous and uncertain

nature.” The basic structure and principles of the French patent system set forth in these early

French statutes endured until after World War II.

        The framers of the U.S. Constitution and its early laws were bold, ambitious, and

optimistic, and helped set the new nation on an institutional trajectory that was radically different

from any in the Old World. One of the areas in which they made this dramatic break was in the


was introduced.
13
   The law of 1844 only allowed for the publication of the full text of patents that were judged to be important. The
attempt to obtain information was also inhibited by restrictions placed on access – viewers had to state their motives;
foreigners had to be assisted by French attorneys; and no extract from the manuscript could be copied until the
patent had expired. “C’est donc bien avec la loi de 1902 que le brevet a definitivement perdu son charactere de


                                                                                                                     9
patent system they constructed. The so-called Founding Fathers took the design of intellectual

property institutions very seriously: for the first time in the world an intellectual property clause

was introduced in a national constitution; the intellectual property clause was approved

unanimously and the law establishing the patent system was one of the first passed by Congress;

and prominent figures such as James Madison and George Washington played key roles in

spelling out the provisions. The framers quite self-consciously made major changes to the

structures employed in Europe, and nearly all of their alterations can be viewed as strengthening

and extending incentives and opportunities for inventive activity to classes of the population that

would not have enjoyed them under traditional intellectual property institutions.

        The framers of the U.S. Constitution and of its early laws were familiar with European

precedents, and so it might be reasonably inferred that their innovations in design were self-

conscious and deliberate. The intellectual property clause providing for the patent and copyright

statutes appears in the very first Article of the U.S. Constitution, whereby Congress was

instructed to “promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to

Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” From

what record of their thinking survives, the framers were intent on crafting a new type of system

that would promote learning, technology, and commercial development, as well as create a

repository of information on prior art. Their chosen approach to accomplishing these objectives

was based on providing broad access to property rights in technology, which was achieved

through low fees and an application process that was impersonal and relied on routine

administrative procedures. Congress debated the question of appropriate fees, and the first patent

law in 1790 set the rate at the minimal sum of $3.70 plus copy costs. In 1793 the fees were

increased to $30 (less than 5 percent of those prevailing in Britain), and were maintained at this


document d’archives.” Brevets d’Invention Francais, 1791-1902, p. 12.

                                                                                                     10
level until 1861. In that year, they were raised to $35, and the term was changed from fourteen

years (with the possibility of an extension) to seventeen years (with no extensions.)

         Incentives for generating new technological knowledge were also fine-tuned by requiring

that the patentee be “the first and true inventor” anywhere in the world. The law employed the

language of the British statute in granting patents to "the first and true inventor," but unlike in

Britain, the phrase was used literally, to grant patents for inventions that were original in the

world, not simply within U.S. borders. Moreover, a condition of the patent award was that the

specifications of the invention be available to the public immediately on the issuance of the

patent.14 This latter condition not only sped the diffusion of technological knowledge, but also --

when coupled with strict enforcement of patent rights -- aided in the commercialization of the

technology. That strict enforcement was indeed soon forthcoming. Within a few decades the

federal judiciary evolved rules and procedures to enforce the rights of patentees and their

assignees, and clearly considered the protection of the property right in new technological

knowledge to be of vital importance.15 Unlike in Britain, patent property was secured by the

“Supreme Law of the land” (the Constitution) and, once granted, could not be overturned except

for cases of outright fraud.

         Another distinctive feature of the U.S. system of great significance was the requirement

that all applications be subject to an examination for novelty. For the first few years after the


14
   American legislators were concerned with ensuring that information about the stock of patented knowledge was
readily available and diffused rapidly. As early as 1805 Congress stipulated that the Secretary of State should
publish an annual list of patents granted the preceding year, and after 1832 also required the publication in
newspapers of notices regarding expired patents. The Patent Office in Washington itself was a source of centralized
information on the state of the arts, but it also maintained repositories throughout the country, where inventors could
forward their patent models at the expense of the Patent Office. Rural inventors could apply for patents without
significant obstacles, because applications could be submitted by mail free of postage.
15
   See Khan 1995. Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, the acknowledged intellectual property expert of the early
courts, succinctly stated the dominant perspective in Lowell v. Lewis [15 F. Cas. 1018 (1817)]: “[T]he inventor has a
property in his invention; a property which is often of very great value, and of which the law intended to give him
the absolute enjoyment and possession ... involving some of the dearest and most valuable rights which society
acknowledges, and the constitution itself means to favor.”


                                                                                                                    11
Patent Act of 1790 was passed, a committee comprising the Secretaries of State and War, and the

Attorney General examined the patent applications. This provision proved unwieldy and was

replaced by a registration system in 1793, whereby disputes about the validity of a patent were to

be resolved by the judiciary. The Patent Act of 1836 re-introduced the examination system, in a

structure that remains in use today. Each application was to be scrutinized by technically trained

examiners to ensure that the invention conforms to the law and constitutes an original advance in

technology.16 Approval from technical experts reduced uncertainty about the validity of the

patent, and meant that the inventor could more easily use the grant to either mobilize capital to

commercially develop the patented technology, or to sell or license off the rights to an individual

or firm better positioned to directly exploit it. Private parties could always, as they did under the

registration systems prevailing in Europe, expend the resources needed to make the same

determination as the examiners, but there was a distributional impact, as well as scale economies

and positive externalities, associated with the government’s absorbing the cost of certifying a

patent grant as legitimate and making the information public.17 Trade in patented technologies

was, as a result, much more extensive – even on a per patent basis – in the U.S. than elsewhere.

Technologically creative people without the capital to go into business and directly exploit the

fruits of their ingenuity were major beneficiaries.

         It was not coincidental that the U.S. system was extraordinarily favorable to trade in

patent rights. From the special provision made in the 1793 law for keeping a public registry of


16
   Although the statutes proposed to grant patents for “new and useful” inventions, in practice the utility claim was
never enforced. Courts declared that it was up to the market, not to administrators, to determine what was useful. In
the 1817 case, Lowell v. Lewis, 15 F. Cas. 1018, Joseph Story charged the jury that the utility of the invention "is a
circumstance very material to the interest of the patentee, but of no importance to the public. If it is not extensively
useful, it will silently sink into contempt and disregard." It was the role of the market, rather than the courts, to
determine the ultimate success of the patent. This policy was continued by the Patent Office, which also did not
attempt to gauge the social or technical value of an invention, deciding conflicting claims predominantly on the
basis of novelty.
17
   See Dutton 1984 and MacLeod 1988 and 1999.


                                                                                                                      12
all assignments onward, it is clear that the framers of the system expected and desired an

extensive market in patents to develop. It was well understood that the patent system enhanced

potential private and social returns to invention all the more, by defining and extending broad

access to tradable assets in technological knowledge to a wide spectrum of the population. A

market orientation enabled patentees to extract income (or raise capital) from their ideas by

selling them off to a party better positioned for commercial exploitation, and thereby encouraging

a division of labor that helped creative individuals specialize in their comparative advantage.

The U.S. system extended the protection of property rights to a much broader range of inventions

than obtained in Britain or elsewhere in Europe (largely through the lower costs) and, when

coupled with effective enforcement of the rights of the “first and true inventor,” this meant that

inventors could advantageously reveal information about their ideas to prospective buyers even

before they received a patent grant. By the mid-1840s, trade in patents (and patenting) was

booming, and growing legions of patent agents or lawyers had set up shop in major cities and

other localities where rates of patenting were high. Although these agents focused initially on

helping inventors obtain patents under the new system, it was not long before they assumed a

major role in the marketing of inventions.18

         Overall, there is no serious question that the United States patent system constituted a

dramatic break from European antecedents as regards policies to promote technological advance.


18
   By the mid-1840s, for example, a number of national patent agencies had begun to publish periodicals (such as
Scientific American) that popularized invention as a career path for the ambitious and talented. Over time,
intermediation in this market for technology grew ever more articulated in a process not unlike the evolution of
financial intermediaries. Patent agents and lawyers became increasingly specialized and were drawn into activities
such as the provision of advice to inventors about the prospects for various lines of inventive activity, and the
matching not only of buyers with sellers of patents but also of inventors with individuals seeking to invest in the
development of new technologies. As the extent of the market for technology expanded over the course of the
nineteenth century, creative individuals with a comparative advantage in technology appear to have increasingly
specialized in inventive activity. This tendency was likely reinforced by the increasing importance to inventors of
specialized technical knowledge as technology became more complex. For evidence and more discussion, see:
Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1996, 1999, 2001, and 2003; Khan and Sokoloff 1993 and 2001; and Khan 2004.


                                                                                                                      13
The framers of the U.S. patent institutions held quite different expectations, relative to those of

their counterparts in Europe, about the extent to which individuals from relatively ordinary or

humble backgrounds could contribute to new technological knowledge, and about how

responsive that group would be to expanded opportunities for realizing returns from inventive

activity. The structure of the U.S. system was based on the conception that a wide range of

individuals, whatever their social origins and standing, were capable of making significant

contributions to the advance of technological knowledge, but that in order to realize that

potential, broad access to property rights in their knowledge had to be provided. Such rights

were especially critical for the technologically creative of limited means. Without clear and

secure property rights to their inventions, how could they hope to mobilize the capital to exploit

them directly? Certainly, without such property rights (dependent both on their ability to obtain a

patent, and on a high likelihood – enhanced by the examination system -- that it would stand up

in court to a legal challenge), problems of asymmetric information and other high transactions

costs would plague the attempts of inventors to attract investors, just as they would complicate

the working out of arrangements between employers and employees to encourage the latter to

develop their ideas for improvement and offer them up. Access to such rights was to be

enhanced by lower fees, an examination system that bolstered confidence that a patent would

stand up to challenge, and by a judicial system that was effective at enforcement. Requirements

of immediate full disclosure of technical specifications stimulated further progress, as the

technologically creative could more easily learn about and build on what had been discovered.

Such measures also encouraged a market in patented technologies that would both aid inventors

in using their patents as collateral to attract investments and increase the returns to their

inventions.

       One would expect this system to have led to a more socially diverse composition of


                                                                                                      14
inventors and, in previous work, based on general samples of patentees, we showed how

individuals from elite backgrounds accounted for a much smaller proportion of patentees in the

U.S. than they did in Britain during the early 19th century.19 Because many patents are of little or

no value, however, this evidence may not conclusively demonstrate that providing broader and

stronger incentives for inventive activity was of much technological significance.20 Indeed,

many observers, including those who were influential in maintaining the more socially restrictive

patent systems that predominated in Europe until late in the 19th century, thought that little in the

way of new technology that was novel or important could be expected from individuals who

lacked sufficient capital to obtain patents and fund their commercial application:

                 even with the present expense there are so many trifling patents taken out. If the

                 fee was much higher, parties that are now taking out patents for little speculative

                 things …would not take them out. They are something like the dog in the manger;

                 they prevent the public from benefiting by the invention or improvements on it for

                 fourteen years, and yet do not benefit themselves.21

The next section of the paper therefore examines the backgrounds and careers of individuals who

made contributions at the frontiers of technology, in order to determine the role of the patent

system in providing broad access to opportunities for deriving income from investments in

inventive activity. The focus on inventors who achieved renown for their contributions to the

advance of technology seems fully appropriate for assessing whether the democratic orientation

of the U.S. system supported important advances in technology.




19
   Khan and Sokoloff 1998.
20
   Sokoloff 1988; Sokoloff and Khan 1990; and Khan and Sokoloff 1993.
21
   So testified Charles Few to the Select Committee on the Law Relative to Patents for Invention, on May 15, 1829.
See British Parliamentary Papers 1968, Reports from Select Committees on the Law Relative to Patents for
Inventions, vol. 1, p.48.


                                                                                                                 15
       III. EVIDENCE FROM THE ‘GREAT INVENTORS’ IN THE UNITED STATES

       The idea that patent institutions might matter for the rate of invention, by either a group or

the entire population, is based on the judgment that inventors (and those who invest resources to

support their activity) are motivated in part by the prospects of realizing material returns. As we

have shown in previous work, early 19th century U.S. inventors were indeed highly

entrepreneurial and quite sensitive to the potential gains that could be extracted from their

discoveries. Some scholars might agree with this characterization, but still contend that the roster

of patents was limited to trivial improvements that were only of marginal relevance to the sources

of productivity growth and technological change. A common argument is that economic growth

depended on discrete advances vested in such “great inventions” as the telegraph, the railroad and

the steam engine, and that such ideas were generated through a different process. We drew on

the Dictionary of National Biography to locate those “great inventors” who were active in the

U.S. at some point during their careers and born before 1886, and traced their patenting through

1930, in order to examine how different their patterns of behavior were from those of patentees in

general. For each of the more than 400 inventors (all men except for one woman), we collected

biographical information as well as the records of a substantial proportion of the patents (roughly

4500 out of 16,900) they were awarded over their careers

       Overall, we find that the so-called great inventors were quite similar to ordinary

patentees. Indeed, to the extent they differed, it was because they were even more

entrepreneurial or influenced by markets. Not only did their patenting activity vary pro-

cyclically, as did patenting overall, but they often shifted the direction of their inventive activity

(as reflected in patents) when exogenous events such as the Civil War altered the relative returns


                                                                                                    16
that could be expected from different sorts of inventions.22 It is also telling that more than 95

percent of the great inventors patented at least some of their inventions, and an even higher

percentage took positive action to derive material benefit from them.23

         Table 1 provides another powerful indication that inventors, and great inventors

especially, were concerned with material returns. This is reflected in the tendency for inventors

to disproportionately cluster in geographic areas (such as New England and the Middle Atlantic)

with better or easier access to low-cost transportation (such as navigable internal waterways) and

to the institutional supports underlying the market for technology (such as patent agents and

lawyers).24 This geographic pattern is not explained by geographic differences in schooling

levels or in the distribution of manufacturing workers. Rather it seems consistent with the notion

that inventors were more likely to focus on inventive activity if they were in (due either to birth

or selective migration) locations where returns to inventive activity were higher.25 Geographic

differentials in patenting seem to have initially (during the early 19th century) been rooted in

transportation-based disparities in access to broad markets, but persisted over time especially

since institutional supports to carrying out and profiting from invention tended to cluster where

patenting was higher. The self-reinforcing pattern was completed when technologically creative

individuals chose to move to those places where the market for technology was concentrated, in

order to better realize the returns to their specializing at their comparative advantage in inventive

22
    Sokoloff 1988; and Khan and Sokoloff 1993.
23
   This claim is based on a presumption that the ‘great inventors’ who were employees (a distinct minority as will be
made clear), did take positive action to derive benefit. From the biographies we have read, there were only a few
inventors who did not try to realize some returns from their efforts. Nearly all patented their inventions, but some
did not. Only three of the cohort born after 1820 did not obtain patent protection.
24
   In previous work, we showed that both overall inventors, and especially great inventors, were highly
disproportionately concentrated in counties with access to water transportation (prior to railroads). See Sokoloff
1988 and Khan and Sokoloff 1993. For evidence that patent agents and other indicators of the market for technology
came to be disproportionately concentrated in those areas (mostly in New England and the Middle Atlantic), see
Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1996, 1999a, 1999b, and 2003.




                                                                                                                   17
activity.26 A final illustration of how entrepreneurial the great inventors were is the high rate of

migration evident in all of the birth cohorts (see Table 2). The rates of inter-state migration we

estimate from their places of birth and their residences during the years they received patents are

much higher than those for the general population at similar ages.27

         One of the key issues for our study is whether the framers of the U.S patent institutions

were correct in their assumption that individuals from modest or undistinguished backgrounds

were capable of playing important roles in pushing out the technological frontier. Although the

biographies contain some information about the parents of the great inventors (see Table 2 for the

occupations of their fathers), the relative paucity of data on the wealth holdings of the parents

limits its usefulness for our purposes here. Instead, we take advantage of the abundant detail on

the formal schooling and training the great inventors received early in their work or career

histories. Historians of education agree, and the biographies confirm, that the age at which a

young male left school and began to work was strongly associated with the economic resources

of the parents during the 19th century.28 This pattern stemmed both from most of the nation’s

secondary schools and universities being private and thus requiring significant tuition until late in

the 1800s, as well as the opportunity cost of an individual at school in lieu of at work. The

evidence on the extent of formal schooling among the great inventors, therefore, bears not only

the significance of having received a higher level (and course of study) of formal schooling for

25
   See Khan and Sokoloff 1993, for evidence that great inventors during the early 19th century were both more likely
to be born in counties with low-cost access to broad markets, and to migrate to such counties. Both factors
contributed to the highly disproportionate concentration of great inventors in such counties.
26
   See Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1996 and 1999 for more discussion.
27
   Joseph Ferrie very kindly provided estimates of the inter-state migration rates from the random sample of the
native-born population that he has collected from the late-19th century public-use census records, for groups at
comparable ages. He agrees that the great inventors seem to have been much more geographically mobile than the
general population. It is also worth noting how the foreign born are disproportionately represented among the great
inventors of the United States. This is consistent with the idea that the technologically creative in Europe were more
likely to migrate across the Atlantic because of greater opportunities – some of which may have associated with the
patent system.




                                                                                                                   18
being capable of making important contributions to technology, but also on what sort of material

circumstances they came from.

        Figure 2 displays the distributions of patents across classes of great inventors

distinguished in terms of the amount and type of formal schooling they received, and arrayed by

birth cohort. It reveals that from the very earliest group (those born between 1739 and 1794)

through the birth cohort of 1820 to 1845, roughly 75 to 80 percent of patents went to those with

only primary or secondary schooling.29 So modest were the educational backgrounds of these

first generations of great American inventors, that 70 percent of those born during 1739-94 had at

best a primary education (at least as formally provided), with the proportion dropping to only just

above 59 percent among those who entered the world between 1795 and 1819. Given that these

birth cohorts were active and indeed dominant until the very last decades of the 19th century,

these figures unambiguously indicate that people of rather humble backgrounds were capable of

making important contributions to technological knowledge. Those who had received some

schooling at institutions of higher learning are admittedly over-represented, as the proportions of

cohorts graduating from secondary school or college were lower than 10 percent and 3 percent

respectively as late as 1900.30 But what is most striking is how individuals who had not enjoyed

the advantages associated with a more advanced education accounted for such a large share of

major inventions, and that those trained in engineering and/or the natural sciences (in college or

28
   See Cubberley 1920, for a discussion of how the schools, and the backgrounds of the students who attended them,
evolved over the 19th century.
29
   Those classified as receiving only a primary education encompass a range from those who spent no time in school
to those who attended school until about age 12. Those who were identified as spending any years in an academy or
who attended school after the age of 12 (but did not attend a college or seminary) were placed in the secondary
schooled category. Those who spent any time at all in college were either counted in the college category, or – if
they had attended a school with an engineering orientation or followed a course of study in medicine or a natural
science – in the engineering/natural science.
30
   See Snyder 1993, figures 11 and 17. The rates of graduation from secondary school and college were markedly
higher in the Northeast and East North Central regions, where inventive activity was disproportionately concentrated
throughout the 19th century however. See Cubberley 1920 and 1947 for discussion of the regional patterns in
schooling.


                                                                                                                 19
beyond) did not play a major role until the birth cohort of 1846 to 1865. Moreover, in all of the

birth cohorts, the great inventors who had only primary or secondary education received as many

(and often more) patents over their careers as did their peers with more extensive formal

schooling. The less-educated inventors also seem to have produced as valuable or technically

significant inventions. Their patents were just as likely to be assigned, and just as likely to be

cited in applications for patents from later inventors. Thus, the technologically creative seem to

have been able to accumulate the skills and knowledge necessary to operate at the frontier largely

on their own, or through their work experience as apprentices or younger employees, up until the

Second Industrial Revolution.31

        Some skeptics might suggest that the great inventors who had to make do with little or no

formal schooling were not so disadvantaged. That is perhaps the point, at least as regards the

sources of technological creativity, but this should not be interpreted as meaning that this class of

great inventors was as well off in material terms as those who went to college. Matthias

Baldwin, James Eads, George Eastman, Thomas Edison, and Elias Howe are among the many

great inventors who were compelled to go to work at an early age to support themselves or their

families, and thus to forego much in the way of formal schooling. A perhaps more fundamental

question is whether this class of inventors was especially advantaged by the structure of the U.S.

patent system, where the cost of obtaining a property right in the new technological knowledge

one had discovered was low, the State supported strict enforcement of those rights, and where

(between 1790 and 1793, and from 1836 onward) the patent office invested substantial resources

in determining the validity of patents before they were granted.


31
 The differences in patent systems had implications for how apprenticeship worked, and the effective rights of
workers to technological improvements they generated, in Britain and the United States. See Fisk 1998 and
MacLeod 1999.



                                                                                                                 20
        The biographies suggest that inventors with only primary or secondary schooling had

more limited financial resources than those who were able to attend college. Given the financial

institutions of that era, inventors lacking in wealth would surely have found it much more

difficult to extract a return from their inventions, if they had to mobilize the capital to start or

conduct a business on their own to exploit their idea directly without patent protection. The

lower cost of obtaining a patent, and the certification that stemmed from having successfully

passed an examination screening, should have made it much easier for inventors to market the

new technology and either extract returns by selling off or licensing the rights to a firm better

positioned for commercial exploitation, or to attract investment (by offering shares in a firm

whose assets consisted largely of the patent rights to the new technology or commitments by the

inventor) to support the continued efforts of the inventor.

        Our evidence does indeed suggest that these features of the U.S. patent system were

highly beneficial to inventors, and especially to those whose wealth would not have allowed them

to directly exploit their inventions through manufacturing or other business activity. The ability

to obtain patents provided a means for individuals whose chief asset was technological creativity,

or accumulated human capital that was conducive to inventive activity, to extract a return from

their talents by focusing on invention. Table 3 shows that a remarkably high proportion of the

great inventors, generally near or above half, extracted much of the income from their inventions

by selling or licensing off the rights to them. Moreover, it was just those groups that one would

expect to be most concerned to trade their intellectual property that were indeed the most actively

engaged in marketing their inventions. The great inventors with only a primary school education

were most likely to realize the income from their inventions through sale or licensing, whereas

those with a college education in a non-technical field were generally among the least likely to




                                                                                                       21
follow that strategy.32 With the exception of the birth cohort of 1739 to 1794 (where there are

relatively few observations), the college-educated inventors were much more likely than others to

extract the returns to their technological creativity by being a proprietor or principal in a firm that

directly exploited the technology in production.33 Inventors who chose to realize the fruits of

their technological creativity in this way might not seem to have been so affected by the patent

system, but in fact even this group benefited. They were obviously helped by holding a

monopoly on the use of the respective technology, but many of them were also aided in

mobilizing capital for their firms by being able to report patents (or contracts committing patents

granted in the future) as assets. Patent portfolios were especially useful as a signal for those who

wished to attract venture capital for exceptionally innovative projects that might otherwise have

seemed overly risky.34

         The estimates in Table 3 of the relative prevalence of the approaches used by the great

inventors to derive income from their inventions also indicate that the reliance on sales and

licensing is quite high among the first birth cohort (51.4 percent on average), and remains high

(62.1, 44.0, and 66.0 percent in the next three cohorts), until a marked decline among the last

birth cohort, those born between 1866 and 1885. The proportion of great inventors who relied

extensively on sales or licensing of patented technologies fell sharply from the levels of

preceding cohorts, and there was a rise in the proportion that realized their returns through long-

term associations (as either principals or employees) with a firm that directly exploited the

32
   Although a bit less striking, the inventors who had studied engineering or a natural science were also, for a time
(the middle three birth cohorts), much more inclined to rely on sales or licensing of their inventions to realize
income. This pattern might be explained as due to these inventors choosing to specialize in what their human capital
gave them a comparative advantage in – inventive activity – and leaving it to others to carry out the commercial
exploitation.
33
   Many of the college educated of the 1739-94 birth cohort were evidently not so concerned with realizing a return
from their inventions. Fourteen percent of the college educated, and more than one third of those who studied
engineering or natural science chose not to pursue returns to their inventions. This attitude, however admirable, was
not shared by inventors that came from less privileged backgrounds.



                                                                                                                  22
technologies. This finding parallels that of Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999a), whose analysis of

different data indicated that there was a substantial increase in the likelihood of the most

productive inventors forming long-term attachments with a particular assignee over the late-19th

and early 20th centuries.35

        The patterns of variation over educational class and time in the relative prevalence of the

different approaches employed by inventors in realizing the returns to their inventive activity,

and in the relative productivity or prominence of different sub-groups at invention, are both

fascinating and complex. We have highlighted the role of a revolutionary, low-cost,

examination-based patent system which, when coupled with favorable legal institutions and

strong enforcement, not only encouraged a broad range of creative individuals and firms to invest

more in inventive activity, but was especially crucial for those who began without much in the

way of resources except for their technological creativity. A key feature of the story, however,

is that much of the population possessed some familiarity with the basic elements of technology

during this era. Moreover, apprenticeship or the widespread practice of leaving home during

adolescence to pick up skills in a trade, a traditional social institution for the transmission and

accumulation of more detailed technological knowledge, was both widely accessible and capable

of adapting to many of the new developments and to the general quickening of the pace of

advance over the 19th century. Technologically creative individuals without the resources to

attend institutions of higher learning thus had avenues for acquiring the skills and knowledge

necessary to be effective at invention, and could later take advantage of the access to

opportunities for inventive activity grounded in the patent system. Good things generally come

34
  Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokoloff 2004.
35
  Although deeply impressed with how well this result fits with the work of Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1999a and
2003, some caution may be warranted. Because the Dictionary of American Biography was originally prepared
during the 1920s, our sample does not include as many great inventors born after 1865 as we would like. We would
feel a bit more secure with more observations.


                                                                                                              23
to an end, eventually, and in this case circumstances changed over time with the evolution of

technology. Formal knowledge of science and engineering became increasingly important for

making significant contributions at the technological frontier, particularly with the so-called

Second Industrial Revolution, and the cost of carrying out inventive activity rose. Both of these

developments served to narrow the range of the population that could generate important

inventions, at least to the extent that technologically creative individuals from humble origins

found it difficult to gain access to the programs in engineering or natural sciences which

proliferated with the expansion of land-grant state universities during the late-19th century.

Given the much higher costs of conducting inventive activity, those who were supplying the

capital to fund such endeavors may have reasonably desired more in the way of credentials, as

well as long-term commitments, from those they were supporting. This interpretation is

obviously somewhat speculative, but does seem to be consistent with the patterns in the data.

       An alternative perspective is that many of the phenomena we have noted could be

explained by changes in the sectoral composition of the economy. In this view, there were

always some industries in which formal schooling in a technical field was nearly a prerequisite

for significant invention, while in others inventors could make do with little or no formal

schooling. The latter industries, such as agriculture or light manufacturing, may have featured

prominently in the early industrial economy, and thus created opportunities at invention for the

under-schooled, but over time the more capital-intensive and science-based industries grew in

importance. The sectoral shifts then led to the dominance among great inventors of those trained

in engineering or the natural sciences, as well as to the rise of R & D laboratories in large

integrated companies. Although some aspects of this account ring true, the estimates presented

in Table 4 of variation in the educational backgrounds of the great inventors across sectors (and

over time) suggest that changes in the sectoral composition of the economy offer little


                                                                                                    24
explanatory power. Although inventors in the electrical/communications sector (that is, electrical

machinery and equipment, telegraph, telephone, radio, etc.) were always slightly more likely to

have studied engineering or a natural science, in general the differences across sectors seem very

small. Instead, the most striking pattern is that the educational backgrounds of inventors tended

to move together over time, with each sector characterized by a marked increase in reliance on

inventors educated in engineering or natural sciences during the last two birth cohorts. Although

our classification of patents by sector is more aggregated than we would like, the data suggest

that the change in the composition of inventors overall was driven more by developments

extending across all sectors, rather than by changes in the relative importance of different sectors.

       Table 5 presents further evidence of a broad change over time in who was responsible for

the most important technological advances, and the growing significance of supporting

investments in human and other capital. As seen in the first panel of this table, there was a

pronounced shift toward greater specialization at invention (and use of the patent system). The

typical great inventor born after 1820 had much longer careers at such activity than those born

before, with nearly 60 percent of them receiving patents for more than 30 years (as opposed to

roughly 37 percent for the earlier cohort). Moreover, even controlling for the duration of career

at invention, the later birth cohort generated many more patents. This tendency toward greater

specialization was likely encouraged by the growth of the market for technology (which raised

the returns to invention, and also helped inventors who demonstrated creativity at research and

development mobilize support) and the increased significance for being productive at invention

of having accumulated specialized knowledge and human capital.36 Changes in the age of first

invention may also reflect these developments. As indicated in the second panel of the table,

over time great inventors began producing patented discoveries at somewhat younger ages, and




                                                                                                  25
on average those who got started earlier ultimately received many more patents over their careers

(in total, and per year of career at invention). Accounted for partially by a sharp drop off in the

fraction of great inventors who filed their first patent at 35 or older, this distinct pattern seems to

suggest that it became more important for the technologically creative to invest in specific human

capital or establish a track record early if they were to be productive at invention in later years. It

is quite interesting, however, that the great inventors who were older at first patent were

proportionally (relative to the number of patents they received) just as likely to receive citations

for their achievements; the implication is the late-starters may have generated fewer inventions

over their careers, but that the average quality of their discoveries was roughly equivalent to

those who began inventing and patenting earlier in life.



           IV. INSTITUTIONS, INVENTION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

         Invention was a remarkably democratic activity in the United States throughout the 19th

century. Although individuals who had been able to study at institutions of higher learning were

over-represented among great inventors, those with little in the way of formal schooling were

major contributors to the progress of technology. As we have argued before, this era of

democratic invention owed much to the broad access to economic opportunities available in an

environment where enterprises operated on a small scale, markets were rapidly expanding, and

there were relatively modest barriers to entry. In this paper, however, we called attention to a

crucial feature of patent institutions whose role has not been fully appreciated. The U.S. patent

system was revolutionary in its extension of property rights in technology to an extremely wide

spectrum of the population. Moreover, it was exceptional in recognizing that it was in the public

interest that patent rights, like other property rights, be clearly defined, well enforced, and easy to

36
     Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1999a..

                                                                                                      26
transact in. These were radical notions in a world accustomed to technology being a free good to

all who had the capital to exploit it, except as limited by the authority of the government to

arbitrarily grant a monopoly over it. It should be no surprise that they encountered fierce

resistance in Old World Europe, at least until the exhibition at Crystal Palace intensified concern

with the logic and design of intellectual property institutions.37

           We have demonstrated the lack of support for the views of those 19th century skeptics

who contended that only an elite segment was capable of truly important invention, and therefore

that an extension of property rights in technology to the general population would have no

beneficial effect and might even retard the pace of technical progress. Although few of the

celebrated inventors in Britain were of humble origins, such individuals were well represented

among the great inventors of the United States. In the U.S., this group was more likely to invest

in inventive activity, not only because of the relatively lower cost of obtaining a patent, but also

because the examination system facilitated the use of a patent as a general asset that could be

sold, licensed, or offered as collateral for finance. This latter feature was of profound importance

for technologically creative individuals who lacked the financial resources to exploit inventions

directly. In short, the patent system was a key institution in the progress of technology, but it

also stands out as a conduit for creativity and achievement among otherwise disadvantaged

groups.

           It might be natural to ask whether, if the U.S. system of strong and broadly extended

property rights in new technological knowledge was so effective at harvesting the technological

creativity of its population, it inspired other nations to adopt such a purportedly successful

institutional innovation. As we have suggested, Britain and many other European countries did

modify their patent institutions, especially after Crystal Palace, to make them more like the

37
     Machlup and Penrose 1950; Penrose 1951; and Rosenberg 1969.

                                                                                                    27
American system. On the whole, however, this institutional convergence might be considered

somewhat slow, especially the convergence that was achieved without the influence of the

international patent conventions convened over the last few decades of the 19th century (see

Table 6). Japan and Germany, for example, stand out as the only leading economies that seem to

have enthusiastically (in their initial system designs) joined the U.S. in embracing the

examination system (though Russia and the Scandinavian countries also went in that direction,

having been much influenced by the German system, with Canada in turn presumably affected by

the U.S. practice). How do we make sense of the pattern of institutional diffusion?

        Tracing back at least as far as Simon Kuznets and Alexander Gerschenkron, scholars of

long-term economic development have wondered whether follower countries naturally evolve, if

not benefit from, a systematically different set of institutions than did the early industrializers.

Gerschenkron’s analysis focused on capital market institutions, but some of his insights might

well apply to the question of what sort of patent institutions the follower countries of the 19th

century should have adopted.38 As with financial capital, follower countries likely had difficulty

mobilizing all forms of capital to invest in inventive activity and thus it was perhaps not

unreasonable for them to choose to rely on technological knowledge from abroad. Early

industrializers, whose populations and industries were more familiar with the frontiers of

technology, would not have been so inclined.

        It should not be too surprising that those who came after tended to adopt patent systems

that were more oriented toward securing flows of technology from outside the country, especially

technological knowledge that was embodied in actual plant or production. Except for the U.S,

and a few relatively minor exceptions, nearly all societies had working requirements (or in a few

38
  Gerschenkron explicitly identified the ability to draw on the technologies developed in those countries that had
industrialized earlier as one of the greatest advantages of economic backwardness. See his classic essay, in



                                                                                                                     28
cases compulsory licensing) as a central component of their patent systems. Similarly, the great

majority of follower countries had provisions for so-called patents of importation -- whereby

those who were the first to introduce a new technology to the country (regardless of whether

he/she was the inventor) from abroad could obtain a property right (typically lasting until the

original foreign patent on the technology expired).39 It was only late in the century, after

international patent conventions -- under pressure from the United States -- urged countries to

adopt the principle that only inventors had the right to a patent, that such awards of property

rights to the importer of a technology were disallowed. Even then, many countries specified that

the first applicant for a patent would be presumed to be the inventor.

         Many argue that extremely underdeveloped countries should have no interest in

maintaining a patent system, on the grounds that their citizens would not be very likely to make

new contributions to technological knowledge, and thus the only impact would be to increase the

flow abroad of licensing fees and other payments for the fruits of technology. This attitude,

however, has an uncomfortable resemblance to that early 19th century view that ordinary people

could not be expected to produce any truly significant new technical knowledge. We have shown

that the latter opinion was incorrect, and though circumstances today are very different, it is far

from clear that strong patent systems in developing countries will fail to elicit a supply response


Gerschenkron 1976, chpt. 1.
39
    Many of the follower countries assessed very high fees for patents (especially those that are less developed) at
rates that are all the more remarkable for the relatively low per capita incomes prevailing there. Indeed, many of the
societies in Central and South America are distinguished for having among the highest fees in the world for patent
protection, and the pattern holds across quite a range of national institutional heritages (Brazil, British Honduras, and
Peru for example). These fees might have been so high because the elites in these extremely unequal societies did
not find it in their interest to provide broad access to property rights in new technology. Given that the number of
outliers in Central and South America, where inequality in wealth and political influence was extreme, as compared
to say Spain and Portugal (which also had rather low per capita incomes), this hypothesis should perhaps not be
immediately dismissed. It might be further noted that the influence of colonial heritage is not nearly so powerful as
one might have expected. There was, for example, enormous diversity in the characteristics of the patent systems of
even the still remaining British colonies. Another rationale is that it provided an effective way of deriving
government revenue at the expense of foreigners (who in many of these countries accounted for well over half of all
patents).


                                                                                                                      29
in domestic invention. Moreover, one can also justify the implementation of an effective patent

system if it were necessary make substantial investments to migrate technologies from abroad or

if the cooperation or assistance of the original inventor was an important factor in diffusion.

Although Taiwan of the mid-1980s was and is hardly typical of most developing countries, in his

careful investigation of the strong patent system suddenly imposed on the country by the U.S., Lo

offers persuasive evidence of a powerful response in expenditures on research and development,

patenting by Taiwanese residents in the U.S., and foreign direct investment.40    More study is

needed, but it seems to us premature to dismiss the idea that there could be some formidable

benefits to developing countries strengthening their protection of property rights to new

technology, especially if such moves involved working requirements.




40
     Lo 2004.




                                                                                              30
                                            FIGURE 1


         THE RATIO OF ALL ASSIGNMENTS TO PATENTS IN THE U.S.,
 AS COMPARED TO THE RATIO OF ALL ASSIGNMENTS AND LICENSES TO PATENTS
                        IN BRITAIN, 1870 TO 1900




              90.0
              80.0
              70.0
              60.0
              50.0
              40.0
              30.0
              20.0
              10.0
               0.0
                 1870      1875      1880       1885      1890      1895      1900
                                     US                Britain




Sources: U.S. Patent Office, Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents. Washington, D.C.:
G.P.O., various years; and Great Britain Patent Office. Annual report of the Commissioners of
Patents [after 1883: Annual Report of the Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade
Marks.] London: H.M.S.O., various years.




                                                                                                31
                                                        TABLE 1

         Regional Shares of Total Patents, Great Inventor Patents, and Population, 1790-1930


            1790-1829   1830-1845   1846-1865 1866-1885     1886-1905   1906-1930
               (%)         (%)         (%)         (%)         (%)         (%)
_________________________________________________________________________________

REGION

New England

Patents                 34.4%            30.1%               24.7%              19.7%              16.7%           11.4%
G.I. Patents            55.1             34.1                29.6               29.1               29.1            18.3
Population              21.0             13.2                10.1                9.1                7.6             7.2


Middle Atlantic

Patents                 54.5             52.3                 48.3              40.6               37.6            30.8
G.I. Patents            35.5             57.7                 55.7              51.5               41.1            62.0
Population              34.4             30.0                 26.5              23.1               20.5            21.1


Midwest

Patents                  3.0              8.3                20.8               30.3               34.5           36.8
G.I. Patents             1.9              3.2                13.3               13.6               22.9           14.5
Population               3.3             17.3                29.2               34.0               36.0           32.6

South
Patents                 8.1               9.2                  5.1               6.0                6.8           10.8
G.I. Patents            7.5               5.0                  1.4               1.5                2.3            3.6
Population             41.3              39.7                 32.9              31.9               31.5           31.7

West

Patents                  --               --                   1.0                3.4                4.6          10.2
G.I. Patents              --              --                   0.0                2.9                2.7           1.6
Population                --              --                   1.4                1.9                4.5           7.5




Notes and Sources: The population figures are from the decadal U.S. Census of Population. The regional distribution
of total patents was computed from the Patent Office Annual Reports. The Great Inventor patents for the period
before 1865 include all patents filed by great inventors to that date; after 1865 the distribution of great inventor patents
refer to a sample of the patents obtained.




                                                                                                                          32
                                       TABLE 2

  OTHER DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON GREAT INVENTORS, BY BIRTH
                           COHORT


            PRE-1820 BIRTH COHORTS               POST-1820 BIRTH COHORTS

                             Number        %                    Number        %

____________________________________________________________________

Father'
      s Occupation

                           Inventors                         Inventors

Artisan                     17         15.6%                    36           20.3%
Farmer                      43         39.4                     37           20.9
Eng/Mach/Inventor            9          8.3                     25           14.1
Professional /Merchant      28         25.7                     61           34.7
Manufacturer                 8          7.3                     18           10.2
Other                        4          3.7                     --           --


Career Patents Received, by place of birth of inventor, and proportion of patents
received in states other than place of birth

                                 Patents                        Patents

Northern New England              92            87.0%           1697        97.6%
Southern New England             537            55.5            1785        64.7
New York                         213            34.7            1872        58.3
Pennsylvania                      45            64.4             459        67.6
Southern Middle Atlantic         118            91.5             266        60.3
South                             48            64.4             260        87.0
Midwest/West                      34            44.1            2670        89.6
Foreign Country                   91           100.0            3483       100.0


Notes and Sources: See text.



                                                                                    33
                                                         FIGURE 2

                      THE DISTRIBUTION OF ‘GREAT INVENTOR’ PATENTS

                           BY FORMAL SCHOOLING AND BIRTH COHORT




                                          EDUCATION By Birth Cohort:
                                            % distribution of patents
                      80
                      70
                      60
                      50
                      40
                      30
                      20
                      10
                       0
                              1739-1794    1795-1819     1820-1845   1846-1865   1866-1885

                                          Primary               Secondary
                                          Nontech Coll          Technical




Notes and Sources: See the note to Table 3 and text.




                                                                                             34
                                     TABLE 3

  DISTRIBUTION OF ‘GREAT INVENTOR’ PATENTS BY LEVEL OF EDUCATION AND
  THE MAJOR WAY IN WHICH THE INVENTOR EXTRACTED RETURNS OVER THEIR
                    CAREERS: BY BIRTH COHORTS, 1739-1885
________________________________________________________________________
                                    Level of Education
Birth Cohort           Primary    Second.       College  Eng/NatSci. Tot

1739-1794      (row %)       69.5    6.8       12.5    11.3     400
  avg. career patents        5.6     3.8        6.5     5.2      75

  sell/license   (col. %)    54.9    11.1      84.0    17.7    51.4%
  prop/direct    (col. %)    36.5    74.1       2.0    44.7    35.6%
  employee       (col. %)     6.2     7.4       --      --      4.8%

1795-1819      (row %)       59.1    19.3       5.4    16.2     709
avg. career patents          20.0    14.4      17.3    12.1      80

 sell/license (col. %)       58.2    81.0      42.1    60.4    62.1%
 prop/direct (col. %)        33.2    10.2      47.4    24.3    28.1%
 employee (col. %)            8.4     8.8       --     13.5     8.8%

1820-1845       (row %)      39.2    34.7      16.3     9.7    1221
  avg. career patents        41.8    44.0      29.4    23.7     145

 sell/license (col. %)       50.7    31.8      37.4    72.8    44.0%
 prop/direct (col. %)        42.3    55.2      47.7    19.3    45.5%
 employee (col. %)            7.7    13.0      14.9     7.0    10.2%

1846-1865      (row %)       22.2    24.5      20.9     32.4   1438
  avg. career patents       158.3    73.6      78.6     55.3     80

  sell/license (col. %)      94.5    68.5      46.2    57.1    66.0%
  prop/direct (col. %)        5.5    18.6      52.8    16.9    22.6%
  employee (col. %)            --    12.9       --     23.6    10.4%

1866-1885     (row %)         0.2    17.9      21.4    60.5     574
  avg. career patents          --   144.5      53.6   155.7      26

  sell/license (col. %)       --      1.0      46.3    40.1     34.3%
  prop/direct (col. %)      100.0    98.1      49.6    18.7     39.7%
  employee (col. %)           --      1.0       4.1    41.2     26.0%




                                                                           35
Notes and Sources Table 1: See the text. The table reports: the distribution of great inventor
patents across the schooling class of the patentee, by the birth cohort of the inventor; the average
number of patents received by each inventor, by birth cohort and schooling class; and the
distribution of patents across the principal method of the inventor extracting income, by birth
cohort and schooling class. The numbers of patents and great inventors are reported in italics for
each birth cohort. The classification of the way income was extracted was arrived at through a
close reading of the biographies, and refers to the overall career of the inventor (all of his or her
patents). The categories include: inventors who frequently sold or licensed the rights to the
technologies they patented; those who sought to directly extract the returns by being a principal in
a firm that used the technology in production or produced a patented product; and those who were
employees of such a firm. We have omitted a category for those inventors who seem to have made
no effort to extract income from their inventions. Our overall sample of ‘great inventors’ was
constructed in two waves. In the first (160 inventors), consisting primarily of those born before
1821, we collected the information for all of the patents they received through 1865, and retrieved
the information on the number they received after 1865 for our estimates of the total career patents.
In the second wave (249 inventors), we collected patents from every fifth year through 1930, and
thus will be missing the patents received late in the careers of those of our inventors who were
born in the 1870s and 1880s.




                                                                                                  36
                                               TABLE 4

            DISTRIBUTION OF ‘GREAT INVENTOR’ PATENTS ACROSS SECTOR

               AND EDUCATION OF INVENTOR: BY BIRTH COHORT, 1739-1885


                                 Agric     Const/CivEng   Elec/Comm      Manuf       Transp     Miscell
1739-1794             #patents     33         27               4           209        99         25
     Sector share of Patents      8.3%        6.8%           1.0%         52.6%       24.9%      6.3%
     Primary (col. %)            60.6        59.3            --           69.4        73.7      84.0
     College (col.%)              9.1        11.1          100.0          12.4        13.1       4.0
     Eng/Nat Sci. (col. %)       15.2        14.8            --           13.4         7.1       4.0

1795-1819             #patents     61          37              6          316         218         67
     Sector share of Patents      8.7%         5.3%          0.9%         44.8%       30.9%      9.5%
     Primary (col. %)            68.9         70.3          66.7          56.7        52.3      76.1
     College (col.%)             21.3          5.4           --            5.4         --        9.0
     Eng/Nat Sci. (col. %)        4.9         24.3          33.3          14.6        21.6      11.9

1820-1845             #patents     98          110           73            659        118        144
     Sector share of Patents      8.2%          9.2%         6.1%         54.8%        9.8%     12.8%
     Primary (col. %)            24.5         41.8          11.0          44.8        49.2      27.1
     College (col.%)             23.5          6.4          23.3          10.8        17.8      38.2
     Eng/Nat Sci. (col. %)        2.0         20.9          17.8            9.0        7.6       6.9

1846-1865            #patents      40          154          413            430        261        128
     Sector share of Patents      2.8%        10.8%         29.0%         30.2%       18.3%       9.0%
     Primary (col. %)             5.0         31.2          28.8          27.9         6.5       6.3
     College (col.%)              7.5         19.5           7.8          13.3        35.3      66.4
     Eng/Nat Sci. (col. %)       42.5         35.1          37.5          23.0        33.3        6.3

1866-1885           #patents        7           44          133            213         87         83
     Sector share of Patents      1.2%         7.8%         23.5%         37.6%       15.3%     14.6%
     Primary (col. %)              --          --            --            --          --        --
     College (col.%)             28.6          6.8          49.6          23.0         --        2.4
     Eng/Nat Sci. (col. %)       71.4         75.0          50.4          67.6        90.8      18.1


Notes and Sources: See the text and the note to Table 1. The distributions of patents across
sectors of intended use are reported for each birth cohort of inventors. Within each sector and
birth cohort, the table reports the distribution of patents across the educational level of the great
inventor. The omitted schooling class is secondary schooling.




                                                                                                         37
                                            TABLE 5

        AGE AND DURATION OF CAREER AT INVENTION, BY BIRTH COHORT


             PRE-1820 BIRTH COHORTS           POST-1820 BIRTH COHORTS
__________________________________________________________________________


Length of Career at Invention (yrs between first and last patent)
                      _____________________________________________________________
               # of           %           avg                     # of        % avg
              inventors               career pats                 inventors     career pats
             _____________________________________________________________
0-5 years        37           23.1%        1.7 pats             22       8.5%    2.2 pats
6-10              8           5.0          3.5                    8      3.1     6.0
11-20            21           13.1         6.1                  36       13.8   25.9
21-30            35           21.9         9.3                   45      17.3   30.6
> 30 years       59            36.9      23.9                   149      57.3   83.5


 Age at First Invention
________________________________________________________________________
          # of      %  avg         avg          # of    %     avg          avg
          inventors    career pats citations  inventors     career pats citations
________________________________________________________________________
 age at
1st patent

< 20      8      5.0%         9.6   1.0              3        1.2%      117.7    8.7
20-24   22      13.8         19.0   0.7              35      13.7      130.6     9.9
25-29   22      13.8         20.0   0.4              72      27.7       64.8     4.2
30-34   35      21.9         17.8   0.5              66      25.4       46.1     4.0
35-39    28     17.5          7.3   0.3              33      12.7       39.0     2.5
40-44   14       8.8          5.9   0.1              18       6.9       28.7     2.8
45-55   21      13.1          4.6   0.0              18       6.9       19.9     1.4

__________________________________________________________________________

                   Notes and Sources: See Text and footnotes to other tables.




                                                                                              38
                                          TABLE 6

                 SOME DESCRIPTIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF PATENT SYSTEMS
____________________________________________________________________________________
                 Examination           Working Req.       Pats for Import or   Cost
                   System             or Compul Lic.    Introd. of Technology.
____________________________________________________________________________________

                                           EUROPE
Austria
          1871         -                   Y                    Y              $$
          1899         Y                   Y                    N              $$$$

Belgium
       1848            N                   Y                    Y              $$$
       1871            N                   Y                    Y              $$$
       1899            N                   Y                    N              $$
Denmark
       1871            -                   Y                    –              $$
       1899            Y                   Y                    N              $$
France
       1848            N                   Y                    Y              $$$
       1871            N                   Y                    –              $$$
       1899            N                   Y                    N              $$$
Germany
       1891            Y                   Y                    N              $$$$
       1899            Y                   Y                    N              $$$$
Great Britain
       1848            N                   Y                    Y              $$$$
       1871            N                   Y                    Y              $$$$
       1899            N                   Y                    N              $$$$
Italy
       1871            N                   Y                    Y              $$
       1891            N                   Y                    Y              $$$
       1899            N                   Y                    Y              $$$

Norway
      1871             --                  Y                    --             $$
      1899             Y                   Y                    N              $$

Portugal
       1848            N                   Y                    Y              $
       1899            N                   Y                    Y              $

Prussia
          1871         -                   Y                    N              $$

Russia
          1871         -                   Y                    Y              $$$$
          1899         Y                   Y                    Y              $$$$
                                                                                       39
_______________________________________________________________________________
                Examination         Working Req.     Pats for Import or     Cost
                  System            or Compul Lic.   Intro. Of Technology
_______________________________________________________________________________
Spain
      1848        N                 Y                 Y           $$$
      1871        N                 Y                 Y           $$$
      1899        N                 Y                 Y           $$

Sweden
      1848          --                   Y                 Y                —
      1871          --                   Y                 –                $$
      1899          Y                    Y                 N                $$


                              SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
Argentina
       1891         N                    Y                 Y                $$$$

Brazil
         1871       N                    Y                 Y                $$$
         1891       N                    Y                 --               $$$$
         1899       N                    Y                 N                $$$$

Br. Guiana
       1891         N                    N                 –                $$$$

Br. Honduras
       1891         N                    N                 –                $$$$

Chile
         1891       N                    Y                 –                $$$

Colombia
      1891          N                    Y                 –                $$$

Cuba
         1871       N                    Y                 Y                $$$

Ecuador
      1891          N                    Y                 Y                $$

Guatemala
      1891          N                    Y                 Y                $$$

Mexico
      1871          N                    Y                 N                $$$$
      1899          N                    N                 N                $$$$

Peru     1891       N                    Y                 N                $$$$
                                                                                   40
_____________________________________________________________________________________
               Examination         Working Req.      Pats for Import or Cost
                 System           or Compul Lic.   Intro of Technology
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Uruguay
      1891           N                     Y                    –              $$$$

Venezuela
      1891           N                     Y                    N              $$$$


                                           OTHERS
Barbados
      1891           N                     Y                    –              $$$

Canada
          1871       --                    Y                    N              $
          1899       Y                     Y                    N              $

Fiji
          1891       N                     N                    –              $$

Hawaii
          1891       Y*                    N                    Y              $$

India
          1891       N                     Y                    –              $$$$

Jamaica
      1891           N                     Y                    –              $$$

Japan
          1899       Y                     Y                    N              $$

Liberia
          1891       Y*                    Y                    –              $$$

New South Wales
      1891           N                     N                    N              $

New Zealand
      1891           N                     Y                    N              $$

South Africa
       1891          N                     N                    --             $$$

United States
       1848          Y                     N                    N              $
       1899          Y                     N                    N              $
___________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                              41
Notes and Sources:

* Although this country officially had an examination system, its patent office does not appear to
have carried out a serious examination of applications for novelty or utility.

1848: John Kingsley and Joseph Piesson, Laws and Practice of All Nations and Governments Relating to Patents of
Inventions (New York: Kingsley and Piesson, 1848).

1871: United States and International Patent Office Manual (New York: Fitch and Co., 1871).

1891: Epitome of the World’s Patent Laws and Statistics (New York: The British and European Patent Agency, 1891).

1899: Arthur Greeley, Foreign Patent and Trademark Laws (Washington, D.C.: John Byrne and Co., 1899).




                                                                                                                  42
                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

British Parliamentary Papers. 1968. Reports from Select Committees on the Law Relative to
Patents for Inventions, 1829-72. 2 vols. Shannon: Irish University Press.

Bugbee, Bruce Willis. 1967. Genesis of American patent and copyright law. Washington: Public
Affairs Press.

Coulter, Moureen. 1991. Property in Ideas: the Patent Question in Mid-Victorian England.
Kirksville, MO: Thomas Jefferson Press.

Cubberley Ellwood P. 1920. The History of Education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

_____________. 1947. Public Education in the United States, A Study and Interpretation of
American Educational History. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Dictionary of American Biography. 1928-36. New York: C. Scribner’s.

Dutton, Harold I. 1984. The Patent System and Inventive Activity during the Industrial
Revolution, 1750-1852. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.

Fessenden, Thomas G. 1810. An Essay on the Law of Patents for New Inventions. Boston:
Mallory & Co.

Fisk, Catherine L. 1998. “Removing the '
                                       Fuel of Interest'from the '
                                                                 Fire of Genius'
                                                                               : Law and the
Employee-Inventor, 1830-1930.” University of Chicago Law Review 65 (Fall): 1127-1198.

Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1976. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Cambridge:
Belknap Press.

Hilaire-Pérez, Liliane. 1994. Inventions et Inventeurs en France et en Angleterre au XVIIIè siècle.
Lille: Université de Lille.

_______________. 2000. L'
                        invention technique au siècle des Lumières. Paris : Albin Michel.

Johnson, James and J. Henry Johnson. 1890. The Patentee’s Manual: A Treatise on the Law and
Practice of Patents for Invention. London: Longmans, Green & Co.

Khan, B. Zorina. 1995. "Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century
America," Journal of Economic History 55 (March): 58-97.

___________. 2004 (forthcoming). The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in
American Economic Development, 1790-1920. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1993. "Schemes of Practical Utility." Journal of
Economic History 53 (June): 289-307.

___________. 1998. "Two Paths to Industrial Development and Technological Change," in
Maxine Berg and Kristine Bruland, eds., Technological Revolutions in Europe, 1760-1860.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 292-313.
                                                                                                 43
____________. 2001. “The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United
States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15 (3): 233-246.

_____________. 2004. “Institutions and Democratic Invention in 19th Century America,”
American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May).

Lamoreaux, Naomi R., Maragret A. Levenstein, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2004. “Financing
Invention During the Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920.” unpublished
working paper.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1996. “Long-Term Change in the Organization of
Inventive Activity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (Nov): 12686-92.

___________. 1999a. “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology in the Late Nineteenth
and Early Twentieth Centuries,” in Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M.G. Raff, and Peter Temin,
eds., Learning By Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

___________. 1999b. “The Geography of the Market for Technology in the Late-Nineteenth and
Early-Twentieth Century United States,” in Gary D. Libecap, ed., Advances in the Study of
Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Growth. Stamford, CT: JAI Press.

___________. 2003. “The Decline of the Independent Inventor: A Schumpeterian Story?”
unpublished working paper.

Lo Shih-Tse. 2004. “Strengthening Intellectual Property Rights: The Experience of the 1986
Taiwanese Patent Reforms.” University of California, Los Angeles: unpublished doctoral
dissertation.

Machlup, Fritz and Edith Penrose. 1950. “The Patent Controversy in the Nineteenth Century.”
Journal of Economic History 10 (March): 1-29.

MacLeod, Christine. 1988. Inventing the Industrial Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

____________. 1999. “Negotiating the Rewards Of Invention: The Shop-Floor Inventor in
Victorian Britain.” Business History 41 (2): 17-36.

Marcellin, Yves. 1983. La Procédure Française de Délivrance des Brevets d’Invention. Rosny-
Sous-Bois: Editions Cédat.

McCloy, Shelby T. 1952. French Inventions of the Eighteenth Century. Lexington: University of
Kentucky Press.

Perpigna, Antoine. 1834 and 1852. The French law and practice of patents for inventions,
improvements, and importations. Philadelphia: J. S. Littell.

Perpigna, Antoine. 1852. Manuel des inventeurs et des brevetés, 8. éd. Paris: Chez l'
                                                                                    auteur.

Penrose, Edith Tilton. 1951. The Economics of the International Patent System. Baltimore: Johns
                                                                                                 44
Hopkins Press.

Pouillet, Eugene. 1879. Traité Théorique et Pratique des Brevets d’Invention. Paris: Marchal et
Billard.

Redondi, Pietro. 1988. “Nation et entreprise: la Société d'Encouragement pour l'
                                                                               Industrie
Nationale, 1801-1815,” in P. Redondi and R. Fox (eds.) - History and Technology vol. 5 (2-4)
Special Issue, French Institutions from the Revolution to the Restoration.

Rosenberg, Nathan, ed. 1969. The American System of Manufactures: The Report of the
Committee on the Machinery of the United States 1855, and the Special Reports of George Wallis
and Joseph Whitworth 1854. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Snyder, Thomas D. 1993. 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. 1988. "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent
Records, 1790-1846." Journal of Economic History 48 (Dec.): 813-50.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and B. Zorina Khan. 1990. "The Democratization of Invention in During
Early Industrialization: Evidence from the United States, 1790-1846." Journal of Economic
History 50 (June): 363-78.

Vojacek, Jan. 1936. A Survey of the Principal National Patent Systems. New York: Prentice-Hall.




                                                                                                  45
