NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC INCENTIVES TO RETIRE:
A QUALITATIVE CHOICE APPROACH

Olivia S. Mitchell
Gary S. Fields

Working Paper No. 1096

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

March 1983
Both authors are equally responsible for the contents of this
paper; first mention is determined randomly. Mitchell is an
Assistant Professor of Labor Economics, New York State School of
Industrial and Labor Relations, Cornell University, and Faculty
Research Fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fields is a Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, New York
State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Cornell University.
We wish to thank Jeffrey Dubin, Ronald Ehrenberg, Daniel Feenberg,
Alan Gustman, Daniel Hamermesh, Peter Kuhn, Nicholas Kiefer, Steven
Lerinari, and Daniel McFadden for helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at Cornell and Harvard. Vivian Fields provided
able computational assistance. Research support as received from
the U.S. Department of Labor, Cornell University, and the National
Bureau of Econoic Research. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Labor Studies and project in Govern—
ment Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1096
March 1983

Economic Incentives to Retire:
A Qualitative Choice Approach

ABSTRACT

This paper addresses two questions:

(1) Are older persons' retirement

ages significantly affected by the opportunities for income from earnings,
private pensions, and Social Security and for leisure at alternative retirement ages?; and (2) How large are the estimated responses?

Our approach to

modeling the retirement problem is a forward—looking one, in which the explanatory variables include present discounted values of expected lifetime
income from earnings, private pensions, and Social Security at all future

retirement ages. Such data have been constructed using a unique archive on
390 workers covered by a large union pension plan. A previous paper (Fields
and Mitchell, 1982) used these data to show that retirement ages are significantly associated with the present discounted value of income at age 60, and

with the gain in income from deferring retirement. The current paper develops
two different qualitative choice models of the retirement decision. We

find: retirement ages do indeed respond significantly to future income and
leisure opportunities; an ordered logit model is more suited to the data
than is a multinomial logit model; and the estimated responses to changes
in future income opportunities differ across model specifications, where
the preferred ordered logit model exhibits larger estimated responses.

Olivia S. Mitchell
Gary S. Fields
New York State School of
Industrial and Labor Relations
Ives Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York 14853
(607) 256—4561

2

I. A Model of Earnings, Private Pensions, Social Security, and Retirement
Building on a well—developed theoretical literature,' we analyze

retirement in a forward—looking intertemporal framework. In essence, older
people are postulated to evaluate the incomes they could receive from

various sources at alternate retirement ages, and also the corresponding

amounts of leisure. These income sources include some or all of the
following:

(a) earnings, to the extent people go on working; (b)Social

Security, which covers a majority of the elderly population; (c) private
pensions, for which a large and growing fraction of older workers is

eligible; and (d) wealth. If the older worker defers retirement, he gives
up Social Security and/or private pension benefits during that year; on
the other hand by working longer, he gains another year's earnings, he
lessens the early retirement reduction factor (or adds to the late retirement
credit) associated with Social Security benefits, and if eligible for a

pension, he typically qualifies for a larger annual benefit. In most
circumstances, monetary gains will outweigh monetary losses so that each

extra year of work increases lifetime income. This gain in income adds to

utility but, of course, comes at a cost: he also foregoes leisure. The
worker's choice of retirement age thus depends on the size of these gains

and losses, as well as his valuation of them. Thus, in a sample of workers,
differences in retirement ages will depend on opportunities and tastes for
future income and future leisure.

Let the i'th individual's utility from retiring at age j be a positive,
concave function of the present discounted value of expected lifetime con—
suznption from year zero, the age of the retirement decision, onward (PDVC1)

'Among the clearest theoretical developments are those by Crawford and
Lilien (1981) and Burbidge and Robb (1980). These and other models are
reviewed in Mitchell and Fields (1982).

3
and of the length of the retirtnent period

(RET):

(1) U1 = U1(PDVC1.,
0 ; U11, U12 <
RET1); U1, U2 >

0.1

PDVC1 and RET. are both functions of the retirement age R1. R1 is chosen
to maximize (1) subject to:

(2) PDVC . = PDVY
ij

where PDVY.

is

.

ij

+ W. io

B

io

the present discounted value of expected lifetime income

from the age of the retirement decision onward, W0 is the i'th individual's

wealth in year zero, and B0 is his planned bequest as viewed from year zero.
Taken together, (1) and (2) yield the first order condition for an interior
solution:

3U1

PDVY

3PDVY

ii
aR

+

RET
aRET. aR
1
1

=

0.

An individual who retires later gains lifetime income (PDVY) and loses hf e—
time leisure (RET1), and finds it optimal to retire when the utility values
of these gains and losses offset each other.2
The message from the preceding paragraph Is that the optimal retirement
age is determined in a future—oriented intertemporal context.3

In addItIon

to leisure, the key explanatory variable is the present discounted value of
expected lifetime income for all future retirement ages from the date of the

retirement decision onward. If there are J possible retirement ages, we
therefore require J PDVY's. The j'th PDVY for individual i is given by:

'For ease of exposition we abstract from the possibility of part—time
or post—retirement work, neither of which was pursued to any significant
degree in the data sample described below. Variable hours of work are allowed
for in recent models by Custman and Steinmeier (1981) and Burtless and Moffitt
(1982).

21f the left hand side of (3) can in fact be equated to zero, and If the
second order condition is satisfied, the solution is an interior one. But
if, as is possible, the left hand side of (3) is negative for all conceivable
retirement ages, it is optimal to retire immediately.

3Past decisions and events are reflected in current wealth, wages, and
other variables.

4

R
(4) PDVY1J

T

=f 1EjSdt

[PPJ + SS] dt,
i

where: Elt is earnings in the t'th year of work; PP and SS are
respectively the private pension beef its and Social Security benefits in
year t, both of which depend on the choice of retirement age R1; and
is a discount factor reflecting time preference and mortality.
In the balance of this paper, we develop an empirical model using
this intertemporal framework to explain workers' choices among nine possible
retirement ages, 60—68.

5.

II. Empirical Specification
To estimate empirically the determinants of retirement based on the

model of Section I, themost immediate problem is that utility functions are
unobservable. To make headway, we write the i'th individual's utility from
retiring in year j as
=

(5)

Here ct and 8

[alog

PDVY.. + 8log RET..] +

are parameters to be estimated by maximum

likelihood

across the

individuals in our sample. The term in brackets, [cLlàg PDVY1. + 8log RET.]
Is termed the average individual's "strict utility" associated with particular
values PDVY . and RET. .
ij

ij

However,the i'th individual's utility function

differs from theaverage for a host of unobserved reasons. These unobserved
components may be summarized by a disturbance term

in (5), about which

additional distributional assumptions must be made.
At this juncture, two classes of models might be considered by

the econometrician: probit and logit. The probit framework maintains that
the

are distributed tnultivariate normally for each individual, but

independently across individuals. While a probit model merits. serious
consideration when the number of choices is no greater than five, we have
nine retirement ages and probit becomes computationally infeasible for

a nine—way choice set) Hence, probit must be rejected for use in the present
context.

A popular alternative is the logit class of models. In these models,

c) are distributed according to the multivariate extreme value
distribution for each individual 1. As McFadden (1978) shows, the function:

(6) F(c1, .

..

, c1)

exp{_G(e1, . .

. , ei)}

'Hausman and Wise (1978) discuss size limitations in multi—outcome probit
models.

6

is a multivariate extreme value distribution. G ( ) is a general function;
below, we present the forms of C C ) corresponding to specific logit formu—

lations. Equation (6) gives rise toa probabilistic choice model

V

V

(7) P = e

G.(e

V

,

. .

.,e

V

)/G(e , .

V

..,e

),

where P. is the probability that retirement age j is chosen and V. is the•
strict utility associated with alternative j, i.e., the bracketed term in (5).
The general class of logits given by (7) is known as the Generalized Extreme
Value (GEV) framework.

A simple representative of the GEV class, and the one used most extensively in the economics literature, is the multinomial logit (MNL) model:

V

(8)

-

=e

p
j

j=l

This corresponds to

(9) G(y, . . . , y) E y4,
J=lJ
where y., a function of attributes of choice j for individual .1, is equal to eV4
The main attraction of the MNL model is its computational simplicity.
However, INL possesses a

property known as Independence from Irrelevant Alter-

natives (hA),, which states that the relative odds for any two alternatives
are independent either of the attributes or of the availability of any other

alternative. hA denies the possibility that son individuals are "workaholics"
and others are "leisure—lovers." We have strong reason to believe that the
error term c

im is correlated with the error term cin for two retirement ages

m and n near one another, but this correlation is not allowed in the MNL model.

Rather than imposing hA, we prefer to work with models that allow error
terms to correlated for a given Individual and to test for hA formally.

7

Ordered logit models enable us to do this, since they recognize that in

many

qualitative

choice contexts, alternatives can be ordered along a

natural dimension. The pathbreaking work on ordered logit was done by
Small (1981, 1982), who considered the decision of how late or early to

arrive at work. In the retirement context, the retirement age may also be
ordered from early to late. It is useful to model this ordering explicitly.
A Simple Ordered Logit model (SOL) maintains that the attractiveness of
any given alternative depends upon the attributes of immediately adjacent

alternatives as well as of the specific alternative in question. For
example, a workaholic has a higher probability under SOL than under NNL
of choosing the next closest late retirement age, and likewise a leisure—
lover is given a higher probability of choosing the next closest early retire-

ment age. Intuitively, the SOL model tilts the structure of probabilities in
one direction or the other as compared with the MNL model. This is achieved
by developing a G function of the form:

(10) C(y1, . . .

, y)

E (yh/P + y'),

where iS an index of independence of adjacent alternatives. When

pl,

hA

holds; p0 corresponds to identical alternatives.
From (7) and (10), the choice probabilities for the SOL model can be
written as

V /P
V IP P—l
V. 11P
e
+
e
[(e
)
=

J1

+

V /p V.1f p p—i

+ e
V

(Note: For j = 0 and j =

J+l,

take e

=

+e

(e

0.)

'D

I.

8

Expression (11) involves non—linear estimatidn. Small suggests

approximating

(11) by

(12)

p

V+cN

e

.

v.

+

aN

j=l

in which N. is defined as:

(13) N. =

- [log()

+ log (1 + P1/P?) + log(l + P+1/P?)] and

is the probability of choosing alternative k under, the hA assumption.
The variable N. may

be

thought of as a proxy for alternative—specific un-

observed taste variation, otherwise omitted in the absence of N..
3

Having constructed a model that permits but does not require hA,
hA can be tested using either of two approaches:
(1) Hausman and McFadden propose a test using the statistic:

(14) T =

°R

OU)'[cov(oR) —

cov(OU)]t(OR

—

where O(=(a,) from (5)) is the coefficient vector estimated for the full
model; 0R is the coefficient vector estimated among individuals who selected
a subset of the total choice set; cov(O) refers to the relevant parameter

covariance matrix; and t denotes a generalized inverse. The test statistic
is shown to be distributed Chi—square with two degrees of freedom' and is
interpreted such that a value of T larger than the critical value rejects the
independence of irrelevant alternatives assumption for the specific formula—
tion of the model at hand.

2

1

The relevant degrees of freedom are given by
df

tr[cov(OR) —

cov(OU)]t[cov(OR)

—

cov(8)].

2Hausman and McFadden (1981) make the point that alternative specifications
of explanatory variables might satisfy the hA assumption, as might alternative
functional relationships.

9

(ii) In the SOL model, N provides an indication of the presence

or absence of hA. If hA holds in the data, the inclusion of N will not
alter results, and the predictions from the SOL model (12) will be identical

to the predictions from the i2L model (8). But if hA does not hold,
SOL predictions will differ from INL predictions. A suitable test statistic
Is:

J (pSOL MNI)2
(15) V
j,MNL
j

where OL and

are the predicted frequencies for choice j in the

SOL and MNL models respectively. V is distributed chi—square with J—l
degrees of freedom.

Estimates of both retirement models and tests of hA follow.

10

III. Data and Results

A. Data1
To estimate the intertemporal retirement model income available at all

future retirement ages must be recorded for each sample individual.2 Most
previous researchers have not had access to such complete information, and
are able to examine only part!ial income measures at the time of the survey

or, at best, two alternative years.3 The data set we analyze is unique
in that it contains sufficient information for us to be able to construct
the earnings, private pension, and Social Security benefits available to
each worker in the sample for all retirement ages from 60 through 68.
Our sample consists of 390 male employees of a manufacturing firm,

for which the private pension formulas were known. In this firm, pension
formulas are based solely on seniority and age; earnings levels do not

affect benefits at all. These workers retired between the ages of 60 and 68,
the latter age being the mandatory retirement age at the firm. We focus on
a specific cohort of individuals born in 1909 and 1910, for two reasons:
all cohort members had reached the age of mandatory retirement (age 68) as
of the survey date (1978), thereby averting truncation bias due to uncompleted

work spells; and also because these workers ware as young as possible while
still having passed the mandatory retirement age, mortality bias is minimized.

'A more detailed description of the pension rules and other aspects of
the data source is available in Fields and Mitchell (1982). The larger data
set of which this is a subsample is known as the Benefits Amounts Study,
under development at PWBP/LNSA, U.S. Department of Labor. For an overview of
the variability in existing pension structures, see Lazear (1982).
2For the empirical work in this paper, we define retirement as the age
of leaving the main employer and accepting a pension.
3Civen the present state of data availability, researchers must choose
between comprehensive budget set information and representativeness. In this
paper, we choose the former course, as did Burkhauser (1979) and Burtless and
Hausman (1981).

11

Construction of the PDVYs for alternate retirement ages involved several

steps. Past earnings from 1951 on were available from Social Security earnings

histories. We imputed values for earnings beyond the Social Security taxable
maximum and predicted earnings for each worker up to age 68. These were
adjusted for income taxes and Social Security taxes. From the earnings
histories, and from knowledge of the Social Security formulas in effect when
these individuals were age 60 and before, we calculated the streams of Social
Security benefits that these people could have expected to receive for al-

ternate retirement ages. Then, because we knew the pension rules in the
firm in question, we were also able to construct private pension benefits
f or alternate retirement ages.

To illustrate these various components, take as an example a worker with
the mean level of seniority (27 years) who retired at the mean age in this

firm (63 years). This worker would earn $20,600 (in present value terms)

between ages 60 and 63, would receive an expected present value of Social
Security benefits from age 63 onward of $31,900 (after adjusting for time
preference at a nominal rate of 5Z and for mortality probabilities), and

would receive an expected present value of private pension benefits from

age 63 onward of $26,300. The sum of these three components is the present
discounted

value of income (PDVY) as viewed from age 60

If retirement were

to occur at age 63. For the mean individual in our sample, this sum Is $78,900.
Average PDVY's for alternate retirement ages are summarized in Table 1.

PDVY is an increasing function of the retirement age: it rises monotonically
from $57,500 for retirement at age 60 to $101,000 for retirement at age 68.
This

happens because earnings always exceed the sum of

Social Security benefits. However, the PDVY function
The marginal

payoff to an additional

year of work

private pension

is decidedly

and

non—linear.

declines from $7,500

12

TABLE 1.
THE INTERTEMPORAL BUDGET SET FOR THE MEAN WORKER IN COMPANY X

Present

Retirement Age

Discounted
Value of Income
(PDVY) from Age 60
on for Alternate
Retirement Ages

PDVY —

PDVY

60

$57,500

61

65,000

$7,500

62

72,400

7,400

63

78,800

6,400

64

84,900

6,100

65

90,600

5,700

66

94,600

4,000

67

98,000

3,400

68

101,000

3,000

t—l

13

between ages 60 and 61 down to $3,000 between ages 67 and 68. These budget
set nonlinearities are handled quite readily in the discrete choice models
described above.

B. Results
Table 2 presents two sets of coefficient estimates for the retirement

equation. Column 1 contains L results and column 2 SOL results. In
both models, income and leisure have positive and statistically significant
effects, confirming that older workers value more of both when deciding
when to retire.
Despite the fact that the two sets of coefficient estimates appear

similar, it is useful to test formally the assumption of hA as discussed
above. We do so first with the Hausman—McFadden test, based on MNL coefficients
from column 1. These were compared with coefficient estimates obtained by
re—estimating the model on two different subsets:

(a) those choosing

retirement at ages 60 to 65, and (b) those choosing retirement at ages

60 to 62. The resultant values of the T statistic given by equation (14)
are:

Comparison

Computed Value of T

60—68 versus 60—65

17.2

60—68 versus 60—62

65.8

The critical value of chi—square with 2 degrees of freedom (.005 significance

level) is 10.6. Hence, hA is rejected using this test.
The second test for hA compares coefficients from both MNL and SOL.
For our data, the statistic given by equation (15) takes the value V =

69.7,

compared to the critical chi—square value with 8 degrees of freedom (.005

significance level) of 22.0 Hence, hA is rejected by this second test as well.
Rejection of hA by both criteria confirms that the ordered logit
model fits the data better than does a conventional logit setup. This agrees

14

TABLE 2.

COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES FOR THE AGE OF RETIREMENT

EQUATION USING MULTINOMIAL LOGIT (MNL) AND SIMPLE ORDERED LOGIT (SOL)
(standard errors in parentheses)

Variable:
PDVY (Income)

(1)

(2)

MNL

SOl.

14.152
(1.297)

RET (Retirement Years)

13.705
(1.191)

N (Pseudo—variable used
to test IIA)

Log L

14.284
(1.445)

13.850
(1.385)

—.149
(.717)

—730.35

—730.33

15

with our theoretical preference for a model that allows covariance among

proximate

retirement age alternatives, which SOL does. Hence, the estimated

SOL coefficients from column 2 of Table 2 receive primary emphasis in what
follows though further MNL results are also presented for purposes of comparison.

Because estimated utility function coefficients are not directly interpretable, and because the budget set is quite nonlinear, it is useful to
determine how responsive retirement ages are to particular changes in

income parameters. We estimate in turn the effects of six

such

changes;

holding all other budget set parameters constant:

Change A: Each worker's earnings stream is increased
by 10% of his base (age 60) earnings amount.
Change B: Each worker's earnings stream is tilted such that
earnings at every age are increased by 10%.
Change C: The pension benefit at each age is increased
by 10% of the age 60 pension amount.
Change D: The slope of the pension function is raised by 10%.

Change E: The Social Security benefit stream is raised by
10% of the initial amount.
Change F: The slope of the Social Security function is
increased by adding 10% to every year's benefits.

Estimated coefficients from Table 2 are used to determine how each
individual would be likely to alter his retirement age if confronted

with these new budget sets. By summing these probabilities across people
and comparing them with initial probabilities, we can evaluate anticipated
retirement age responses to these particular policy changes.

Table 3 reports the findings for these six budget changes. Consider
first the preferred SOL specification in column 1.

A 10% increase in

earned income would increase the average retirement age by about 0.2 years,

ceteris paribus. Earnings have both income and substitution effects on the

16

demand for retirement, and in this formulation, the substitution effect appears

to dominate. On the other hand, changing the private pension and Social Security

benefit structure would reduce retirement ages. For instance, raising
private pension and Social Security benefits by a given amount at each age
(Changes C and E) produces only income effects, which encourages earlier

retirement. An increase of 10% in the age—60 amount is estimated to reduce
the average retirement age by about 0.2 years. The two changes that raise
private pension and Social Security benefits by 10% in every year (Changes D
and F) entail both income and substitution effects, rendering the predicted

effects ambiguous. Empirically, we find that both these changes are estimated
to have negative effects: —.15 years for the private pension case and —.07
years In the case of Social Security. The changes in D and F are less

negative than the changes in C and E, because income effects only are present
In C and E whereas these are partially offset in D and F by substitution
effects in the opposite direction.

To see what difference the econometric specification makes, compare the

MNL results in column 2 of Table 3 with the SOL results (column 1). The
estimated responses from the NML model are much smaller than those based

on the SOL model. This occurs because the S0 model allows nearby alternatives
to be "closer" to the chosen alternative than does the MNL model. Consequently,
when the budget constraint is changed, there is more predicted movement between
retirement ages using the SOL model, as compared to the MNL model, which

assumes hA.

17

TABLE 3.

EFFECT OF BUDGET SET CHANGES ON MEAN AGE OF
RETIREMENT, IN YEARS, FOR SOL AND MNL MODELS

Change in Mean Retirement Age
Preferred
Specification

Alternative
Specification

(SOL)

(MNL)

Change A: Raise earnings stream by 10%
of age 60 amount

+.19

4.04

Change B: Raise earnings stream by 10%
at each age

+.22

4.05

Change C: Raise private pension stream
by 10% of age 60 amount

—.22

—.05

Change D: Raise private pension stream
by 10% at each age

—.15

—.03

Change E: Raise Social Security stream
by 10% of age 60 amount

—.19

—.04

Change F: Raise Social Security stream
by 10% at each age

—.07

—.02

Budget Set Change

18

IV. Conclusions
In this paper we have developed a qualitative choice model of the economic
incentives to retire and estimated it with a sample of 390 male workers in

one large manufacturing firm. Theory suggests that lifetime leisure and
streams of earnings, private pension benefits, and Social Security benefits

enter into the choice of retirement age. We summarize these streams with
two variables which we observe empirically in our data set: PDVY, the present
discounted value of expected lifetime income from earnings, pensions, and
Social Security associated with each alternative retirement age; and RET,
the expected number of retirement years associated with each retirement

age. Theory also suggests that in addition to PDVY and RET, retirement
ages are affected as well by individuals' preferences for income and

leisure. Though these utility function components are unobservable, they
presumably reflect persistent individual—specific differences in tastes.
"Workaholism"

and "leisure—loving" should be accommodated empirically.

To take account of these determinants, and to allow for the non—linearity
of the lifetime budget set, we formulated a qualitative choice model with

retirement age as the dependent variable. We did not, however, wish to
maintain the multinomial logit model (MNL) with its attendant assumption of
independence from irrelevant alternatives (hA) in the retirement context.
Instead, we estimated a simple ordered logit model (SOL), which allows
for nearby alternatives to be correlated with the alternative chosen.

We performed two tests of hA and rejected hA by both of them. On
this basis, the SOL model is judged to be the preferred specification on

empirical as well as theoretical grounds. SOL coefficient estimates
were then used to evaluate the effects on retirement ages of various
changes in the components of lifetime income. We found that, on average,

19

raising earnings induces longer worklives, but increases in private pensions

and Social Security benefits induce earlier retirement. Changes of 10% in the
streams of earnings, pensions, or Social Security produce changes in average
retirement ages of about 0.2 years in our sample according to the SOL

estimates. For comparison, we also presented MNL estimates, which are less
warranted for theoretical and empirical reasons, and found much smaller

estimated effects. In future work, we intend to evaluate other data sets
to determine the robustness of these findings.

REFERENCES

Burbidge, J. B. and Robb, A. L. "Pensions and Retirement Behavior."
Canadian Journal of Economics, August, 1980.
Burkhauser, Richard V. "The Pension Acceptance Decision of Older Workers."
Journal of Human Resources, 1979.
Burtless, Gary and Hausman, Jerry. "Individual Retirement Decisions Under
An Employer Provided Pension Plan and Social Security." NBER Working
Paper, November 1981.

Burtless, Gary and Moffitt, R. "The Effect of Social Security on Labor
Supply of the Aged: The Joint Choice of Retirement Date and Post—
Retirement Hours of Work." Miineo October 1982.
Crawford, Vincent P. and Lilien, David N. "Social Security and the Retirement Decision." Quarterly Journal of Economics. August 1981.

Fields, G. and Mitchell, 0. "Economic Determinants of the Optimal Retire—
nnt Age: An Empirical Investigation." NBER Working Paper No. 876.
April 1982.
Gusttnan, Alan and Steinmeier, Thomas. "Partial Retirement and the Analysis
of Retirement Behavior." NBER Working Paper No. 763, September 1981.

Hausman, J. and McFadden, D. "Specification Tests for the Multinomial
Logit Model." MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 292,
October 1981.

Hausman, J. A. and Wise, D. A. "A Conditional Probit Model for Qualitative
Choice: Discrete Decisions Recognizing Interdependence and Hetero—
genous Preferences." Econometrica, March 1978.

Lazear, E. P. "Pensions and Severance Pay." NBER Working Paper No. 854,
February 1982.

McFadden, D. "Modelling the Choice of Residential Location," in A. Karlqvist
et.al., eds. Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models. Amsterdam:
North Holland Publishing Co., 1978.

Mitchell, 0. and Fields, G. "The Effects of Pensions on Retirement: A Review
Essay," in R. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 5, 1983.

Small, K. "Ordered Logit: Discrete Choice Model with Proximate Covariance
Among Alternatives." Econometric Research Program Memorandum No. 292,
Princeton University, December 1981.

Small, K. "The Scheduling of Consumer Activities: Work Trips." American
Economic Review, June 1982.

