NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIGGING THE DIRT AT PUBLIC EXPENSE:
GOVERNANCE IN THE BUILDING OF THE ERIE CANAL
AND OTHER PUBLIC WORKS
Stanley L. Engerman
Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Working Paper 10965
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10965
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

The authors gratefully acknowledge valuable comments from David Dollar, Ed Glaeser, Claudia Goldin,
Stephen Haber, Karla Hoff, Daniel Kaufmann, Zorina Khan, Naomi Lamoreaux, and participants in the
NBER Conference on Corruption and Reform, held in Salem, MA, July 30-31, 2004. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2004 by Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Digging the Dirt at Public Expense: Governance in the Building of the Erie Canal and Other
Public Works
Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 10965
December 2004
JEL No. N10, H4, O1, O2
ABSTRACT
The Erie Canal was a mammoth public works project undertaken largely because the scope of the
investment was beyond what a private firm could manage during the early 19th century. As with
most public works, there were ample opportunities for public officials to realize private gains from
the effort, and many did. On the whole, however, the construction of the Erie Canal (and most other
major public works projects of the era) appears to have been well conceived and executed; it not only
paid off more than its costs through tolls, but also generated substantial welfare improvements for
the residents of the state of New York in the form of producer and consumer surplus and a wide
range of positive externalities. Although there was obviously some fraud and mismanagement, the
public authorities carried out the work at costs relatively close to those projected at the point of
authorization. In an effort to try to place this episode in a broader perspective, we compare the ratio
of actual expenditures on construction relative to the estimated costs at the time of authorization for
the Erie Canal, to those for a range of other public works over American history up to the present
day. It is our contention that this measure, albeit quite narrow in focus, is informative about the
quality of governance of public resources. We highlight how, by this standard, the governance of
public resources during the canal era stands up well in comparison with what we have seen since.
Indeed, the cost overrun ratios have risen sharply over the last half-century, coinciding with both a
marked increase in the relative size of the government sector as well as sustained economic growth.
These patterns suggest how important it is that better measures and other means of systematically
studying how the prevalence and effects of corruption vary across different contexts be developed.
Stanley L. Engerman
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
enge@troi.cc.rochester.edu

Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sokoloff@ucla.edu

It is generally accepted that no human society, at least since the early days of the Garden
of Eden, has been free of corruption. Although conceptions of what range of behaviors is
encompassed by the term vary widely, there is a grand tradition of laying responsibility for many
social ills on it. One such social ill is the lack of economic growth, and economists have in
recent years sought to elucidate mechanisms through which various forms of corruption might
bring about inefficient actions, preventing a society from fully realizing its productive potential,
at a point in time or over time. Such studies normally treat corruption as a phenomenon of public
officials taking private advantage of their public offices, but recognize that both public and
private figures are typically involved.1 Public officials tailor or administer laws, regulations,
contracts, and other policies in ways calculated to benefit particular private interests in return for
bribes (or other sorts of personal material gain). Such arrangements may be good for the public
officials and the particular favored private interests, but bad for overall economic performance
(and social welfare) if they contribute to: misallocation of resources (public or private); irregular
protection of property rights that deters individuals from exerting effort or investing in physical
or human capital; or barriers to entry or other impediments to competition, innovation, and use of
best practice.2
There seems little disagreement that, in theory, higher levels of corruption should impede
economic performance, but empirical investigation of this relationship has been largely confined
to establishing strong correlations in contemporary data. This work has been very informative,

1

In some contexts, fraud, or deceit or cheating between private parties, might also be considered a form
of corruption. However, in the modern literature this class of activities are generally viewed as a
consequence of poor enforcement of the ‘rule of law’.
2
Daniel Kaufmann and his colleagues at the World Bank have been pioneers in trying to devise
systematic measures of corruption, and relating it to performance, at both the micro and macro levels.
See, for example Hellman, Jones, and Kauffmann (2000). Also see La Porta, et al. (1999); Murphy,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1993); Shleifer and Vishny (1993); and Glaeser and Shleifer (2003).
1

but skeptics argue that the results might be due to high levels of productive performance reducing
corruption, either through institutional change or though affecting perceptions, rather than by
reductions in levels of corruption bringing about better economic outcomes. For this reason, it is
not surprising that many scholars are turning to economic history to improve our understanding
of the social processes involving corruption. Extending the study of corruption along a time
dimension offers the possibility of obtaining a more precise fix on the importance of corruption
for understanding long-run patterns of economic growth or performance more generally. It
should also allow for a closer examination of what sorts of conditions are more conducive to
corruption, whether the forms of corruption change over time as circumstances change, whether
some forms are more destructive of prospects for economic progress, and of whether (and how)
specific types of institutions or conditions reduce the prevalence of corruption.
Although the study of corruption may be much enhanced by turning to history, several
key problems remain. The first is definition. Where does one draw the line between corrupt and
non-corrupt behavior? Can an action that is legal be corrupt? Should private actions that deviate
from meritocracy or economic efficiency, and systematically advantage or disadvantage a
particular agent or group, be considered corrupt, or should the classification be reserved for
behaviors involving public officials? If the latter, should the standard for corruption be the
familiar “taking private advantage of public office,” and if so, what does private advantage
encompass? Should any action by a public official that affects the interests of a party with whom
the official has a personal or pecuniary relationship be so classified? The second problem is one
of measurement. Even if one is able to formulate a definition that is conceptually sound, how
does one empirically implement it such that study of how corruption varies over time, place, and
other circumstances is feasible?
2

Recognizing the difficulty of framing a broadly acceptable general definition of
corruption, we choose to focus our study of corruption on a specific context – the building of the
Erie Canal, and other canals, by New York State during the antebellum period (see Figure 1 for a
map of the New York State canals and the railroad system c.1858). The logic of this approach is
that it will be easier to develop a reasonable working definition of corruption in a particular
setting, and our goal is to explore the issue of whether corruption in this major public works
program of the era led to a marked misallocation of resources, generated excess rents for the well
connected and politically influential, or otherwise constituted a significant obstacle to economic
growth. Large-scale public works projects such as the Erie Canal (which was sometimes
referred to as the “big ditch”) are widely regarded as nurseries for, if not hotbeds of, corruption.
Well-directed bribes (varying in form), or clever orchestration of logrolls, can generate
appropriations for public investments whose social returns would not seem to warrant the costs
that the respective population has to bear. Moreover, even for projects having a solid economic
basis, problems in governance, or principal-agent issues more generally, provide opportunities
for public officials to extract personal returns at public expense through the precise design of the
plan (such as the route of the canal) and the manner in which contracts for construction or
operations are extended, written, and enforced. Thus, overall economic performance can be
impacted adversely from excessive investment in public works, poor project selection, public
authorities agreeing to higher than necessary costs in carrying out the work, as well as by the
dissipation of resources in rent-seeking and other secondary effects.
The movement by a number of northeastern states during the first half of the nineteenth
century to undertake the construction of a massive network of roads, canals, and railroads, in an
attempt to attract and gain control of trade with the Midwest, is perhaps the most dramatic
3

example of the intense competition among states that the federal nature of U.S. government
encouraged.3

Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, and New Orleans (as

well as Montreal) all sought to tap the midwestern trade, and did so with various combinations of
canals and railroads. The great triumph of New York City is what makes the Erie Canal (but
some might say it is the reverse) a critical part of the American historical experience. Much
attention, deservedly, is given to its successful construction and operation as one of the success
stories among state economic policies. Less attention has been devoted to the importance of
political factors in its origins, and to the blemishes in the story of its construction. While clearly a
great success and one of the leading reasons why New York City became the principal port of the
U.S. and upstate New York a major agricultural and industrial center for a century, questions
about the prevalence of corrupt practices in the development of the Erie Canal and other canals
were raised during the era.
There has been a considerable historical literature devoted to corruption in the economy
in the postbellum United States. Colorful terms such as “The Robber Barons,” “The Great
Barbecue,” and “The Gilded Age,” have been applied to the late nineteenth century links between
government and the economy, and texts are filled with the story of the Union Pacific, the
Chapters of Erie, and the great battles among the railroad tycoons seeking advantageous routes
and rates. Curiously, however, despite some attention to the operation of the so-called “spoils
system” and legislative bribery in chartering banks and other businesses, many scholars have
treated the antebellum era as relatively corruption free. There are, of course, discussions of the
background to Hamilton’s economic policies, especially the assumption of the state and central
government revolutionary war debts by the federal government, and the Yazoo land scandal is
3

In addition to the works cited elsewhere in this article, for recent discussions of the general movement
4

depicted by some as symptomatic of other land speculations, but the general impression is that
corruption was, if not less prevalent, less costly than in later years.4 In part, this may reflect the
fact that governments were smaller during this era, and that most of the relevant activity took
place at the state and local levels, rather than federal. The perspective of corruption not being
such a problem during the early nineteenth century also traces back to Tocqueville, with his
emphasis on high rates of citizen participation in (and monitoring of) local affairs, competition
between different communities and states (as well as political figures and parties), and an
ideology celebrating democracy and open access. In such a setting, one might expect
opportunities for rent seeking to be rather limited.5 Whether this judgment reflects the reality, or
whether corruption by large railroads and manufacturing firms merely provides a more exciting
story than those forms of corruption that occur in smaller decentralized polities, is an issue
deserving of more investigation.
Recently Edward Glaeser and Andrei Shleifer have asked whether this view that
corruption was not so severe during the early years of the republic is well founded.6 In
suggesting that the traditional image is idealized, if not mistaken or naïve, they are raising
for internal improvements in transportation, see Shaw (1990); Majewski (2000); and Larson (2001).
On the Yazoo scandal, see Magrath (1966), and for a discussion of the debates on the assumption of the
debts, and other aspects of the Hamiltonian policy after the Revolution, see Nettels (1962), pp. 89-129.
5
See Tocqueville (1961), particularly chapters 5 and 8. Another related and relevant feature of
antebellum political structures in the U.S. is the extremely high turnover rates of elected representatives.
L. Ray Gunn (1988) argues that the extremely brief tenures of legislators during the early- and midnineteenth century led to legislatures that were focus primarily on local and sectional concerns, as
committees were weak and legislators closely tied to their communities, “The legislature mirrored an
increasingly fragmented, mobile, individualistic society, which seemed to drive its very energy from the
competitiveness of local communities. As a consequence, policy demands were themselves highly
fragmentary, representing local or sectional interests and only rarely expressing the possibility of a
‘general’ interest. Thus, the legislature more nearly approximated a public market in which the agents
(legislators) of local and special interests bargained and traded for considerations favourable to their
clients (constituents) than a deliberative assembly making public policy for the common good…But it
should be noted that this was a wholly acceptable, indeed desirable, condition in the context of American
ideas about representation.” See Gunn, p. 80.
4

5

fundamental questions about the nature of the relationship between corruption and economic
development. Are high levels of corruption so detrimental to prospects for economic growth that
developing societies must focus on reducing them if they are to have much hope of realizing
sustained material progress? Or is pervasive corruption a feature or symptom of a pre- or earlyindustrial society that will decrease with economic growth as higher incomes support changes in
institutions that lead to improvements in ‘rule of law’? The case of the U.S. has often been cited
in arguments that low levels of corruption, or secure property rights, are a virtual precondition for
sustained growth.7 The provocative notions of Glaeser and Shleifer challenge economic
historians to determine just how prevalent corruption was during the antebellum period. Our
work is but one part of a general effort to respond to that challenge by extending our knowledge
of the record of corruption in the American past.
The paper is organized in a straightforward fashion. The next section reviews the history
of the building of the Erie Canal, and of how the enormous success of this unprecedented public
investment in transportation infrastructure inspired more public investment in canals, in New
York and elsewhere. We note how the administrative procedures adopted for the letting and
monitoring of contracts in constructing the Erie Canal do appear to have led to rather effective
use of public funds, but that the oversight of public resources may have eroded during the canal
mania that followed. In the third section of the paper we make use of the ratio of actual
expenditures on public works relative to the original projected costs as a gauge of the quality of
governance of public resources. We contend that the ratio is a useful measure of an important
phenomenon closely related to corruption, and that it has the additional advantage of permitting

6

7

Glaeser and Shleifer (2003).
For examples, see North (1981) and Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986).
6

comparisons over time and other circumstances.8 Estimates of the ratio for a range of public
works extending from the Erie Canal to the present day are presented, and it is shown that cost
overruns seem to be much larger (in absolute and relative terms) in the modern era than during
the early nineteenth century. In the concluding section, we note how a comprehensive study of
the governance of resources in public works would examine the social rates of return on
investment, but that our evidence points to the possibility that the governance of public works
projects may be worse today than it was before. The significance of this finding is, moreover,
bolstered by the observation that the government has come to play a markedly more substantial
role in the economy than it did previously.

II
Canals were only one of a large range of economic activities, most notably in the
provision of social overhead capital, provided or permitted by state governments during the
antebellum era. Unlike the railroads that would come later, canals were generally both built and
operated by governments. Railroads were granted state charters (allowing them to raise funds in
the private capital markets that only gradually evolved over time) as well as awarded subsidies in
the forms of land, bonds, or cash, but most were privately owned, built, and operated. Given the
central role of government in canal construction and operation, as well as the pronounced
geographic patterns of the benefits they yielded, it is easy to understand how the political factors
involved in making decisions and in obtaining the necessary votes to implement them could have
led to overbuilding of canals, which raised overall costs even in the absence of outright fraud and
8

This interpretation is not unique to us. Susan Rose-Ackerman (1999, p. xi) has commented: “People [at
the World Bank] told me that when a review of a program mentioned “governance problems,”
“unexplained cost overruns,” or “excessive purchase of vehicles,” this meant that corruption and simple
7

corruption. With so many parts of New York State desirous of procuring access to low-cost
water transportation, how was the route of the Erie Canal (and other canals) selected? How was
legislative approval of the plan for the rules and regulations controlling the actual construction
and operation of the canal accomplished?9
The great commercial success of the Erie Canal and its contribution to the growth of New
York City often leads us to overlook the uncertainty and political controversy that surrounded the
project. Not only was the Erie Canal a public project of an unprecedented scale (363 miles) and
cost to society, but the route was also not the obvious first choice for a canal to link the Midwest
and Lake Erie with the Hudson River.10 Apparently, the shorter, cheaper and more certain route
would have linked a canal around Niagara Falls with another leaving Lake Ontario for the
Oswego River. Indeed, this was the approach recommended for New York State by Albert
Gallatin in his 1808 Report on Canals, where he otherwise did an excellent job in detailing a
plan for the antebellum canal network that would ultimately be constructed.11 There was a strong
logic for the Erie route, however, especially from the point of view of the state government (see
theft were a problem.”
9
Our descriptions of the debates over the building of the Erie Canal, and of the discussions of various
forms of alleged corruption are drawn from our reading and examination of a variety of primary and
secondary sources, including: Documents of the Assembly of the State of New York (1847, 1851, 1868,
1875, and 1876); Reports of the Commissioners (1818); Laws of the State of New York (1825); Whitford
(1906); Renwick (1842); Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine (1852); Hammond (1846); Shaw (1966); Walker
and Walker (1963); Sheriff (1996); Miller (1962); Hanyan and Hanyan (1996); Goodrich et al (1961);
and MacGill and others (1917).
10
George Washington is often credited with suggesting, during the 1780s, a canal to link the Great Lakes
to Atlantic ports. The route ultimately selected was extraordinarily ambitious, however, in that no canal
of near that length had previously been constructed in either Europe or the Americas. Although there
were many short canals in England, by far the longest was in France, a 148-mile long waterway in
Languedoc – spanning less than half the distance the Erie did. The longest canal in the Americas
extended for less than one-tenth the length. See Goodrich (1960) for more discussion.
11
The building of a link between the Hudson and Lake Erie similarly presented a choice of methods.
Clinton advocated a waterway, while Morris – another powerful member of the State Commission –
favored an inclined plane-canal from Lake Erie to Utica, and then a connection with the Hudson via the
Mohawk River. This approach was dropped in 1816 however.
8

Map). Not only was there a possibility that the canal Gallatin proposed might lead to a diversion
of midwestern produce to Canada (Montreal), not New York City, but the Erie route also had the
advantage of having a higher expected payoff because of the considerable new land in western
New York that it would bring into profitable production. Indeed, the funding of the Erie Canal
was aided by substantial land grants from the Holland Land Company, and others, as an
inducement to build the canal through their lands.
The Erie Canal was well short of being voted in unanimously, as the issue came to be
entangled in sectional and political disputes. Indeed, the margin of victory in the 1817 roll call
was very thin. The mid-Hudson valley farmers were opposed to the canal because of the threat of
extensive Midwestern and upstate produce entering into New York City. The quite strong
opposition of New York City is a bit more difficult to comprehend. In part, given the great
uncertainty of whether the stimulus to economic development would be sufficient to justify such
a massive public work – more than twice as long as the then longest canal in the western world
and more than ten times that in the United States at the time – economic success (or even its
completion within a reasonable time) was not obvious beforehand. Even Thomas Jefferson,
whose boldness and vision were reflected in the Louisiana Purchase, in 1808 considered the
project a century ahead of its time.12 With those in New York City fearful that they would bear a
heavy tax burden for a social investment with little return, it should perhaps not be so surprising
that their representatives stood fast against the construction of such a large-scale public work. A
second reason for the lack of support from New York City reflected the intense political
disagreements within the state. With De Witt Clinton (who became governor in 1817) and his
Federalist followers pushing vigorously for the canal to generate economic growth, as well as to
12

See Shaw (1966), pp. 35-37. Granted, Jefferson expressed this opinion when reneging on an earlier
9

further his political interests, the Democrats, then in control of the city, were instinctively
opposed so as to prevent any political credit accruing to their rival party. Political struggles of
this sort, between representatives from different regions and parties, continued in subsequent
debates over expenditures on canal construction, repair, and enlargement, as well as over
political patronage of canal employment.
A key issue was, of course, how to finance the canal. While the federal government had
earlier indicated a willingness to provide support for interstate public works, a formal request for
assistance from New York State was rejected by the national government on the grounds that
funding the project would be inappropriate because the benefits would go to residents of only a
limited area. New York then organized a petition asking for a general program to help states
finance public improvements, but this too was turned down. New York State also attempted to
raise funds from those states, such as Vermont, Kentucky, and Ohio, that could expect to benefit
from building the canal, but the effort yielded only moral support. Finally, in April 1817, six
weeks after President Madison had vetoed legislation that would have provided New York with
some funds, the state legislature adopted a measure calling for the building of the canal and
accepting that New York State would bear full responsibility; the first dirt was dug on July 4th.
The five canal commissioners (previously appointed under an act of 1810) that had prepared an
extraordinarily detailed plan, including the route, technical specifications, and estimates of cost,
were vested with the authority to direct the construction and to borrow the money on the credit of
the state. The law provided that this debt would be paid off from a Canal Fund, overseen by all
of the officers of the state except the governor. The revenues for this fund were to come from
tolls from the canal, a tax on salt manufactured in the state, duties on goods sold at auctions, a
promise to help finance canals.
10

tax on steamboat passengers, grants, donations, and a tax on real estate located within 25 miles of
the canal (this latter tax appears never to have been implemented). The need to levy taxes within
New York State led to inevitable conflicts between those who expected to receive direct benefits
and those who expected not to benefit, as well as over how to tailor revenue enhancements. For
example, an initial proposal to raise funds through a more general tax on property was voted
down.
One method of attracting votes from the representatives of districts not in a position to
directly benefit from the canal was the use of traditional logrolling to provide assurances that
their support would be remembered in decisions about future, if not concurrent, transportation
projects. Extensive legislative maneuvering was required to obtain approval of the act to
construct the Erie Canal, contributing to the inclusion of authorization to build the Champlain
Canal (linking the Hudson to Lake Champlain) in the 1817 act. However, logrolling seems to
have played a much more important role after the completion of the Erie and Champlain, as a
mania for canals developed and the legislature authorized surveys for seventeen proposed canals
in 1825, and the actual construction of five additional shorter canals over the next decade.13 It
has been widely noted that the geographic patterns of voting on the various bills were salient, and
that the question of whether a proposed canal would traverse near the home county explained
more about how legislators voted than did their party affiliation or the advice of state officers
about financial feasibility.14 Representatives of counties along the Erie Canal were

13

By 1836, even after two reductions in tolls, the Canal Fund was able to pay off the entire debt incurred
in building the Erie and Champlain canals. The five lateral canals included the Oswego Canal (begin in
1825 and completed in 1829), the Cayuga and Seneca Canal (1827 to 1828), the Crooked Lake Canal
(1829 to 1833), the Chemung Canal (1829 to 1833), and the Chenango Canal (1833 to 1836).
14
See the discussions in Hammond (1846) and Sowers (1914) about voting patterns. A telling example
of the weight of economic feasibility in the deliberations of this period comes from the case of the
Chenango Canal. Despite a report from the canal commissioners stating that its tolls would be unlikely
11

understandably reserved or hostile to new projects that were thought likely to offer competition
for traffic.15 Three of these five extra waterways proved to be (as anticipated) financial failures,
and added to the state’s debt. Indeed, in 1876, the New York Canal Investigation report notes,
that “the lateral canals, [has] been the sole cause of the fact of the present indebtedness of the
State by reason of the canals.”16
As inefficient (or corrupt) as logrolling might seem, this approach to getting measures
through the legislature was, and remains, far from novel. Logrolling along geographic lines was
a common feature of crafted political alignments throughout the antebellum period, wherever
(most notably Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Kentucky, as well as New York) there was legislative
consideration of internal improvements.17 When successful (from the perspective of those
seeking to obtain authorization for an economically desirable public investment), logrolling
meant that there were higher costs than necessary to construct the core project.18 A failure to
achieve success by logrolling saved on costs to the state government (by avoiding the
commitment of public resources), but often – because of the difficulty of raising private funds to
carry on with the investment – meant the loss of the benefits that would have flowed from the
internal improvement. In a context of legislators voting the interests of their constituents,
logrolling may not merit classification as an intrinsically corrupt practice. Rather, the key issue

to cover either the interest on the debt necessary to construct the canal, or the variable costs of operating
it, and warnings from the state comptroller and the governor about its inadvisability, the legislature
ultimately voted to order the canal commissioners to proceed with construction.
15
In a similar fashion, once the Erie Canal was built, Clinton and Martin Van Buren, who had both
vigorously pursued federal support, reversed their stances and systematically opposed federal aid for
internal improvements. See Seavoy (1982), pp. 3 and 83.
16
See Report (1876), p. 11. The report continues: “but for that fact, the State would be to-day entirely
free from any canal debt.”
17
For discussion of the experiences in Pennsylvania and Ohio, see Hartz (1948) and Scheiber (1969).
18
Of course, there may be cases where no economically desirable public investment is at stake, and
success at logrolling leads to allocating resources to a set of socially undesirable projects.
12

about logrolling is the social return to the package of public investments for which the political
tactic obtains authorization.
Payment of bribes to secure approval of the Erie Canal was not mentioned in the
extensive legislative hearings on the construction and operations of the canal, nor in the many
scholarly treatments of this major public works project that have been published since. In
contrast with descriptions of bank charters being issued during this era in return for bribes, in
cash or by sale and repurchase of securities, exchanging votes for remuneration seems to have
been insignificant in this case, perhaps because of the opportunities for land ownership in
appropriate locations. Where corruption and fraud were more visible concerns of the state, or of
those entrusted with responsibility for public funds, was in the construction and operation of the
canal. Rather than have the work done by state employees, the policy was to contract out the
construction to private firms or individuals who furnished their own tools and hired their own
workers. A rather small group of engineers (most of whom were canal commissioners) was
responsible for most of the technical or design issues, and they and their assistant engineers
oversaw the work of the various contractors. Partly because the enterprises of the era were of
modest size (and often strapped for funds to procure necessary supplies and materials), each
contractor was to handle only a short stretch of the canal (no more than a few miles, and
sometimes as short as a quarter-mile).19 This policy also meant that expenditures were widely
spread to benefit many contractors in local areas, a non-trivial consideration during the protracted
economic contraction that plagued the country through the early years of the project (up until
19

Each contract was to be put up for bid, and assigned to the lowest bidder, and contained detailed
specifications appropriate to the individual situation (with the tasks including clearing land, excavating,
and the construction of locks, embankments, culverts, towpaths, fences, etc.). For more treatment of the
procedures, see Shaw (1966) and Walker and Walker (1962), pp. 40-44, for the relevant discussion from
the 1818 Report of the Commissioners.
13

1821 or 1822). The engineers who were charged with inspecting and approving the quality of the
work before the contractor was paid (generally on a monthly basis, and in advance conditional on
performance up to that point), typically boarded at homes near the construction site and made
their disbursements in small bills drawn from local banks.20
Although a theory for why this organization of the construction would keep costs low was
offered by some observers at the time, the basic reason for its adoption was likely the reality that
the work was performed over a vast geographic expanse, and that construction firms of this era
were small and highly localized.21 It was, accordingly, left up to the engineers responsible in
each area to provide for construction by placing for bid contracts pertaining to rather short spans.
On one hand, the lack of central control and monitoring of contracting procedures, the small size
of the firms hired, and the not uncommon personal familiarity between the engineers and the
contractors could well have fostered corrupt practices. From another perspective, however, it
could be argued that the conditions were unfavorable to malfeasance. Not only did the
technology of constructing canals make it relatively easy to make comparisons of cost per mile
across supervising engineers or contractors, and to detect those stretches of canal that were below
standard (further facilitated by strict procedures and guidelines for the testing of the quality of the
work), but the absolute amounts to be gained from individual episodes of corruption must have

20

The most prominent scandal associated with the construction of the canal concerned the activities of
Myron Holley, the treasurer of the Canal Committee, and the commissioner who was perhaps most active
at negotiating contracts and disbursing payments to contractors. Although attacked by some observers for
partisanship in the award of contracts as early as 1820, in 1824 it was discovered that he was unable to
account for $30,000 of public monies, and had used public funds to purchase property near the canal.
For more discussion, see Shaw (1966), pp. 169-172.
21
Another explanation for the use of relatively small contracts rather than a sole, general contractor
emerged during the Progressive Era, with the intent to curb the powers of contractors and avoid
corruption on public jobs, albeit at the cost of imposing difficulties of coordination. While many states
soon repealed this legislation, New York still operates under the Wicks Law, which requires separate
contracts for each function to be performed.
14

been small.
A ceremony to officially mark the completion of the entire canal took place to universal
acclaim in 1825, but the financial and economic success of the Erie was evident to observers well
before. Indeed, it was not long after the middle section of the canal had been opened, and
substantial toll collections began to roll in, that the securities issued to mobilize funds for the
remainder of the project were attracting the interest of investors as distant as London. The
primary basis for the enormous social returns to this public investment was of course the demand
for the transportation services that the canal provided at radically lower cost than the
alternatives.22 But the cost effectiveness of the construction effort also deserves attention.
Despite the massive and unprecedented scale of this public works project, the provincial attitudes
of most of those involved, and the direction by canal commissioners who were at best self-taught
engineers, the Erie Canal (and its companion Champlain Canal) were constructed at only about
46 percent above the estimated costs at the time of authorization. Although this overrun seems
quite formidable in the abstract, it is (as suggested by the comparison with other public works
project presented in Table 1) quite modest by the standards of modern experience and
sensibilities.
The problems of excess expenditure, if not corruption, in New York State grew much
more severe after the completion of the Erie. As mentioned above, the Erie Canal was so
successful in stimulating economic development along its route, and in generating surpluses from
tolls, that state legislators were swept up with a general enthusiasm for constructing many more
22

See Fogel (1979) for discussion and estimates of the extraordinary cost advantages of canals and
railroads over transport by horse and wagon. More specifically, the costs for transporting grain or flour
from Buffalo to New York City are generally said to have fallen by 85 to 90 percent. So great was the
impact of the Erie Canal, that Carter Goodrich (1960, p. 55) judged its opening as “the most decisive
single event in the history of American transportation”.
15

canals throughout New York with borrowed funds.23 Within five years, they authorized going
forward with a series of additional canals despite reports from canal commissioners that
predicted that at least some of the planned canals would not produce sufficient tolls to cover
expenses, and a series of increasingly tough warnings from the comptroller and governor about
committing to projects unlikely to be able to cover costs. To make matters worse, as the annual
expenses of the state government grew over time, the legislature, reluctant to raise taxes,
increasingly relied on tapping the revenue or accumulated surplus from canal tolls and exotic
financial measures such as borrowing from the Common School Fund at lower than market rates.
Despite the ominous fiscal balance, however, in 1835 and 1836 the legislature again defied the
advice of the governor by authorizing not only a major enlargement and improvement of the Erie
Canal (which was widely acknowledged to be of insufficient size given the heavier than expected
volume of traffic) but also several other waterway projects and a $3 million loan to aid the New
York and Erie Railroad.24 Even with a change in the party in power (from Democrats to Whigs),
a courageous and insightful state comptroller, and the encouragement to concentration of the
mind provided by the financial crisis of 1837 and the protracted downturn that followed (along
with the associated fall in canal revenue), the legislature continued to pursue policies of
extravagance. The ability of the state to service its debt and obtain new credit, not
coincidentally, eroded dramatically.
It was not until 1842 that New York, on the brink of insolvency, began to take strong

23

It is interesting that this movement to build more canals got started about the same time that the
franchise was extended in New York by eliminating wealth requirements. See Engerman and Sokoloff
(2004).
24
For discussion, see Shaw (1966), pp. 239-242. For more on the New York and Erie Railroad, see Pierce
(1953), pp. 13-16.
16

action.25 The “stop and tax law of 1842” both assessed a general tax on wealth as well as
suspended state expenditures for the construction of public works (only maintenance and
repairs). As the state made progress in paying down its debt and restoring fiscal balance, it also
took steps to prevent the recurrence of such profligacy by the government. In 1846 a new
constitution was adopted, and among the many important new provisions were restrictions on
borrowing, establishments of guidelines for the use of sinking funds to pay off canal and other
government debts, and other reforms directed at improving governance.26 The same concern with
trying to identify the sources of the fiscal crisis, as well perhaps as a spirit of reform more
generally, also gave rise in 1846 to the first serious investigation of the construction and
operations of the canals. Another motivation may have been an interest on the part of legislators
to shift responsibility for the debacle in state finance.
The Select Committee of the Assembly convened in 1846 was zealous about
“investigating frauds in the expenditures of the public moneys upon the canals of this state,” and
desirous of identifying problems that would attract public attention and provoke enactment of, if
not resolution by, new laws and procedures.27 The investigators focused on the possibilities of
corruption associated with the construction of the canals as well as on the use of canal-related
jobs as a form of political patronage (with the allocation of supervisory, inspector, and other
positions associated with operating the canals changing with shifts in parties in power). The

25

During the early 1840s, one-third of the states defaulted on their bonded debt, and while several
resumed payments of interest and principal within a few years, four repudiated their debt. See McGrane
(1935). New York did not default.
26
For example, the new constitution increased transparency (and perhaps limited logrolling) by
specifying that private or local bills could not deal with more than one subject, and that the subject had to
be expressed in the title. Also, money could only be paid out of the treasury “in pursuance of an
appropriation” and that any such appropriation had to be explicit about the sum appropriated and the
object to which the fund would be applied. See Sowers (1914), pp.72-74 for more discussion.
27
Report (1847), p. 3.
17

chronological scope of the inquiry was broad, extending back to the construction of the Erie
Canal several decades before. The major sources of corruption highlighted in these hearings
were: fraud in allocating contracts to “friends, acquaintances, and neighbors,” forging of
vouchers for reimbursements of materials, padded payrolls, stolen materials, and use of claims
concerning the need for extraordinary repairs to circumvent state limits.28 The committee
established that problems emerged very early in these public works projects. As noted above, the
most notorious example involved Myron Holley, one of the first canal commissioners, who in
1824 had been charged with (and admitted to) being unable to account for some public funds and
using some of them to purchase land in the canal region. Also worthy of note was the discovery
that the books of the canal commission for the period 1822-1828 were missing (or that no records
had been kept during those years), and that several of the individuals asked to testify about the
construction of the Erie declined to do so.
What stood out in these hearings, and in the other major hearings that were to be held in
the years to come on the subject of the construction and operations of the canal policies, is that
the quality of controls had become more lax over time, allowing the influence of politicians (as
regards who served as engineers and who received contracts) and corrupt practices by engineers
to become more pronounced.29 Although other factors, such as the originally unscheduled

28

Report (1847), p. 6.
For example, the report of the Select Committee expressed concern about what happened under the
charge of Frederick C. Mills, chief engineer on the construction of the Genesee Valley Canal. Near the
close of his work, his brother Hiram P. Mills was employed as resident engineer on the stretch of the
canal extending from Mont Morris to Olean. The contracts for the construction on this part of the canal
were let in the fall of 1838: “It will therefore, be seen that the work on that section was immense, and that
a majority of it was rock excavation from the mountain side, whence the rocks excavated could be cast
directly off into the river channel. The contract for that work being a very desirable one, there was much
competition for it; and the manner of conducting the business of letting that contract to the successful
competitor, deserves particular attention. The contract was awarded to Nicholas Van Derwerken, who it
is said, was not possessed of the means necessary to the prosecution of such an undertaking, and who was
18
29

cessation of construction between 1842 and 1847, certainly played an important role in
accounting for cost overruns, the findings of the investigators suggest that poor governance
(encompassing acceptance of incompetence or inefficiency), if not an increased prevalence of
outright fraud, help to explain why the costs of enlarging and improving the Erie Canal ballooned
from the initial projection of $12.42 million to over $30 million (and the time required for the
work from 12 years to 27 years). The testimony to, and analysis provided by, the series of
investigating committees convened by The New York Assembly and/or Senate were published in
1847 (1242 pages), 1851 (332 pages), 1868 (1018 pages), 1875 (677 pages), and 1876 (770
pages), and in less complete reports on contracts and frauds in other years (starting in 1840).30
The 1876 Report reported on the following “various forms of mismanagement, neglect,
fraud, and malfeasance”:
(a): the approval or toleration of ‘unbalanced bids’; (b) improper action of commissioners
in making new contracts, and in extending or canceling old ones; (c) agreement to
contracts that were adverse to the interests of the State, and for the benefit of contractors;
(d) blind, hasty or corrupt legislation in making appropriations for repairs, claims, and
awards; (e) failure of engineers to make true cost estimates, and connivance with bidders
or contractors in making false ones; (f) carelessness or neglect on the part of the Canal
Board in ascertaining whether proposed work had proper legal sanction; (g) appropriation
of property of the State by contractors, or by superintendents; (h) approval, by
superintendents, of bad or worthless work; (i) wrongful or careless awards by canal
appraisers; (j) the legal fiction of ‘extraordinary repairs’ which misstates a matter of fact,
misleads successive Legislatures, and prevents the completion of the enlargement; and (k)
the lack of responsibility on the part of canal officers, owing to a defective system of
subdividing duties, which rendered it difficult to hold a wrong-doer to strict account.31
The various hearings uncovered a number of instances of these kinds of mismanagement and
without experience as a contractor. How it happened that he became the lowest bidder does not directly
appear, except by the proposition itself; but the course then pursued in regard to it by H.P. Mills, the
resident engineer, leaves the impression very strong that there was connivance between him and Van
Derwerken. After the work was awarded to Van Derwerken on his proposition, the contract for it was
taken jointly by Van Derwerken and Robert Powers, his brother-in-law, who had previously been a
partner with H.P. Mills.” See Report of the Select Committee (1847), pp. 4-49.
30
See Report (1876), p. 11; and Hasse (1907).
19

malfeasance, as well as the likelihood that there had been some confiscation of fees and tolls
collected by canal workers.32 Their conclusions, framed in general terms, were that the controls
intended to prevent behaviors inappropriate or otherwise wasteful in the use of public funds were
imperfectly designed, not strictly adhered to, and irregularly enforced. Because we have all come
to expect such problems, at least to some extent, in the administration of large public (and
private) enterprises, it is in no way surprising that thorough investigations uncovered their
existence. What would be more informative and useful, however, is a gauge that would allow us
to evaluate the magnitude of these problems, and to examine whether their seriousness varies
over type of project or time.

III
Several features of this record of canal building by New York State stand out. First,
although legislators were perhaps wanton in their authorization of public transportation projects,
it is significant that a potentially more corrosive form of rent- seeking appears not to have
imposed major costs on the state. The legislature does not seem to have been capable of limiting
access to low-cost transportation, and in so doing to greatly advantage one specific region or
segment of the population at the expense of others – and at the expense of the overall growth of
31

Report (1876), pp. 12-16.
These same sorts of problems with internal improvement projects were noted in other states. For
example, in 1840 the Pennsylvania Canal Commissioners listed twenty ways in which “positive proof
was obtained to substantiate…charges of attempts to defraud the Commonwealth”. In his study of
corruption in The State Works of Pennsylvania, Bishop observes (1907a, pp. 229-244) that “we have no
assurance that there would have been greater purity under corporate management,” and as “public works
were used by the political party in power as an invaluable instrument of political corruption, destroying
the morale of citizens and squandering the resources of the state.” He concludes that “those who are
abashed by the present-day disclosures of corruption in the management of cities and powerful
corporations, and who therefore sigh for the ‘good old days’ of political purity, have to face the fact that
these did not exist in Pennsylvania …at least during the period of state ownership and control of public
32

20

the state economy.33 On the contrary, even when precarious state finances should have
strengthened the case for skepticism about marginal projects, legislators all too often failed to
summon up a majority against. Their failure in enforcing such restrictions, or monopolies, on
access to low-cost transportation, was not because of an absence of advocates. The
representatives of the areas that already had access to canals were generally amongst those
legislators who opposed the authorization of new ones along routes that would have competed
for traffic. Similarly, they, as well as others who had interests in canal operations, also sought
restrictions on the speed of the expansion of a new competing innovation, the railroad. Various
limitations were in fact imposed on the railroads when they threatened toll collections on canals,
though they were withdrawn in the early 1850s.34 Partially offsetting such restrictions were, of
course, subsidies to encourage the construction and expansion of specific railroads. Excess
transportation capacity and collapsing rates were the consequence.
The observation that legislators were not effective at restricting access to transportation
by water or rail reflects the fact that the open political system made it very difficult for those
geographic areas or companies who sought to obtain and maintain strong competitive
advantages, or monopolies, on such a basis. It further suggests that if there were social costs to
works.” See also Bishop (1907b) and Bowers (1983).
33

The liberal policy about authorizing canals is not unlike the policies concerning the establishment of
banks and corporations. The passage of free incorporation and free banking acts reduced the ability of
the legislatures to create highly profitable monopolies by restricting entry. Because the monopoly rents
would have gone in large measure to legislators with the power to charter firms, the free incorporation
and banking laws meant that the legislators were accepting a lower stream of rents. The social and
political pressures that led to such policies may have narrowed the scope for, and economic
consequences of, corruption in the antebellum economy.
34
See MacGill and others (1917), pp. 353-356. First were requirements that they carry only passengers,
and passenger baggage, not freight. They were followed by restrictions against railroads operating
during the summers when the canals were open, and finally by a requirement that railroads pay canal tolls
for traffic carried. Similar types of restrictions, lasting until 1861, were introduced for railroads in
Pennsylvania. See Dunlavy (1994), pp. 79-80 and 138-139.
21

corrupt practices in the building and operation of New York canals they likely consisted
primarily of excessive costs of construction and/or operations, or from investments in marginal
canals that yielded low social returns. It is beyond the scope of our study to estimate the social
returns to each of the New York canals, but we would note that the work of Albert Fishlow
suggests that the rate of return on investments in New York canals was well above the cost of
capital.35 His estimates would seem to imply that the overall cost of the misallocation of public
funds on these canal projects was likely not all that monstrous.
Our focus is instead on the issue of whether, and by how much, corrupt practices or
incompetence tolerated by public officials increased the costs of constructing the canals. Precise
measures of this theoretical concept are of course difficult to tease out of the data. The approach
we employ here is to use the ratio of the expenditures on public works projects relative to the
estimated cost at the time of authorization as a rough gauge of the quality of public governance in
such activities. This ratio is, of course, very different from the amount by which the costs of
construction exceeded the minimum feasible cost, but it has the advantages of being both
relatively straightforward to retrieve as well as meaningful about the quality of public
governance.36 The implicit supposition for our approach is that conscientious public officials
practicing good governance would make their decisions about whether to go forward on a public
investment with the best available estimates of costs (and benefits). Errors in these estimates are

35

Fishlow (2000), pp. 552-564, and pp. 604-606. See also Goodrich et al (1961), pp. 216-247; and
MacGill (1917). The social and private returns on building the Erie Canal were much larger than on the
others, but in his assessment of six of the New York canals, Ransom (1964) concluded that three of the
six were ”successful” in financial terms. Fishlow also judged the early canals in Ohio successful. The
problem was that too many feeder canals (like in New York) were built. Competition between the large
number of waterways and railroads put substantial downward pressure on tolls.
36
How much the ultimate costs of a project exceed the estimated costs at time of authorization, and how
that ratio has varied over time and across projects, has been the subject of earlier studies. See, for
example, Merrow (1988) and Flyverberg, Bruzelius, and Rothengatter (2003).
22

obviously to be expected, as it is impossible to perfectly anticipate all of the circumstances that
develop in the course of major construction projects, and public officials, like other humans, are
often prone to wishful thinking. Nevertheless, the estimated cost of a project at the time public
authorities commit to carrying out an investment would seem to provide a reasonable baseline,
on average, if there was good governance over public resources. Thus, we argue, a major source
of systematic bias in the cost estimates is tolerance of incompetence, weak oversight or
administration, actual corruption, and other cost-inflating practices by public officials, or the
quality of governance more generally. Deliberate misrepresentation of the costs of a big public
investment project reflects poor governance, in that public officials can get away with it (whether
they are elected officials or not). Moreover, to the extent that costs rise (on average) after the
authorization of a public investment project, it would seem reasonable to attribute it primarily to
poor management or oversight of the uses to which public funds are being put – whether due to
corruption or tolerance of incompetence and other cost-inflating practices. The measure we rely
on, therefore, should be regarded as one that relates more to the quality of public governance than
to the level of corruption narrowly understood.
Although we emphasize how the cost overrun ratio is informative about the quality of
public governance, it must be admitted that there are other reasons – some quite innocuous – why
the ratio might differ from unity or even vary systematically. First, there might be unanticipated
inflation, such that nominal expenditures could total more than original forecast, even if
expenditures expressed in constant dollars had not risen.37 Second, the costs of a public works
investment might exceed the projected amount, because of a redesign that added new elements
37

One might initially presume that this issue would lead to substantial cost overruns during periods of
inflation. However, often, such as in the U.S. over recent decades, the projected expenditures generally
took account of expected inflation in forecasting nominal expenditures. See the discussion in Merrow
23

that added to costs. A third consideration, one that could in principle lead to increases or
decreases in costs, is that technology (or regulations) might advance in unexpected ways. Yet
another possible contributor to cost overruns is the deliberate preparation of downward-biased
estimates of the costs of projects so as to increase the likelihood of their being approved by
public authorities. There might also be problems having to do with management, which may
stem from the complexity or scale of projects being undertaken – rather than to the quality of
public governance. All of these factors need to be taken into account in the interpretation of any
costs overruns, or systematic patterns therein.
As we have already stated, and as is highlighted in Table 1, the seriousness of the cost
overruns in the construction of New York canals seems to have increased after the completion of
the Erie Canal. Whereas expenditures on the Erie totaled roughly 46 percent more than those
projected at the time the legislature authorized going ahead, the ultimate cost of the enlargement
and improvement of the Erie was more than 140 percent greater than the plan approved in 1835
(a decade after the Erie was originally opened). That the cost overrun was much larger in the
later work is consistent with the evidence of erosion of oversight, and of greater prevalence of
corrupt practices, over time uncovered by the various investigations conducted by the New York
State Assembly and Senate. At least part of the higher than expected costs of completing this
project must have been due to the interruption in work, between 1842 and 1847, brought on by
the state fiscal crisis.38 It is notable, moreover, that the cost overrun on the Erie Canal
improvement project was far greater, relative to the estimated figures at time of authorization,
(1988).
38
Although the difficulty of obtaining information prevent us from giving the issue more extensive
treatment, it does appear that extreme cost overruns were typically associated with delays in completing
the respective projects. The Mississippi River Levee Line and the Boston Central Artery/Tunnel projects
are examples of projects whose construction fell well behind schedule, and the Hoover Dam is an
24

than those incurred on several other antebellum canals – the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal (63
percent) and the Ohio and Miami Canals (16 percent) as well as on the major project that vastly
expanded the supply of fresh water to rapidly growing New York City – the Croton Aqueduct.
Given that these canal projects were extremely large, relative to the scale of enterprise,
the depth of capital markets, and the size of the economy, the increase in the costs of carrying out
these works could not have been insignificant in absolute terms. But it is difficult to gauge the
import of the cost overruns without some basis for comparison. For this reason, to aid in the
evaluation of the significance of the cost overrun ratios for the Erie and other antebellum canal
projects, Table 1 also includes the ratios calculated for other large public works projects over the
course of the history of the United States.39 Our selection of the public works to include in the
table was not random, but we sought to retrieve the information on a range of well-known
projects extending from the canal era to the present day.40
The record of cost overruns on public works revealed in Table 1 suggests that the
construction of the Erie Canal, and of other public works built during the antebellum period, was
not plagued by extraordinary problems in managing costs. On the contrary, the cost overrun
ratios drawn from the period before the Civil War are generally among the lowest we have
observed; only the Hoover Dam, a Great Depression-era public works project does as well by this
example of one completed well ahead of schedule.
Some may find it interesting that the cost overrun ratios we computed for the unsuccessful French
effort to build a canal across the isthmus of Panama, and for the infrastructure Montreal needed to host
the Olympics were among the highest we have seen. See Toohey and Veal (2000), p. 77. We confine our
attention here, however, to public works in the United States.
40
We have not included in Table 1 all of the public works for which we obtained cost overrun ratios, but
the basic qualitative pattern (and rough quantitative pattern) would be robust to their inclusion. For other
examples from the late-19th and early 20th centuries, and discussion of related issues, see Moulton (1915).
Another example, developing as this paper is being written is the increase in the cost of the eastern span
of the San Francisco Bay Bridge (which was damaged in an earthquake) being carried out under the
auspices of the California Department of Transportation. Although the project is not scheduled for
39

25

gauge (the Panama Canal also does better than the project enlarging and improving the Erie
Canal). If there is any trend, it is that cost overruns have become somewhat worse over time,
especially after World War II. The cost overrun ratios vary between 1.16 and 2.42 across the five
antebellum projects (averaging 1.60), but vary between 4.17 and 19.10 across the four projects
constructed since 1950.41 The difference in the distributions is indeed very stark. If the ratios do
provide a meaningful indicator of the quality of public governance, then the implication would
seem to be that conditions were better during the early 19th century than in the late 20th century.
As many would find such a judgment surprising, it is necessary to critically assess
whether we should believe the trend in our estimates. Although more observations would
obviously be desirable, the strength of the pattern we have noted and the general consistency of
our results with those of other studies give us confidence that the qualitative result will hold up
under further research scrutiny.42 For example, Bent Flyverberg, Nils Bruzelius, and Werner
Rothengatter have conducted studies of both 258 railway and road projects and large nontransportation projects between 1927 and 1998, and found cost overruns to be generally higher,
and often much higher, than what we found for the U.S. during the antebellum era. The cost

completion until 2010, the cost overrun ratio is already at 3.0.
The high ratio for the interstate highway system is especially striking. It appears to have resulted
primarily from the initial law being written in an open-ended way, such that it obligated the federal
government to pay for many more highway projects than had been anticipated. According to Weingroff
(1996), the 1952 Act authorized $25 million for the next two years to pay for an interstate system on a
50-50 matching basis, between the federal government and the state governments. Within one year,
however, the states had built considerable mileage, and the federal share of total costs was $477.5
million. We regret that our estimated cost overrun on the interstate highway system public works pertains
only to the very early stages of the program. We have not yet been able to obtain the information that
would permit us to calculate a cost overrun ratio for the entire system.
42
From our readings of the histories, the cost overruns, even those of the modern era, seem to be
primarily due to higher than estimated costs of carrying out or implementing the designs or work laid out
in the original plans, as opposed to the addition of new features to the original plan. The one exception
(we can not be sure) may be the cost overrun on the interstate highway program. See the sources cited in
the note to Table 1 for more details.
26
41

overruns, moreover, seem to have grown slightly over the period under investigation.43 In his
study of 52 major investment projects (most of which were in mining, manufacturing, and
energy) carried out across a range of countries during the 1970s and 1980s, Edward Merrow
(using a concept or procedure that produces lower estimates than our approach) found overruns
of 88 percent in real terms on average, and markedly higher for public or mixed public-private
projects than for private.44 Although such estimates of cost overruns on late-20th century public
works projects generally fall below those suggested in Table 1, they do provide rather strong
support to our key observation – that such cost overruns were typically lower in the antebellum
era than they are today.45 Another issue in interpreting the high cost overrun ratios in the modern
public works projects is whether the higher rates of inflation during the 1970s and 1980s may
lead them to overstate the increase in the real costs of a project over what was originally forecast.
This problem may be relevant for assessing the estimated cost overruns for the Louisiana
Superdome, the renovation of Yankee Stadium, and the Boston Central Artery/Tunnel project,
but in all of these cases no reasonable adjustment for changes in the price level could alter the
qualitative finding.46
43

See Flyverberg, Bruzelius, and Rothengatter (2003), p. 18.
See Merrow (1988). He and his team calculated cost overruns from the detailed engineering plans
typically made after authorization. They also found that projects that were larger ex ante had
proportionally higher cost overruns.
45
Current municipal policies regarding sports stadiums, if not airports and convention halls as well,
resemble the mercantilistic policies of local and state governments during the era of internal
improvements. This entails competitive bidding for teams and large subsidies to influence location
decisions, and has generated intense controversy about the social returns to such public investments. The
cost overrun figures we present for several of the earliest public investments in stadiums are somewhat
higher than the ones that pertain to more recently constructed stadiums. However, the costs of
constructing sports stadiums have ballooned as the mania for publicly-built stadiums has spread. It may
be that the commitment of public resources to build ever-more extravagant stadiums for use by private
teams on easy terms is the most telling feature in this record about the quality of governance of public
resources. See Quirk and Fort (1992 and 1999).
46
For example, even after adjusting for inflation, the cost of the Boston Artery/Tunnel project more than
tripled. See the discussion in Altshuler and Luberoff (2003), chapter 4, and especially p. 119. As the
27
44

In our view, the finding that cost overruns on public works were relatively modest during
the antebellum era, as compared to those today or in other eras in American history, has a solid
empirical basis.47 The next and more fundamental question, however, is what this intriguing
pattern means.
The straightforward interpretation, one for which we have already expressed support, is
that the governance, or control over the use, of public funds was stricter during the early
nineteenth century than it is today. It is difficult to explain the more substantial cost overruns
during the modern era, in particular, without acknowledging that either the processes of vetting
these public works projects were either badly flawed (if not dishonest), or that oversight by the
public authorities was so poor as to permit grossly inefficient use or private extraction of public
resources.48 What the source of this contemporary institutional failure is not easily identified, but

task of retrieving all of the information necessary to deflate the expenditures on the public works are
quite formidable to us, and as the qualitative results seem likely to be robust, we have not gone any
further as of yet. Both the Hoover Dam and Erie Canal projects are cases where the bias from changes in
the price level may have served to bias the cost overrun ratio downward, but again the basic qualitative
results are unlikely to be sensitive to adjustments for changes in the price level.
47
Boss Tweed and his New York City machine are not infrequently invoked to illustrate the extent of
corruption in the late 19th century United States. It is not clear how representative they were of the
country overall, but the histories are rather convincing about how poor public governance in New York
City was under the Tammany Democrats. How does Tammany fare under our gauge? Although the
complex accounts make it difficult to compute a precise cost overrun ratio, it seems that the amounts paid
out for the construction of the famed New York County Courthouse (“the House that Tweed built”) were
more than forty times the amount forecast at the time of the original authorization (which took place
before the Tweed Ring was formed). In contrast, the generally comparable courthouse (as regards size
and accoutrements) built at about the same time in neighboring Brooklyn (Kings County) had a cost
overrun of only about 40 percent and was built at less than ten percent of the cost of the one in New
York. See New York Times (1871) and Callow (1966).
48
Among the scholars who have examined cost overruns on recent public works and other large
investment projects, there are two schools of thought about the principal causes, and the source of the
evident trend toward proportionally higher cost overruns. One school emphasizes how forecasts of costs
are deliberately underestimated so as to increase the probability of project approval. The notion seems to
be that public authorities are less transparent or less able to monitor themselves than they were
previously, perhaps because there are a greater number of organized interests that stand to benefit from a
project approval and aid public officials in preparing deceptive cost estimates. For examples of those
who hold this view, see Flyvbjerg, Bruzelius, and Rothengatter (2003) and Altshuler and Luberoff
28

cost overrun ratios during the late twentieth century that seem routinely very high by early
nineteenth century standards imply that public officials (or the taxpaying electorate) have lost
control. What the basis is for the relatively good performance of the public sector during the
antebellum period is likewise unclear.
There are a myriad of possible explanations, ranging from the virtues of democracy and
high rates of participation in civic affairs to the natural constraints on corruption and gross
incompetence that come along with relatively low per capita incomes and small enterprises (as
well as a small government sector). We are as yet unable to distinguish between them, and the
absence of information on the social returns to different public works is another reason why our
assessment must be considered tentative, but the evidence on cost overruns does seem consistent
with de Tocqueville’s (1961, orig. publ. 1835) conception that democracy in America meant
good governance.

IV
The Erie Canal was, for its time, a mammoth public works project undertaken largely
because the scope of the investment was beyond what a private firm could manage. As with
most public works, there were ample opportunities for public officials to realize private gains
from the effort, and many did. On the whole, however, the construction of the Erie (and the
(2003).The latter (p. 246) quote Martin Wachs, “one of the nation’s most thoughtful and balanced
observers of urban transportation policymaking”: “I have interviewed public officials, consultants, and
planners who have been involved [in transit project cost and ridership forecasting] and I am absolutely
convinced that the cost overruns and patronage overestimates were not the result of technical errors,
honest mistakes, or inadequate methods. In case after case, planners, engineers, and economists have
told me that they had to ‘revise’ their forecasts many times because they failed to satisfy their superiors.
The forecasts had to be ‘cooked’ in order to produce numbers that were dramatic enough to gain federal
support for projects whether or not they could be fully justified on technical grounds.” Also see Wachs
(1989). Although acknowledging that the much worse performance of public projects was telling,
Merrow (1988) argues that changes in the regulatory environment and in feasible technology have also
29

companion Champlain Canal) appears to have been well conceived and executed; it not only paid
off more than its construction costs through tolls, but also generated substantial welfare
improvements for the residents of New York in the form of producer and consumer surplus and a
wide range of positive externalities. Although there was obviously some fraud and
mismanagement, the public authorities carried out the work at costs relatively close (by the
standards of public projects) to those projected at the point of authorization. The experience of
the Erie provides something of a model of what a public works project could feasibly be.
The problems arose after the completion of the Erie, and out of a common reaction to
emulate success. Noting how the areas along the route of the Erie had grown quite prosperous,
many other parts of New York wanted their own transportation improvements. The legislature
approved some of the proposals, and committed to building some canals that may have been
beneficial to those counties that were served, but whose costs were at least partially borne by
taxpayers elsewhere (as toll revenue was insufficient). The consequences of inadequate attention
to the amount of traffic that would be procured were compounded by the oversupply of
transportation lines as both new waterways and railroads proliferated, and by the impact of a
severe and prolonged economic contraction that began in 1837. How much of the misallocation
of public funds to such projects should be attributed to corruption or poor governance can be
debated, as private agents too often make similar miscalculations in their estimation of the
probability of duplicating the success of innovative investments (and did so during this era in
buying some of the canal bonds), but matters were made worse by the evident deterioration in
cost controls. The resources devoted to the post-Erie projects (both new canals and the
enlargement and improvement of the Erie) mushroomed, with the ultimate costs far exceeding
played an important role in causing cost overruns.
30

those originally budgeted for.
In an effort to try to place this episode in a broader perspective, we have computed the
ratio of actual expenditures on construction relative to the estimated costs at the time of
authorization for the Erie Canal, for the project to enlarge and improve it, and for a range of other
public works in the U.S. to the present day. It is our contention that this measure, albeit quite
narrow in focus, is informative about the quality of governance of public resources. In general,
we expect the ratio to vary positively with the lack of transparency exhibited by public authorities
as well as with their level of tolerance of incompetence or other cost-inflating practices
manifested in the use of public resources. We highlight how, by this standard, the governance of
public resources during the canal era of the early nineteenth century stands up well in comparison
with what we have seen since. Indeed, the cost overrun ratios have risen sharply over the last
half-century, coinciding with both a marked increase in the relative size of the government sector
as well as sustained economic growth. These patterns reveal, in our view, how little scholars
and policymakers understand about how the type, prevalence, and effects of corruption vary
across different contexts, and how important it is that better measures and other means of
systematically studying the phenomenon be developed.

31

REFERENCES
Altshuler, Alan and David Luberoff. 2003. Mega-Projects: The Changing Politics of Urban
Public Investment. Washington, D.C.: 2003.
Bishop, Avard Longley. 1907a. The State Works of Pennsylvania. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
_____________. 1907b. “Corrupt Practices Connected with the Building and Operation of the
State Works of Pennsylvania,” Yale Review 15 (February): 391-411.
Bishop, Joseph Bucklin. 1913. The Panama Gateway. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Bogart, Ernest Ludlow. 1924. Internal Improvements and State Debt in Ohio: An Essay in
Economic History. New York: Longmans, Green.
Bowers, Douglas E. 1983. “From Logrolling to Corruption: The Development of Lobbying in
Pennsylvania, 1815-1861,” Journal of the Early Republic 3 (Winter): 439-474.
Burch, Philip H., Jr. 1962. Highway Revenue and Expenditure Policy in the United States. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Callow, Alexander B., Jr. 1966. The Tweed Ring. New York: Oxford University Press.
Danielson, Michael N. 1997. Home Team: Professional Sports and the American Metropolis.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dunlavy, Colleen A. 1994. Politics and Industrialization: Early Railroads in the United States
and Prussia. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Economist. 2004. The World in 2004.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the
Americas,” unpublished working paper.
Frank, Arthur DeWitt. 1930. The Development of the Federal Program of Flood Control on the
Mississippi River. New York: Columbia University Press.
Fishlow, Albert. 2000. “Internal Transportation in the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth
Centuries.” In Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman (eds.) The Cambridge Economic
History of the United States, Volume II, The Long Nineteenth Century. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 543-642.
Flyvbjerg, Bent, and Nils Bruzelius and Werner Rothengatter. 2003. Megaprojects and Risk: An
32

Anatomy of Ambition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gallatin, Albert. 1968. (first published 1808). Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the
Subject of Public Roads and Canals. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” Journal of
Economic Literature 41 (June): 401-425.
Goodrich, Carter. 1960. Government Promotion of American Canals and Railroads, 1800-1890.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Goodrich, Carter, et al. 1961. Canals and American Economic Development. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Gray, Ralph D. 1967. The National Waterway: A History of the Chesapeake and Delaware
Canal, 1769-1965. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Gunn, L. Ray. 1988. The Decline of Authority: Public Economic Policy and Political
Development in New York State, 1800-1860. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Hammond, Jabez D. 1846. The History of Political Parties in the State of New York 2 vols. 4th
edition. Cooperstown: H&E Phinney.
Hanyan, Craig and Mary Hanyan. 1996. DeWitt Clinton and the Rise of the People’s Men.
Montreal: McGill-Queens.
Hartz, Louis. 1948. Economic Policy and Democratic Thought: Pennsylvania 1776-1860.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hasse, Adelaide. 1907. Index of Economic Material in Documents of the States of the United
States: New York, 1789-1904. Washington: Carnegie Institution.
Hellman, Joel S., and Geraint Jones and Daniel Kaufmann. 2000. “Seize the State, Seize the Day:
State Capture, Corruption, and Influence in Transition.” World Bank Policy Working Paper
2444. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine and Commercial Review. 1850. “Internal Improvements in the
State of New York.” 28: (September 1850): 259-269; (October 1850): 383-395; and
(November 1850): 497-508.
King, Charles. 1843. A Memoir of the Construction, Cost, and Capacity of the Croton Aqueduct.
New York: Charles King.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencia Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999. “The
Quality of Government,” Journal of Law Economics and Organization 15 (March): 222-229.
33

Larson, John Lauritz. 2001. Internal Improvements: National Public Works and the Promise of
Popular Government in the Early United States. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.
Laws of the State of New York in Relation to the Erie and Champlain Canals, Together with the
Annual Reports of the Canal Commissioners and other Documents requisite for a complete
official history of these works (2 vols.). 1825. Albany: E. and E. Horsford.
MacGill, Carol S., et al. 1917. History of Transportation in the United States before 1860.
Washington: Carnegie Institution.
Magrath, C. Peter. 1966. Yazoo: Law and Politics in the New Republic; The Case of Fletcher vs.
Peck. Providence: Brown University Press.
Majewski, John. 2000. A House Dividing: Economic Development in Pennsylvania and Virginia
before the Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCullough, David. 1977. The Path between the Seas: The Creation of the Panama Canal,
1870-1914. New York: Simon & Schuster.
McGrane, Reginald C. 1935. Foreign Bondholders and American State Debts. New York:
Macmillan.
Merrow, Edward W. 1988. Understanding the Outcomes of Megaprojects: A Quantitative
Analysis of Very Large Civilian Projects. Santa Monica: The RAND Corporation.
Miller, Nathan. 1962. The Enterprise of a Free People: Aspects of Economic Development in
New York State During the Canal Period, 1792-1838. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Moulton, H.G. 1915. “The Cost of the Erie Barge Canal,” Journal of Political Economy 23
(May): 490-500.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1993. “Why is Rent-Seeking so
Costly to Growth?,” American Economic Review 83 (May): 409-414.
Nettels, Curtis. 1962. The Emergence of a National Economy, 1775-1815. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1962.
New York Times. 1871. How New York is Governed: Frauds of the Tammany Democrats. New
York: New York Daily Times.
North, Douglass C. 1991. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.
Pierce, Harry H. 1953. Railroads of New York: A Study of Government Aid, 1826-1875.
34

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Quirk, James and Rodney D. Fort. 1992. Pay Dirt: The Business of Professional Team Sports.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
_____________. 1999. Hard Ball: The Abuse of Power in Pro Team Sports. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Ransom, Roger. 1964. “Canals and Development: A Discussion of the Issues.” American
Economic Review 54 (May): 365-376.
Renwick, James. 1842. Life of Dewitt Clinton. New York: Harper & Brothers. Report of the
Commissioners of the State of New York on the Canals from Lake Erie to the Hudson River
and from Lake Champlain to the same. Presented to the Legislature, January 31st, 1818.
1818. Albany: J. Buel.
Report of the Select Committee of the Assembly of 1846, upon the Investigation of Frauds in the
Expenditure of the Public Monies upon the Canals of the State of New York. (February 17,
1847) (No.100). 1847. Documents of the Assembly of the State of New York, Seventieth
Session. vol. 3. Albany: Charles van Benthuysen.
Report of Select Committee on Reports etc., Relative to Canal Frauds. 1851. Testimony and
Exhibits taken by committee approved by the Assembly of 1850 to investigate certain alleged
canal frauds April 17, 1851 and July 10, 1851 (No. 158 and 156). Documents of the
Assembly of the State of New York, Seventy-fourth Session, 1851. vol. 6. Albany: Charles van
Benthuysen.
Report of the Committee Appointed by the Senate to Investigate and Inquire into the
Management of the Canals of this State the Official Conduct of Any Person Now, or
Heretofore, Officially Connected Therewith, and also the Official Conduct of Persons
Comprising the Canal Contracting Board. 1868. (January 22, 1868) (No. 32) Documents of
the Assembly of the State of New York Ninety-first Session, 1868.vol. 4. Albany: Charles van
Benthuysen.
Report of Joint Committee of Senate and Assembly in Relation to Canal Fraud, Investigation.
1875. (May 5, 1875) (No. 152) Documents of the Assembly of the State of New York, NinetyEighth Session, 1875. vol. 10. Albany: Weed, Parsons and Company.
Report of the Joint Committee of the Senate and Assembly, Relative to Canal Investigation.
1876. (March 3, 1876) (No. 78). Documents of the Senate of the State of New York, Ninetyfifth Session. vol. 6. Albany: Jerome B. Parmenter.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1999. Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
35

Rosenberg, Nathan and L.E. Birdzell, Jr. 1986. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic
Transformation of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Books.
Scheiber, Harry N. 1969. Ohio Canal Era: A Case Study of Government and the Economy,
1820-1861. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Seavoy, Ronald E. 1982. The Origins of the American Business Corporation, 1784-1855:
Broadening the Concept of Public Service During Industrialization. Westport: Greenwood
Press.
Shaw, Ronald E. 1966. Erie Water West: A History of the Erie Canal, 1792-1854. Lexington:
University of Kentucky Press.
_____________. 1990. Canals for a Nation: The Canal Era in the United States, 1790-1860.
Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
Sheriff, Carol. 1996. The Artificial River: The Erie Canal and the Paradox of Progress, 18171862. New York: Hill and Wang.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1993. “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
108 (August): 599-617.
Sowers, Don C. 1914. The Financial History of New York State from 1789 to 1912. New York:
Columbia University.
Stevens, Joseph E. 1988. Hoover Dam: An American Adventure. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Sullivan, Neil J. 2003. The Diamond in the Bronx: Yankee Stadium and the Politics of New York.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1961(orig. publ. 1835). Democracy in America (2 vols.) New York:
Schocken Books. .
Toohey, Kristine and A.J. Veal. 2000. The Olympic Games: A Social Science Perspective.
Walingford: CABI Publishing.
Wachs, Martin. 1989. “When Planners Lie With Numbers,” Journal of the American Planning
Association. 55 (4): 476-479.
Walker, Barbara K. and Warren S. 1963. The Erie Canal: Gateway to Empire: Selected Source
Materials for College Research Papers. Boston: D.C. Heath.
Weingroff, Richard F. 1996. “Federal- Aid Highway Act of 1956: Creating the Interstate
System”. Public Roads 60 (Summer): 10-17.
36

Whitford, Noble E. 1906. History of the Canal System of the State of New York together with
Brief Histories of the Canals of the United States and Canada.2 vols. Albany: Brandon
Printing Company.

37

Table 1
Actual Expenditures to Projected Costs on Major Public Works: 1817 to 2004
_________________________________________________________________________________
Years

Public Works

Projected
Cost
(current US$
millions)

Actual
Expenditures
(current US$
millions)

Ratio of Actual to
to Projected Cost

1817-1825

Erie Canal
(New York State)

$5.75

$8.40

1.46

1824-1829

Chesapeake and
Delaware Canal
(US Government)

1.35

2.20

1.63

1825-1835

Ohio and Miami
Canals (Ohio)

5.13

5.93

1.16

1835-1862

Enlargement and
Improvement of Erie
Canal (NY State)

12.42

30.00

2.42

1838-1843

Croton Aqueduct
(City and County
of New York)

8.46

11.45

1.35

1883-1926

Mississippi River
Levee Line
(US Government)

11.45

>229.00

>20.00

1902-1913

Panama Canal
(US Government)

145.00

298.00

2.06

1931-1936

Hoover Dam
(U.S. Government)

48.89

54.70

1.12

1952-1953

Interstate Highways
25.00
(US & State Governments)

477.50

19.10

1966-1975

Louisiana Superdome
(Louisiana)

35.00

163.00

4.66

1971-1975

Renovation of
Yankee Stadium
(New York City)

24.00

100.00

4.17

1991-2004

Boston Central Artery/ 2800.00
Tunnel or “Big Dig”
(US Government)

>14600.00

>5.21

38

Notes and Sources: Our projected cost figures generally pertain to the estimated construction costs at the
time the projects were approved. The periods specified for the projects begin with the year of approval
(or cost estimate), and end with the completion of the project. We have for each project specified the
government that was the initiator of the project, or the major funding source. The cost figures for the
Erie Canal include the cost of the Champlain Canal. The projected costs were prepared in March 1817,
and were those in place when the legislature approved the plan in that year. For those estimates and the
actual cost of constructing the two canals, see Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine (1850, 386). For the
Chesapeake and Delaware Canal, see Gray (1967, 51); the cost estimate we use here is the one prepared
by the consulting engineers, which leads to a slightly lower ratio of expenditures to estimated costs. For
the Ohio and Miami Canals, see Bogart (1924, 28-29 and 76). For the estimates for the Croton
Aqueduct, see King (1843, 176 and 221). For the estimates of projected (prepared by the Mississippi
River Commission in 1883) and actual expenditures on building the levee line to control flooding on the
Mississippi River, see Frank (1930) and the House Committee on Flood Control (1927-28). This project
was not completed by 1927. For the projected costs of constructing the Panama Canal (presented in 1901
by a commission appointed by President McKinley, and voted on by Congress in 1902), see Bishop
(1913, 428-29). For a more optimistic estimate, see McCulloch (1977, 610-11). For a more pessimistic
estimate, see Moulton (1915). Our cost figures do not include the $40 million that was paid to obtain the
land, property, and rights of an unsuccessful French effort to build the canal. For discussion of the
estimated cost of the Hoover Dam (taken as the winning bid by the contractor), and the ultimate cost of
the construction to the government, see Stevens (1988, 252). For the figures on the Louisiana
Superdome, see Danielson (1997, 279). Also see Quirk and Fort (1992, 158). The figures for Interstate
Highways pertain to the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1952, and come from Weingroff (1996, 4). For an
extended discussion of the background and development of the New York City project to renovate
Yankee Stadium, as well as of how the cost of the project were underestimated, see Sullivan (2001, chap.
7). For the estimated costs of the “Big Dig” (a highway/bridge/tunnel project in Boston and the “single
largest civil-engineering project in American history”), see The Economist (2004, 28).

39

MAP OF NEW YORK CANALS AND RAILROADS, c. 1858

