                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INCOMPATIBILITY, PRODUCT ATTRIBUTES AND CONSUMER WELFARE:
                           EVIDENCE FROM ATMs

                                          Christopher R. Knittel
                                              Victor Stango

                                          Working Paper 10962
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10962


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




Carrie Jankowski and Kaushik Murali provided excellent research assistance. We thank Andrew Bernard,
Jeff Campbell, Astrid Dick, Ed Green, Tim Hannan, Tom Hubbard, Ariel Pakes, Robert Pindyck and
CatherineWolfram for helpful comments. Seminar participants at Berkeley (Haas), Dartmouth (Tuck), the
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and New York, Penn State Univeristy, UCSD, the 2004 AEA Meetings
and the 2004 NBER Summer Institute also provided constructive comments. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the NET Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2004 by Christopher R. Knittel and Victor Stango. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Incompatibility, Product Attributes and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from ATMs
Christopher R. Knittel and Victor R. Stango
NBER Working Paper No. 10962
December 2004
JEL No. L1, L4, L8

                                           ABSTRACT


Incompatibility in market with network effects reduces consumers' ability to "mix and match"

components offered by different sellers, but can also spur changes in product attributes that might

benefit consumers. In this paper, we estimate the effects of incompatibility on consumers in a classic
hardware/software market: ATM cards and machines. We find that while ATM fees ceteris paribus

reduce the network benefit from other banks' ATMs, a surge in ATM deployment accompanies the

shift to surcharging. This is valuable to consumers and often completely offsets the harm from higher

fees. The results suggest that policy discussions of incompatibility must consider not only its direct

effect on consumers, but also its effect on product attributes.

Christopher R. Knittel
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu

Victor Stango
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
victor.o.stango@dartmouth.edu
                                                                                                                 2


1        Introduction

The last two decades have witnessed a dramatic increase in the importance of markets with network
eﬀects.1 In these markets, the eﬀect of incompatibility between “platforms” sold by separate Þrms is
a central policy concern, and one on which theory is ambiguous. To illustrate, one can easily imag-
ine that incompatibility between competing video game consoles reduces welfare by preventing one
platform’s console owners from using the other’s proprietary game software. However, incompat-
ibility strengthens the incentives to develop such software–because outstanding software attracts
customers from competing platforms. Ultimately, this might beneÞt consumers. It is this tension
that we examine here: Incompatibility reduces consumers’ options for cross-platform matching, but
may also lead platform owners to change their product attributes in ways that improve welfare.2

        Our empirical setting is a classic “hardware/software” industry: Automated Teller Machines
(ATMs) and ATM cards. In this market, network eﬀects arise because consumers can use ATM
cards and ATMs owned by diﬀerent banks. However, banks impose fees for such “mix and match”
transactions, introducing partial incompatibility between cards and competitors’ machines. To
continue the analogy above, with zero ATM fees, consumers may freely match hardware (cards)
and software (ATMs) oﬀered by diﬀerent platforms (banks). Fees reduce or eliminate this ability.
Our data display both cross-sectional and time-series variation in this fee-based measure of incom-
patibility, providing a rare opportunity to observe its eﬀects. We also observe changes in the sizes
of banks’ ATM ßeets. This allows us to estimate not only the direct eﬀect of incompatibility on
cross-platform matching, but also the second eﬀect: shifts in product attributes, as represented by
increased ATM deployment. The key empirical question that we examine is whether on balance
the shift toward incompatibility leaves consumers better or worse oﬀ.

        Our data are well-suited for such an analysis. We conduct our empirical work using ATM-
related data for banks operating in diﬀerent local markets throughout the United States. Our data
cover the period 1994-1999, containing roughly ten thousand bank/county/year observations. Each
observation contains information regarding the bank’s ATMs and ATM fees, as well as the number
of competitors’ ATMs available to customers and their fees. It also contains information regarding
deposit account (ATM card) prices and market shares, as well as characteristics associated with
these accounts. Thus, we possess panel data on prices, quantities and characteristics for both
components of the network good, as well as a measure of incompatibility. Our data also contain a
    1
        See Katz and Shapiro (1994) for a summary of the literature and its key points.
    2
        We focus here on consumer welfare rather than social welfare. Massoud and Bernhardt (2002) and others argue
that while consumers may beneÞt from the investment incentive we sketch here, it may be socially ineﬃcient.
                                                                                                                    3


relatively discrete move toward incompatibility after 1996, when banks began imposing surcharges
on foreign transactions made by non-customers on their ATMs.

       The empirical approach involves estimating a structural model of consumer demand for deposit
accounts (ATM cards) as a function of deposit account prices, ATM fees, ATM density and other
bank characteristics. The model allows us to estimate consumers’ willingness to pay for deposit
accounts, and the inßuence of ATMs on willingness to pay. It also allows us to estimate the indirect
network eﬀect: the relationship between willingness to pay for an account and competitors’ ATM
ßeet size. Finally, we estimate the relationship between competitors’ ATM fees and willingness to
pay for competitors’ ATMs; this captures the eﬀect of incompatibility.

       The estimated parameters from this model provide the basis for our welfare analysis. The Þrst
component of the welfare eﬀect is the partial equilibrium reduction in consumer welfare resulting
from the shift toward incompatibility. Our results suggest that incompatibility ceteris paribus harms
consumers during our sample. We also provide a fuller estimate that incorporates changes in ATM
deployment–both for a given bank’s own ATMs and its competitors’ ATMs. ATM deployment
increases with surcharging, providing beneÞts to customers that in some cases completely oﬀset
the reduction in welfare associated with incompatibility. Roughly stated, the net eﬀects on welfare
are more likely to be positive in urban areas, and more likely to be negative in rural areas. We
also estimate split sample speciÞcations that allow the demand parameters to vary by local market
population density. We Þnd that the network eﬀects associated with ATMs and cards are much
stronger in areas with high population density. This is consistent with the idea that in areas with
high travel costs, ATM access is more valuable to consumers. Using the parameters from the split
samples, we Þnd that welfare changes in low density markets are negative, while welfare changes
in high-density areas average roughly fourteen percent.

       To our knowledge, ours is the Þrst empirical study to examine changes in incompatibility and
product attributes in a market characterized by indirect network eﬀects.3 To date, most research
has examined the value of compatibility across diﬀerent products in markets with direct network
eﬀects.4 It also has focused on instances where compatibility between products remains Þxed over
time, relying on cross-sectional variation in compatibility for identiÞcation.5 While this other work
   3
       An exception is Greenstein (1994), who Þnds that mainframe buyers prefer to upgrade to compatible systems, a
result suggesting that compatibility between past and future hardware is important.
   4
       Gandal (1994, 1995) and Brynjolfsson and Kemerer (1996) Þnd that computer spreadsheets compatible with the
Lotus system commanded higher prices during the early 1990s.
   5
       The analyses in Gandal (1994, 1995) and Brynjolfsson and Kemerer (1996) do not separate within-Þrm from
cross-sectional eﬀects of compatibility. The datasets are panels, but too small to allow the examination of within-Þrm
                                                                                                                      4


is important, most policy discussions of incompatibility involve forcing compatibility within a given
market. Our work is the Þrst to examine not only the within-market (and within-Þrm) eﬀects of
a shift to incompatibility, but also the complementary shifts in product attributes induced by
such a shift. Our work does relate to a developing literature establishing empirical relationships
in markets with indirect network eﬀects, although typically this work examines markets in which
compatibility between diﬀerent systems is Þxed.6 It also complements existing literature examining
ATM markets, although that literature does not focus on incompatibility per se.7



2        ATMs, ATM Cards and ATM Fees

ATMs allow bank customers to perform Þnancial transactions electronically. ATMs initially served
banks’ desires to cut costs by automating tasks performed by bank tellers. While ATMs can in
principle perform more complex transactions such as deposits or loan payments, the most common
transaction is a cash withdrawal.8 Banks locate or deploy ATMs both “on-premise” at branches,
and “oﬀ-premise” at other locations likely to generate signiÞcant transaction volume.9 Independent
Service Operators (ISOs) also deploy ATMs, typically in lower-volume locations such as convenience

variation.
    6
        Gandal, Greenstein and Salant (1999) study the link between operating system values and software availability
in the early days of the microcomputer market. They Þnd evidence supporting the existence of complementary
feedback between hardware and software availability. More recent work by Gandal, Kende and Rob (2002) seeks
to establish a positive feedback link between adoption of Compact Disks (CDs) and CD players. Rysman (2000)
provides evidence supporting the existence of complementary demand relationships in a two-sided platform market
(yellow page directories). More recent work by Shankar and Bayus (2002), Nair, Chintagunta and Dube (2003) and
Ohashi (2003) also applies structural econometric techniques to test for the existence of network eﬀects.
    7
        Hannan et al. (2003) examine surcharging although they do link surcharging to deposit account pricing. Prager
(2001) tests whether small banks lost market share in states that allowed surcharges prior to 1996; this is implicitly a
test of whether incompatibility favored banks with high-quality ATM ßeets, although she does not pose the question
in those terms. Hannan and McDowell (1990) Þnd that markets in which large banks adopted ATMs became more
concentrated during the 1980s, although they do not discuss their Þnding in terms of network economics. Saloner and
Shepard (1995) examine the diﬀusion of ATM machines from 1972-1979 and Þnd that adoption occurred earliest for
Þrms with many branches and deposits, a result they interpret as consistent with the existence of indirect network
eﬀects in demand. Earlier work by Hannan and McDowell (1984a, 1984b) also examines the causes of ATM adoption
but does not test for network eﬀects.
    8
        Dove Consulting (1999, 2002) Þnds that in both 1999 and 2002, roughly eighty percent of ATM transactions were
cash withdrawals. Deposits and inquiries comprise roughly ten percent each.
    9
        Monthly costs of ATMs average over $1000 for high-end machines, and may be as low as $500 for low-end machines
oﬀering fewer features and using cheaper telecommunications. Rental expenses for oﬀ-premise ATM deployment may
add $200/month to this Þgure.
                                                                                                                       5


stores, restaurants and bars.10

       Banks grant consumers access to their ATMs by providing ATM cards with checking (demand
deposit) accounts. The deposit account also carries other services, such as check-writing and
direct deposit for paychecks. Banks are diﬀerentiated both horizontally through geography, and
vertically through service quality. Survey evidence suggests that the most important account
features in determining customer attraction and retention are service quality and ATM/branch
location.11 Customers also may value purchasing other Þnancial services such as loans or brokerage
services from their depository institution; the breadth of these oﬀerings is therefore a source of
both horizontal and vertical diﬀerentiation.

       Customers pay both implicit and explicit prices on deposit accounts. The implicit price is the
opportunity cost of holding cash in a non-interest bearing account, or earning an interest rate
below the risk-free rate if the checking account pays interest. Explicit costs may include a monthly
service charge, fees associated with transactions (such as check-writing), and penalty fees such as
NSF (insuﬃcient funds) fees. Banks often oﬀer customers a menu of options, trading lower explicit
fees or interest payments for higher minimum balances. The menus are usually determined at the
bank level, and identical across all branches for that bank.12 While total account prices for any
one customer may vary in principle depending on their pricing plan and balances, available survey
evidence suggests that these prices are similar for accounts with or without minimum balances,
averaging roughly $144 per year.13

       Consumers typically pay no per-transaction fees for ATM transactions made at their own bank’s
machines. They can also make foreign transactions on other banks’ ATMs, because during the 1980s
most banks joined “shared networks” that allow consumers to use their card at any ATM owned by
a bank in the network. These ATM networks, which are often joint ventures organized by member
banks, provide switching services for each foreign transaction made on a member bank’s ATM by
another member bank’s customer. The networks jointly establish a Þxed subscription fee for each
member bank in the network, a per-transaction switch fee paid by the cardholder’s bank to the
network, and a per-transaction interchange fee paid by the cardholder’s bank to the ATM owner.14
  10
       See Dove Consulting (1999, 2002) for more details.
  11
       See Stavins (1999) and Kiser (2003) for discussions of account characteristics valued by banking customers.
  12
       Radecki (1998) provides evidence in favor of this point.
  13
       See Stavins (1999) for details.
  14
       Data from the Card Industry Directory show that network subscription fees vary substantially, with larger national
networks charging higher fees (as much as $25,000 for membership and $500 monthly). Interchange fees range from
$0.30-$0.60 per transaction during our sample, and switch fees range from $0.02-$0.12. Many networks apply some
sort of volume discount to their pricing.
                                                                                                                    6


By the mid-1990s, shared networks had expanded to the point that an ATM card would function
at nearly any ATM in the country.15

       A foreign transaction may generate a foreign fee paid to the consumer’s home bank, and a
surcharge paid to the owner of the ATM. Foreign fees exist throughout our sample and remain
roughly constant, while surcharges are a more recent phenomenon. Prior to 1996, the major ATM
shared networks (PLUS and Cirrus) prohibited banks from imposing surcharges. The major shared
networks ostensibly prohibited surcharging in an attempt to build consumer acceptance of foreign
transactions. The prohibition on surcharging was challenged by both banks and state legislatures;
banks claimed that surcharging would enable them to deploy ATMs in lower-volume locations,
while states viewed the ban as a potentially illegal vertical restraint. Prior to 1996, sixteen states
overrode the surcharge bans. Furthermore, antitrust actions regarding the surcharge ban were being
considered by the Department of Justice. Facing this pressure, the leading networks eliminated the
ban. From 1997-1999, most banks adopted surcharges, and they are currently nearly universal.
Both foreign fees and surcharges are set at the bank level; it is rare for a bank to set diﬀerent fees
across machines or markets.16

       Table 1 shows summary statistics regarding ATM fees, deployment and transaction volume
during our sample period 1994-1999. The data illustrate that while foreign fees remain roughly
constant throughout our sample period, surcharging becomes much more prevalent after its incep-
tion in 1996.17 Concurrent with the advent of surcharging is an increase in ATM deployment; the
average annual growth rate is under fourteen percent from 1993-1996, and nearly eighteen percent
after 1996. Transaction volume holds steady after the advent of surcharging, after growing rapidly
prior to 1996. This leads to fewer transactions per ATM, a pattern consistent with the notion
that the break-even number of transactions per ATM is much lower if foreign transactions generate
surcharge revenue.18
  15
       Currently it is most common for a bank to subscribe to one of the major national networks, and one or two
regional networks (which have priority in switching transactions relative to the national networks). It is also quite
common for banks to subscribe to the VISA or MasterCard networks, allowing their customers to use their ATM
cards to perform signature-based “oﬄine” debit transactions on those networks.
  16
       Our data from the Card Industry Directory allow banks to list a range of fees. Fewer than ten percent do
so. Additionally the Bank Rate Monitor web site, www.bankrate.com, lists ATM fees by geographical region for
multi-region banks. There is little evidence from this source that banks charge diﬀerent fees on ATMs in diﬀerent
locations.
  17
       These data show that some banks imposed surcharges in 1996; these banks either operated in states that overrode
the surcharge ban, or subscribed to smaller networks that did not adhere to the ban. Unfortunately, we do not possess
data in our primary sample on surcharging prior to 1997.
  18
       This diﬀerence is dramatic. A study by Dove Consulting estimates the monthly accounting costs of maintaining
                                                                                                                   7


2.1       The Network Economics of ATMs and ATM Cards

In the language of the literature on network economics, ATM cards and machines are a “hard-
ware/software” system.19 Consumers purchase “hardware” in the form of an ATM card by choosing
a bank and establishing an account. ATMs are “software” that allow consumers to assemble a com-
posite good–a Þnancial transaction that is usually a cash withdrawal. This “mix and match” con-
struction of goods is a common feature of emerging technologies, and is analogous to that involved
in consumers’ matching of computer hardware and software, operating systems and spreadsheets,
diﬀerent components of audio/visual systems, and a variety of other products.20 In ATM markets,
as in many of the aforementioned examples, Þrms produce both hardware and software, and oﬀer
their customers bundles containing both. Thus, a customer establishing an account receives both
an ATM card and free access to that bank’s ATMs. Our focus in this paper is on estimating
consumer welfare. We therefore are concerned primarily with the implications of network eﬀects
for consumers’ willingness to pay for components of the system–which in our case is the hard-
ware/software bundle oﬀered by banks. Our discussion takes Þrms’ strategic behavior regarding
pricing, incompatibility and quality as given, and focuses on the eﬀects of changes in these factors
on consumers. This parallels our empirical approach, which uses variation in incompatibility to
estimate changes in consumer welfare.

       We would expect a consumer’s willingness to pay for an account and associated ATM services
to depend on the characteristics of the account–service quality, for example, as well as any comple-
mentary services oﬀered with the account. One (internalized) indirect network eﬀect in the bundle
is that willingness to pay should also depend on the bank’s own ATMs. Consumer incur travel
costs to use ATMs; therefore, a greater number of local ATMs reduces travel costs and makes an
account more attractive. It also means that if consumers value accounts based on which bank has
the ATMs closest to “home,” more consumers will be closer to an ATM of that bank. The second
indirect network eﬀect on willingness to pay is that competitors’ ATMs also provide beneÞts, be-

an ATM at roughly $1200. If interchange ($0.40 per transaction) is the only source of ATM revenue, the break-even
number of foreign transactions per month is 3000. If interchange plus surcharging yields revenue of $1.90 per foreign
transaction, the break-even monthly number of foreign transactions falls to 631.
  19
       See Katz and Shapiro (1994) for a survey of this literature. Economides and Salop (1992) present a theoretical
model of hardware/software competition using ATMs as an example.
  20
       There has been considerable theoretical work examining hardware/software markets. Chou and Shy (1990),
Church and Gandal (1996), and Matutes and Regibeau (1988) consider cases where hardware and software are
sold by integrated Þrms. Economides and Salop (1992) provide a comparison of market structures characterized by
diﬀerent forms of integration and ownership among component (hardware and software) producers. Matutes and
Regibeau (1992) examine a case where Þrms produce both hardware and software, and may bundle them together.
                                                                                                                  8


cause ATMs operate on shared networks. While consumers may prefer to use an ATM operated
by their own bank (even absent fees, they can perform a wider array of transactions on their own
ATMs), they also should value occasional access to other banks’ ATMs.


2.2       Incompatibility and its Eﬀects

In hardware/software markets, the compatibility issue revolves around whether Firm A’s hardware
will function with Firm B’s software, and vice versa. ATM fees create incompatibility by increasing
the cost of access to other banks’ ATMs. While surcharges do not render competitors’ ATMs fully
incompatible, they impose an incremental expense for foreign ATM use. In the language of network
economics, this expense is most analogous to an “adaptor fee” paid by software users to achieve
compatibility with potentially incompatible hardware.21

       Generally speaking, there are three eﬀects of incompatibility in such markets. The most general
eﬀect is that incompatibility reduces consumers’ willingness to pay, ceteris paribus. The strength of
this eﬀect depends on the degree to which consumers want to mix and match hardware and software
from diﬀerent sellers. If demand for such transactions is zero, incompatibility leaves consumers
unaﬀected, but if demand for mix and match transactions is high, incompatibility reduces aggregate
willingness to pay. These eﬀects may vary by Þrm; Þrms with high demand for mix and match
transactions will experience a larger reduction in willingness to pay. In our data, this eﬀect should
weaken the relationship between willingness to pay for an ATM card (account) and the number of
accessible competitors’ ATMs.

       A second eﬀect of incompatibility operates through product attributes. With incompatibility,
consumers’ hardware and software purchases become more tightly linked. Thus, changes in software
attributes will have a stronger eﬀect on hardware purchases, increasing the marginal beneÞt of
such investment.22 Within our context the argument would be that incompatibility increases Þrms’
incentives to invest in their ATM ßeets.23 High surcharges, the argument goes, induce customers
with high demand for foreign transactions to migrate from banks with small ATM ßeets to banks
  21
       See Farrell and Saloner (1992) for a model of adaptors in a hardware/software market.
  22
       But for the papers by Massoud and Bernhardt (2002a, 2002b), this notion has received little formal attention.
Katz and Shapiro (1994) mention the possibility that incompatibility spurs investment, but only in passing. The
classic papers on “mix and match” competition such as Matutes and Regibeau (1988) and Economides (1989) assume
that product characteristics are Þxed. Einhorn (1992) models the eﬀect of quality diﬀerences across component
producers, but assumes that such diﬀerences are exogenous.
  23
       These incentives are the primary focus of the theoretical models of ATM pricing and deployment in Massoud and
Bernhardt (2002a, 2002b).
                                                                                                                 9


with large ATM ßeets. This is analogous to arguments regarding incompatibility in the network
literature; incompatibility can shift competitive advantage in one market (hardware) by tying
consumers’ purchases to another market (software). Anecdotally this appears to be the case; the
data from Table 1 reveals that within our sample, the annual growth rate of ATMs increased from
roughly fourteen percent to over eighteen percent after 1996.

         A third eﬀect of incompatibility is that it may change the intensity of competition. Here again
theory is ambiguous; models of competition in mix and match markets Þnd that incompatibility may
either intensify or weaken price competition.24 Despite this theoretical ambiguity, our intuition tells
us that in ATM markets the advent of surcharging would probably weaken price competition.25
Without ATM fees of any sort, ATM ßeet size is not a source of horizontal or vertical product
diﬀerentiation. As fees rise, the degree of diﬀerentiation also rises, which we would expect to
weaken business-stealing opportunities. Our empirical work below should control for such shifts in
competitive behavior, although we can not identify the size of their eﬀects.

         To summarize, a full analysis of the eﬀects of incompatibility should estimate not only the
reduction in utility stemming directly from incompatibility, but also any changes in product at-
tributes and price competition associated with the shift toward incompatibility. From a theoretical
perspective it is not clear which eﬀect will dominate. Our approach below is to focus on the direct
eﬀects of incompatibility as it operates through ATM fees. We also estimate how the direct reduc-
tion in welfare from incompatibility is oﬀset by changes in product attributes. While we do not
estimate the eﬀects of changes in price competition, we discuss its impact later in the paper.



3         Modeling

In order to measure the eﬀects of incompatibility on consumer welfare, we estimate a structural
demand system for deposit account services and ATM usage. This follows techniques developed
by Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995), building on Lancaster (1966). The essence of the empirical
approach is to estimate the relationship between consumer utility and product characteristics;
speciÞc products are modeled as bundles of characteristics. Under speciÞc assumptions regarding
the functional form of preferences on observed and unobserved characteristics, there is a structural
    24
         The discussion in Katz and Shapiro (1994) mentions instances in which compatibility might intensify price
competition. Matutes and Regibeau (1988), Economides (1989) and Einhorn (1992) all Þnd that compatibility
relaxes price competition. Katz and Shapiro (1986) Þnd that in a dynamic setting, compatibility has diﬀerent eﬀects
on competition at diﬀerent points in the product life cycle.
    25
         We Þnd evidence consistent with this view in Knittel and Stango (2004).
                                                                                                                    10


relationship between aggregate Þrm-level market shares and the parameters of consumers’ indirect
utility functions. This approach is more parsimonious than traditional demand system estimation,
as it reduces the large matrix of own- and cross-price elasticities to a smaller matrix of coeﬃcients
associated with product characteristics.


3.1       Consumer Behavior

In our econometric framework, the fundamental consumer choice is the establishment of a demand
deposit (checking) account relationship with a bank. Consumers choose from the set of banks
within their county in order to maximize indirect utility.26 Consumer i’s utility for bank j in
county k in year t is a function of the price for a deposit account pjt , bank j’s observable deposit
account characteristics xjkt in county k in year t, the access to ATMs Njkt provided by obtaining
an account, the bank’s unobservable characteristics ξj , county level unobservable characteristics
ξk , bank/county unobservable characteristics ξjk , unobservable year-speciÞc characteristics ξt and
a mean zero term )ijkt capturing unobserved consumer heterogeneity.27 This yields the following
speciÞcation:


                                  uikjt = αi pjt + xjkt βi + Njkt + ξjk + ξt + )ikjt                               (1)

While in practice the vector of marginal utility coeﬃcients (αi , βi ) varies by consumer, in this
instance we restrict the coeﬃcients to be constant across consumers. By omitting income from
the utility function, we are assuming that there are negligible income eﬀects when establishing a
deposit account. Given the low share of consumer income devoted to purchasing checking account
services, we feel this is reasonable. The assumption is also a function of our data, which do not
lend themselves to such an analysis.28
  26
       Using counties to approximate local markets is common in the banking literature. Some recent work (e.g., Radecki
[1998]) argues that geographic banking markets have expanded. However, we feel that while this may be true for
products such as loans, it is much less likely to be true for ATM-related services. In fact, we use the county as the
market even in MSAs, rather than treating the MSA as the market. In practice this has no eﬀect on our results.
  27
       While in principle there are separate bank eﬀects ξj , county eﬀects ξk and bank/county eﬀects ξjk , in practice
we nest them within ξjk .
  28
       Our data are measured at the bank/county/year level, but income data are only available at the state/year level.
The BEA publishes county/year income Þgures, but these are interpolated between decennial Census Þgures rather
than actually observed.
                                                                                                                    11


3.2       Deriving the Estimating Equation

As shown by Berry (1994), if )ikjt follows an extreme value distribution one can integrate the
individual utilities to obtain an estimating equation that provides a structural relationship between
the utility parameters and market shares for each Þrm. This yields the following equation:


                               ln (sjkt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + Njkt + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt                                (2)

       This is a useful transformation, because while we do not observe individual consumer choices, we
do possess bank/county/year observations on market share, prices and other explanatory variables
of interest. Note that the consumer-speciÞc heterogeneity has been “integrated out” here, and we
are left with the bank/county/year speciÞc term ∆ξjkt capturing unobserved quality.

       While econometrically tractable, the speciÞcation of utility that leads to this estimating equation
is quite restrictive.29 A signiÞcant limitation is that a proportional increase in all bank prices will
not reduce demand for banking services. A common way to guarantee that banks lose market
share when prices rise involves choosing an “outside good” to which consumers can switch given an
increase in prices by all banks. In our case, we not only observe deposits for banks in each county,
but also observe deposits for credit unions; these institutions are imperfect substitutes for banks
and are the product to which consumers might conceivably switch given higher bank prices.30 We
therefore treat banks as the “inside good” and credit unions as the outside good.

       Another way of enriching the model is to assume that consumers make a two-stage decision, in
which they Þrst decide whether to establish an account at a credit union or at a bank. Given that
choice, they make their second stage decision regarding which institution to establish an account.
This allows for more intuitive substitution patterns, in which a consumer switching away from a
bank is more likely to switch to another bank than to a credit union. In a manner similar to that
outlined above, one can begin with a general speciÞcation in which consumers have heterogeneous
preferences for remaining in each “nest.” These are also integrated out under speciÞc assumptions
regarding the form of the heterogeneity. As Berry (1994) shows, this leads to the following nested
logit estimating equation:

                                                                          ³    ´
                 ln (sjkt ) − ln (sokt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + Njkt + σt ln s̄j|g + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt                   (3)

  29
       See Nevo (2000) for a discussion of these issues, and some improvements to the model we use here.
  30
       To be more precise, we treat banks and thrift institutions as the inside good. We have also estimated the model
treating banks as the inside good, and thrifts/credit unions as the outside good. This has little eﬀect on the results.
                                                                                                                       12


       The term sokt is the market share of the outside good, while s̄j|g is bank j’s share of the inside
good. The term σt represents the correlation between consumer choices within each nest; higher
values of σt reßect a higher likelihood that a consumer switching away from one bank will choose
another bank rather than a credit union. Letting the term vary by year allows the substitutability
between the inside and outside goods to change over time.


3.3       Measuring Market Share

We use data from the FDIC Summary of Deposits database to obtain the total deposits held by each
bank in each county of operation during our sample period.31 Similar data from the National Credit
Union Administration (NCUA) yield deposit data for credit unions, which we use to calculate the
share of the outside good.32 In our sample, the share of deposits held by the inside good falls slightly
over time as credit unions gain market share. Anecdotally, it also appears that the substitutability
of credit unions and banks grows during our sample as well, because credit unions have expanded
their service oﬀerings to more closely match those of banks.

       One issue associated with our dependent variable is that it is based on total deposits held by
each bank. Total deposits include not only checking (deposit) account balances, but also savings
and other time deposits such as money markets and CDs. A second issue is that while our model is
a discrete choice model, we are proxying the number of accounts with the level of deposits. Thus,
total deposit market share may measure checking deposit market share with error. In principle,
this can present a problem in our non-linear framework, even if the measurement error is of a form
that is innocuous in more standard linear regressions.33 In practice, however, there is little evidence
that this error is signiÞcant.34


3.4       Deposit Account Prices

We take pricing data on deposit accounts from the FDIC Reports of Condition and Income, or Call
Reports. These data are available at the card issuer (bank) level. The variable listed in the Call
Reports shows annual income from fees associated with deposit accounts. The primary component
  31
       The SOD also contains deposit data for thrifts. While we use thrift deposit data in calculating market shares,
we can not include observations for thrifts in our sample because we do not possess prices or other data for them.
  32
       The mean outside good share is roughly twelve percent in our sample; the interquartile range is [0.01, 0.16].
  33
       See Berry (1994) for a discussion.
  34
       At the bank level, the correlation between total deposits and demand deposits is 0.98.
                                                                                                                       13


of such revenue is income from monthly service charges on transaction accounts.35 It also includes
foreign fee income paid by its customers stemming from the use of other issuers’ ATMs, and a
variety of other fees such as NSF fees for bounced checks and other penalty fees on accounts. To
calculate a normalized price for each bank, we divide this value by the end-of-year dollar value of
deposits held in transaction accounts.36 This price measure therefore represents the average revenue
per dollar (per year) of transaction account balances. While it undoubtedly averages over the many
diﬀerent fees and fee schedules oﬀered by each bank, this price measure is highly correlated with
annual price measures using Þner data.37

       This measure omits the additional opportunity cost of holding deposits in checking. While this
opportunity cost surely varies across customers, Radecki (1999) suggests using the federal funds
rate as an approximation of forgone interest income for demand deposit balances. We therefore
add the average annual fed funds rate to each bank’s price.38 While this does not aﬀect any of our
coeﬃcient estimates because they rely on within-bank variation in prices over time, it does provide
a useful benchmark for comparing our price measure to others. As a point of comparison, we Þnd
that our raw price measure averages roughly $0.01 per dollar of transaction balances, while the
cost of funds averages roughly $0.05. The typical checking account has average balances of $1600,
implying an annual cost of $96. This Þgure is in line with other estimates in the banking literature.

       The discussion above should make clear that our price variable is subject to measurement error.
However, if this measurement error is fairly constant over time it is not an issue because we use
within-bank variation to estimate the model.39 Additionally, our instrumental variable procedure
  35
       This variable also includes income on other types of deposit accounts that do not carry ATM card access,
introducing measurement error. However, these other types of accounts (such as savings) typically have lower fees
than checking accounts. We examine within-bank variation in these fees, meaning that our results below will only be
biased if within-bank variation in other fees is correlated with our variables of interest (e.g., ATMs). Most importantly,
we use an instrumental variable approach that controls for the measurement error in price, as well as the endogeneity
of price.
  36
       We have also used an alternative measure that divides deposit fee income by the dollar value of deposits. This is
the variable used by Dick (2002) in her study of consumer welfare in deposit markets. Our results using this measure
are nearly identical to those shown below.
  37
       Stavins (1999) regresses the fee variable used in our price on actual fee data from surveys (such as minimum
balance requirements, monthly fees etc.) and Þnds that the explanatory variables explain over eighty percent of the
variation in fee income.
  38
       We would expect there to be considerable consumer-level heterogeneity in the opportunity cost of funds. Con-
sumers carrying credit card balances, for example, would have high costs. This might aﬀect the bank-level cost of
funds if consumers are not uniformly allocated across banks. However, our instruments (in particular those measuring
the riskiness of a bank’s customer base) should capture at least some of this variation.
  39
       Large banks tend to pay lower interest than smaller banks. This may refect quality diﬀerences or market power.
                                                                                                                    14


outlined below should account for measurement error that varies over time. Finally, in other work
we estimate a series of hedonic relationships between account prices and characteristics using a
wide variety of price measures (such as revenue per account rather than per dollar of balances),
and also controlling for bank-level balances per account and other possible inßuences on measured
prices.40 There is little diﬀerence in the empirical results using these diﬀerent measures.


3.5       Specifying the BeneÞts of ATMs

The access to ATMs associated with an account, Njkt , will depend on bank j’s ATM deployment
in the local market. It will also depend on the network eﬀects conferred by other banks’ ATMs,
and the compatibility of those other ATMs. We model this access using the following speciÞcation:

                   Njkt = b1 ln(OwnAT M sjkt ) + [b2 + b3 E (sc−j,kt )] ln(CompetAT Msjkt )                        (4)


       The Þrst parameter, b1 , measures the value of bank j’s ATMs in the local market.41 We measure
the ATM variable in logs to capture the declining marginal value of ATMs; the incremental eﬀect of
an additional ATM falls with more ATMs in the market, growing negligible as the market becomes
saturated.

       The second term estimates the value of the indirect network eﬀect associated with the presence
of competitors’ ATMs. This value is represented by the term [b2 + b3 E (sc−j,kt )], where b2 repre-
sents the value of a competitors’ ATM with full compatibility (zero surcharges), and b3 represents
the reduction in value from competitors’ ATMs caused by surcharges. This gives the following
speciÞcation:



                     ln (sjkt ) − ln (sokt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + b1 ln(OwnAT Msjkt )                                 (5)

If savings rate diﬀerences stem from market power and consumers face switching costs, we will slightly overstate the
price diﬀerence between large and small banks using our fee income variable.
  Another issue to consider the sorting of diﬀerent customer types (e.g., those with high and low balances per account)
across diﬀerent banks. More importantly, it does not allow changes in such sorting after the advent of surcharges.
While such a shift is certainly possible, we have found no evidence that it occurred; we have examined movements in
customer base data such as balances per account following 1996, and found no signiÞcant changes.
  40
       See Knittel and Stango (2004) for details.
  41
       One might imagine that a density measure such as ln(ATMs per square mile) might be appropriate. Our deÞnition
is equivalent with Þxed county eﬀects and our log speciÞcation, because the square mileage of counties does not change
over time.
                                                                                                   15


                                         + [b2 + b3 E (sc−j,kt )] ln(CompetAT Msjkt )
                                                ³    ´
                                         +σt ln s̄j|g + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt


   One methodological issue associated with this speciÞcation is that it includes the impact of
foreign fees only in the price term pjt . While in one sense foreign fees are a part of the consumer’s
expected costs associated with an account, it is also true that foreign fees create incompatibil-
ity. While we can not separate the share of pjt driven by foreign fee revenue, we do estimate
speciÞcations that allow a bank’s foreign fees fjt to aﬀect the value of competitors’ ATMs:

            ln (sjkt ) − ln (sokt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + b1 ln(OwnAT Msjkt )                         (6)
                                     + [b2 + b3 (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))] ln(CompetAT Msjkt )
                                            ³    ´
                                     +σt ln s̄j|g + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt


   Another issue is that while we only observe surcharges in 1997 and beyond, some banks did
begin to surcharge prior to that point because they operated in a state that had overridden the
ban. We do know which states overrode the ban, allowing us to estimate a speciÞcation using a
simple dummy variable to measure the transition to surcharging:

ln (sjkt ) − ln (sokt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + b1 ln(OwnAT Msjkt )                                        (7)
                         + [b2 + b3 (fjt + E (sc−j,kt )) + b4 I (k ∈ St & t < 1996)] ln(CompetAT Msjkt )
                               ³    ´
                         +σt ln s̄j|g + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt

where St is the set of state that overrode the surcharge bank. Thus, b4 represents the reduction in
the indirect network eﬀect associated with competitors’ ATMs in the states that overrode the ban
prior to 1996, while b3 measures the eﬀect of incompatibility after 1996. In the main results section
below, we report estimates from equation (7). We also report results using the other measures
of incompatibility in appendix Table A3; the results are qualitatively very similar, although the
coeﬃcient on incompatibility is estimated more precisely in our preferred speciÞcation.


3.6   ATM-Related Data and Measurement Issues

While we possess data on market shares and deposits for the population of banks, we only observe
data on ATM fees and deployment for the 300 largest ATM card issuers. While these issuers
collectively hold a large share of the total market (for cards or machines), we do not observe such
data for smaller issuers. The primary eﬀect of this limitation is to reduce our useable sample size,
                                                                                                                      16


as we only include in our estimating sample those observations for which we observe both ATM
fees and ATM deployment.

       Another issue with our ATM data is that while we observe each issuer’s total ATM deployment,
we do not observe the allocation of that deployment across counties. This is not a problem for single-
county issuers, which represent twenty-Þve percent of our observations. For the other issuers, we
assume that banks allocate ATMs across counties in proportion to their branches (which we observe
without error from the Summary of Deposits). That is, we use:


                                                          Branchjkt
                                    OwnAT M s∗jkt =                 OwnAT Msjt                                       (8)
                                                          Branchjt

       This introduces error into our measure of OwnAT Msjkt . To the extent that the measurement
error is constant for a particular bank/county over time, our Þxed eﬀects will control for it. How-
ever, it is possible that there is time-varying bank/county measurement error. As is well-known,
measurement error in an independent variable leads to attenuation bias, bringing the absolute value
of the estimated coeﬃcients closer to zero.42 A number of methods for correcting attenuation bias
exist.43 Below we discuss our method and some robustness checks of that method.

       Competitors’ ATMs also are measured with error, because we do not observe ATM deployment
for every bank in each county.44 We rely on the information we do have regarding competitors’
branches to estimate competitors’ ATMs, using a regression-based method. We have experimented
with several estimation methods, all of which yield similar results, in part because the ATM de-
ployment of smaller issuers is fairly easy to predict; almost all smaller issuers deploy roughly one
ATM per branch, with deployment growing slightly over time.45 In the results shown here, we
use a regression-based imputation method that uses data from our observed issuers to Þt ATM
  42
       This result pertains to the univariate case. In a multivariate setting, correlation among (mismeasured) X’s can
lead measurement error bias to be toward or away from zero.
  43
       See Fuller (1987) for an exposition of the problem and comprehensive treatment of the literature up to that point.
One line of research proposes techniques when the “reliability ratio” or some other independently available index of
the degree of error is available; see Fuller (1987) for examples and solutions. In the absence of such information,
Griliches and Hausman (1986) and Biorn (2002) propose instrumental variable techniques appropriate for use with
panel data, although their techniques involve diﬀerencing which would substantially reduce our sample size. Lewbel
(1997) and Dagenais and Dagenais (1997) suggests using higher moments of the observed variables as instruments;
we discuss and apply this technique below.
  44
       On average, the banks for which we observe ATM-related data collectively hold forty-seven percent of deposits
in the county. Their share of ATMs in that county is almost surely higher.
  45
       For more detail on diﬀerences between large and small issuers, see Knittel and Stango (2004).
                                                                                                                         17


deployment for other issuers in local markets.46

       We also face measurement error in constructing a measure of competitors’ ATM fees. We
use a regression-based method for imputing expected competitors’ surcharges.47 Again, we have
experimented with alternative methods of estimating competitors’ fees, with little eﬀect on the
results. The shift to surcharging is fairly discrete, meaning that small diﬀerences in a prediction
of competitors’ surcharges are swamped by the change occurring between 1996 and 1998. In fact,
using a simple dummy variable indicating whether competitors can impose surcharges yields results
very similar to those shown below.

       We are left with three independent variables that may be measured with error, meaning that
our estimating equation is:



ln (sjkt ) − ln (sokt ) = αpjt + xjkt β + b1 ln(OwnAT Ms∗jkt )                                                                 (9)
                                   h         ³          ³        ´´                                  i
                                + b2 + b3 fjt + E sc∗−j,kt            + b4 I (k ∈ St & t < 1996) ln(CompetAT Ms∗jkt )
                                        ³     ´
                                +σt ln s̄j|g + ξjk + ξt + ∆ξjkt


       We address the measurement error issue by implementing the procedure in Lewbel (1997). This
involves using higher moments of the observable data (the xjkt ’s) as instruments for the variables
that are measured with error.48 In the results below, we present both estimates that use this EIV-
IV (Error-in-Variables Instrumental Variable) correction and estimates that do not, and discuss
  46
       In order to estimate the number of ATMs deployed by other institutions, we estimate a within-sample regression
of ATMs on branches, year dummies and year/branch interaction terms. To control for the fact that larger institutions
have a greater ratio of ATMs to branches, we allow issuer size (in deposits) to aﬀect branches per ATM. We also
allow branches per ATM to vary based on whether the issuer is located in an MSA or non-MSA county. We then
construct Þtted values of ATMs for each institution for which we do not have ATM data. We have experimented
with a number of alternative speciÞcations of this model, with essentially no change in the results.
  47
       We Þrst estimate the within-sample probability of surcharging and surcharge level (conditional on surcharging)
based on issuer size, year eﬀects, MSA dummies and interactions between these variables. We then predict the
expected surcharge (probability of surcharging multipled by expected surcharge) for each competing bank. The
expected competitors’ surcharge is an average of these and observed surcharges over all competitors in the local
market, weighted by each competitors’ share of branches in the local market.
  48
       These instruments will provide consistent estimates of the true parameters if the joint distribution of the variables
measured with error is not multivariate normal–in particular, if the distribution is skewed. We report the results
that use moments of branch density as instruments. Given that we use branch density to imput county-level ATM
density, there may be some concern that branch density will be correlated with the measurement error. Omitting
these instruments does not qualitatively change the results.
                                                                                                                18


their diﬀerences. We also conduct some robustness checks using diﬀerent imputation methods and
split samples, which we discuss in the “Alternative SpeciÞcations” section below and present in the
Appendices.

       The speciÞcation above omits two variables. First, it omits growth in ATMs deployed by ISOs.
Unfortunately we possess no regional data on deployment by these ATM owners. Aggregate data
suggest, however, that between 1996 and 1999 the share of ATMs deployed by ISOs grew from
nearly zero to roughly ten percent. This implies that our estimates of post-1996 ATM growth are
too low; this becomes an issue in Section 5 when we estimate the relationship between surcharging
and ATM deployment. We discuss the implications of this when we present the empirical results.

       A second limitation is that our speciÞcation does not include data regarding the availability of
point-of-sale (POS) terminals. These terminals allow consumers to use their debit (ATM) cards
to make purchases at retail locations such as supermarkets. Their availability has countervailing
inßuences in our speciÞcation. First, the availability of POS terminals would certainly increase
consumers’ willingness to pay for debit cards. On the other hand, POS terminals are a substitute
for ATMs because they oﬀer consumers an alternative means of payment. The eﬀects of omitting
POS terminals would depend on the correlation between the within-Þrm (log) change in POS
availability and our variables of interest.

       While we do not possess data on POS availability, we do observe POS transactions per card for
our set of issuers. In unreported results, we have estimated models that include the level or log of
POS transactions per card, as well as interaction terms between POS usage and the ATM-related
variables. The results are not statistically signiÞcant. Moreover, including the POS variables does
not aﬀect the sign or signiÞcance of the ATM-related variables.


3.6.1       Endogeneity

The unobserved portion of quality that remains in the error term, ∆ξjkt , is likely to be correlated
with the price variable pjt and the within-nest market share s̄j|g . Increases in unobserved quality
will likely be correlated with both increases in price and within group share. We account for this
following Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) by using costs and competitors’
characteristics as instruments.49
  49
       Our cost measure is the bank’s average loan loss rate over the previous year. These loan losses aﬀect banks’
net loan loss margins, which in turn aﬀect equilibrium deposit account prices because banks use deposit account
funds as the source of loans. Thus, exogenous variation in loan losses is plausibly correlated with deposit account
prices, but uncorrelated with unobserved deposit account quality. The competitors’ characteristics include oﬀerings
                                                                                                          19


3.7       Variables and Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 lists yearly trends for the primary variables used in our analysis. In addition to the
variables discussed above, we also deÞne a set of bank-level variables capturing other characteristics
associated with deposit accounts, for inclusion in the xjkt vector. These variables follow closely the
set used in other structural demand studies in banking.50 We use county-level branches to measure
convenience of access to non-ATM related services. We use employees per branch and salaries per
employee to capture service quality. We measure the number of counties in which a bank operates,
in order to allow willingness to pay to depend on the geographic breadth of a bank’s operations. The
average number of counties that a bank has branches in increases dramatically over the sample.
This is the result of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Eﬃciency Act of 1994
that relaxed interstate branching restrictions. Finally, we deÞne two dummy variables indicating
whether the bank oﬀers complementary services: money market accounts, and brokerage services.
We would expect that increases in any of these variables would increase consumers’ willingness to
pay for accounts.

       While we do not present the results here, in related work we examine our summary data in
more detail in order to highlight the variation in our data that drives identiÞcation.51 In that
work we observe two general trends. First, much of the within-Þrm increases in ATM density
(and competitors’ ATMs) appear to be accompanied by increased prices on deposit accounts. This
pattern is in fact suggested by the data in Table 2 as well. Furthermore, we observe that the
greatest changes in behavior occur for (a) large rather than small banks, and (b) urban rather than
rural banks. It appears that the post-1996 increase in ATM deployment and any associated increase
in deposit prices are concentrated primarily among large urban banks. In fact, among small urban
banks ATM deployment stays essentially ßat, while deposit prices actually fall. There is relatively
minor variation in foreign fees or competitors’ surcharges across these categories, although larger
banks are more likely to impose surcharges themselves (thereby increasing competitors’ surcharges
for all other banks in the market). Interestingly, during all of these changes within-Þrm market
shares are relatively stable, with the exception of small urban banks, who appear to lose some
ground relative to large urban banks.52

of brokerage services and money market accounts, which will vary by bank/county/year. This implicitly assumes
that competitors’ characteristics are exogenous from any one bank’s perspective.
  50
       Dick (2002) is the Þrst work to employ many of these variables.
  51
       See Knittel and Stango (2004) for details.
  52
       Average market share falls in Table II above, but primarily due to sample composition.
                                                                                                                      20


4         Results

Table 3 reports the results from three speciÞcations estimating equation (7).53 The Þrst speciÞ-
cation uses OLS and ignores the endogeneity of prices and within-nest market share. The second
speciÞcation instruments for prices and within-nest market share. The third speciÞcation imple-
ments the Error-in-Variables Instrumental Variable (EIV-IV) speciÞcation.

         Patterns across the speciÞcations seem sensible. The price coeﬃcient grows more negative
when we move to the IV speciÞcations. The coeﬃcients on the variables measured with error
change signiÞcantly moving from the IV to EIV-IV speciÞcations, and for the most part in an
intuitive way. We expect that the competitors’ ATMs and competitors’ surcharges variables are
measured with relatively more error than own ATMs; indeed, these coeﬃcients change the most,
and the EIV-IV estimates are farther away from zero.

         Most of the coeﬃcients on the xjkt follow an intuitive pattern. Utility for deposit accounts
increases with the number of branches, employees per branch, salary per employee and number
of counties in which a bank operates. The dummy variables indicating complementary service
oﬀerings are not statistically signiÞcant, although in most speciÞcations the coeﬃcients are of the
expected signs.

         The coeﬃcient associated with price represents the marginal utility of income, and allows us
to interpret the other coeﬃcients.54 It also allows us to calculate the Þrm-level price elasticity of
demand; we show summary data regarding these elasticity estimates in Table A4. The estimates
are generally quite low, lying near one for most banks. One possible explanation for this is the
signiÞcant anecdotal evidence that banks use checking account prices as loss leaders, in order to
engage in cross-marketing for loan and other Þnancial service products.

         In order to clarify the economic interpretation of our results regarding the strength of network
eﬀects, we discuss them here in terms of price changes that would leave consumers indiﬀerent to
a given change in ATMs or incompatibility. Within this context we Þnd that the indirect network
eﬀect between a bank’s own ATM density and willingness to pay is strong; in exchange for a Þfty
    53
         These results are nearly identical to those from the speciÞcations in equations 5 and 6. This is not surprising;
most of the within-Þrm variation in fjt + E (sc−j,kt ) stems from variation in E (sc−j,kt ), as Þrms do not change their
foreign fees vey much. Similarly, most of the variation in E (sc−j,kt ) is fairly discrete and occurs in 1997 as Þrms
initially adopt surcharging.
    54
         Because our price variable is measured as dollars per dollar deposited, measuring the marginal utility of income
requires an assumption regarding account balances. We use the average account balance during our data because we
do not have data regarding the distribution of deposits.
                                                                                                             21


percent increase in own ATMs, the average consumer is willing to pay deposit account prices that
are roughly seven percent higher. The eﬀect of competitors’ ATMs (absent fees) is also economically
signiÞcant; for a similar Þfty percent increase in competitors’ ATMs the mean consumer would pay
deposit fees nearly thirteen percent higher.55

         We also Þnd signiÞcant eﬀects of incompatibility. As the costs associated with using foreign
ATMs increase, the value associated with competitors’ ATMs falls. At the typical foreign cost
of $3.00, a proportional increase in competitors’ ATMs is worth three-quarters as much as when
these costs are zero. At a combined (foreign plus surcharge) cost of twelve dollars, the typical
customer derives no value at all from competitors’ ATMs–meaning that this level of incompatibility
eliminates the indirect network eﬀect.



5         Surcharging and Consumer Welfare

The parameter estimates from the structural model allow us to estimate the welfare eﬀects of incom-
patibility. One component of the welfare change is the reduced value of competitors’ ATMs as they
become less compatible with customers’ ATM cards. The other is the shift in product attributes
following 1996–in particular, any increase in ATM deployment associated with the shift to incom-
patibility. Attempting to quantify the net eﬀect of these changes requires not only the parameter
estimates from the structural model, but an estimate of how ATM deployment changed after 1996.
Given that ATM deployment was growing even before 1996, we estimate the shift in the growth rate
after 1996 in order to avoid attributing all post-1996 deployment to surcharging. For each ATM re-
                    h                                              ³        ´                           ³          ´i
lated variable ln(OwnAT M s∗jkt ), ln(CompetAT Ms∗jkt ), E sc∗−j,kt ln(CompetAT Ms∗jkt ), E sc∗−j,kt
we estimate:


                    yjkt = α0 + α1 t + α2 I (yr = 97) + α3 I (yr = 98) + α4 I (yr = 99) + εjkt              (10)

The parameter α1 is the pre-1997 annual percentage change in the variable of interest, while α2 ,
α3 and α4 are the cumulative changes in this growth for 1997, 1998 and 1999. Given our log-
linear speciÞcation, these are conservative estimates; they assume that our variables of interest are
    55
         It may seem odd that an equal percentage increase in competitors’ ATMs would be worth more than in own
ATMs–but the base level of competitors’ ATMs is much higher, meaning that it is a signiÞcantly larger increase
in the total number of ATMs. Given the parameter estimates, consumers are always willing to pay more for an
additional own rather than competitors’ machine.
                                                                                                                     22


growing exponentially prior to 1997, and estimate shifts beyond such exponential growth.56 We
estimate three variations of equation (10). The Þrst is a Þxed eﬀect regression at the bank/county
level. Table 4 reports these results. For OwnAT Ms∗jkt , the increase in the detrended increase in
ATM deployment is 7 percent in 1999; for CompetAT Ms∗jkt the increase is 12 percent. The level
        ³        ´
of E sc∗−j,kt ln(CompetAT Ms∗jkt ) increases by 4.6.

       In the second speciÞcation, we allow growth rates to vary by state by estimating equation (10)
for each state in our sample, pooling the bank/county observations. While this adds noise to our
detrended growth rates, it allows for state level variation in the growth rates. Finally, we estimate
equation (10) at the county level. The means of the state- and county-level estimates are similar
to the aggregate measure reported in Table 4.

       In Table 5, we use the parameters from Table 3 and our estimates of the increase in ATM
deployment to calculate the change in consumer welfare over the period 1994-1999. Because we
have estimates of the marginal utility associated with both ATMs and incompatibility, we can
use these parameters and estimates of changes in the ATM/incompatibility variables to calculate
utility changes for the typical consumer.57 We provide both the partial eﬀects of incompatibility
holding ATM deployment constant, and fuller estimates incorporating the welfare gains from in-
creased deployment. We present aggregate, state-level and within-county estimates. The aggregate
estimates use the parameters from Table 5, and Þx the changes in ATM-related variables at their
sample mean values. The within-state and within-county estimates use the individual state- or
county-level parameters, which we do not show to save space. We present both dollar value and
percentage Þgures. The dollar value numbers can be used to calculate actual dollar costs to con-
sumers from incompatibility. Recall that the typical consumer holds $1600 in transaction balances
over the year. Thus, Þnding that incompatibility reduced welfare by $0.0051 implies an annual
cost of $8.16–or, roughly the cost of four foreign ATM transactions per year. On balance, the
partial eﬀects amount to a reduction in consumer welfare equivalent to an increase in deposit fees of
roughly nine percent (or nine dollars per customer per year). Greater ATM deployment during our
sample period increases consumer welfare. However, an unweighted average across our observation
still shows the a reduction in consumer welfare equivalent to a 4-6% increase in deposit fees.

       To provide some evidence on cross-market diﬀerences, Figure 1 shows a kernel density estimate
of the percentage change in welfare from 1994 to 1999 for all counties in our sample. using the
county speciÞc estimates of ATM growth rates. The Þgure shows both the partial and full estimates.
  56
       We have also estimated linear and linear-log versions of this equation. These yield larger estimates of post-1996
increases in ATM deployment, and therefore more positive welfare estimates than those we report below.
  57
       Again, we use the average deposit account balance for these calculations.
                                                                                                  23


The full estimates vary widely because we estimate signiÞcant variations across counties in the post-
1996 shift in ATM deployment, and are positive for a substantial share of counties. Some of this
heterogeneity may simply reßect noise in our estimates of county level changes. Nonetheless, it
seems clear that there are some counties in which ATM deployment expanded extremely rapidly,
and perhaps rapidly enough that the gains from increased deployment may have oﬀset the eﬀects
of incompatibility. Many of these areas are urban markets; the mean post-1996 percentage shift in
ATM deployment is close to zero in non-MSA counties, and nearly thirty percent in MSA counties.
Figure 2 plots our estimated county-level welfare changes against the natural logarithm of county
population density. The Þgure also includes a non-parametric Lowess smoothed line. There appears
to be a signiÞcant positive relationship between the two and the non-parametric line is positive for
population density levels above 400. A simple linear regression conÞrms this, yielding the following
estimated relationship:



                       UtilChgP ercentk = −0.329 + 0.056 ln(P opDensk )                         (11)
                                                (0.028) (0.005)


   While this estimate is admittedly rough, it predicts negative welfare eﬀects for any county
with population density below 356 persons per square mile–a Þgure typical of such medium-sized
metropolitan areas as Kalamazoo county (Michigan) and Palm Beach county (Florida). Of the
roughly nine hundred counties in our sample, over six hundred fall below this level. Another way of
interpreting the results is that in a sparsely populated area such as Des Moines county (Iowa) with
a population density of roughly 100 people per square mile, the model implies a welfare change of
negative seven percent–while in a densely populated area such as Montgomery county (Maryland)
with 1500 people per square mile, the model implies a welfare change of positive seven percent.

   The above results regarding population density depend solely on diﬀerences in ATM deployment
across markets, but it is also possible that demand parameters vary across markets. In particular,
it seems likely that areas with high population density have higher travel costs. This might increase
consumers’ willingness to pay for ATM services, since using ATMs involves traveling to them. To
analyze the eﬀects of travel costs further, we estimate equation (7) separately for counties above
and below the median population density level. Lower travel costs should reduce the importance
of ATM density as well as reduce the surcharge level for which competitor’s ATMs are no longer
valued. The results for the ATM variables are reported in Table 6. In low population density
markets, the value placed on ATMs is much lower and not statistically signiÞcant, while the “break
                                                                                                                      24


even” foreign cost falls to under three dollars. In contrast, high density markets place a greater
weight on ATMs and competitors’ ATMs are valued even with very high foreign costs.58

         Table 7 repeats the welfare calculation using these parameters, while Figure 3 plots these welfare
changes versus the log of population density for the base and split-sample models; the results are
striking. Consumers in high travel cost counties experience substantially higher welfare after 1996,
while the net eﬀect remains negative for consumers in low travel cost counties. Figure 4 plots a
Lowess smoothed line through the welfare scatterplot (note the change in scale). Comparing this
to Figure 2 suggests that the welfare eﬀect of surcharging becomes positive at a lower population
density and has a steeper slope than implied by the base model.59 While we repeat the caveat
that these calculations ignore any shifts in the intensity of price competition following surcharging,
these results do suggest that surcharging may have a positive eﬀect on consumer welfare, especially
if we focus on a population weighted average of consumer welfare.



6         Alternative SpeciÞcations

Tables A1-A3 report the results of the robustness checks we mention earlier in the paper. Table A1
compares EIV/non-EIV results from counties in which we observe relatively complete ATM data to
those in which we observe less complete data.60 Presumably, the measurement error (particularly
in competitors’ ATMs) is greater in the latter counties. If true, this would imply a greater relative
impact of the EIV correction. We Þnd evidence in favor of this: in counties with relatively complete
data EIV results are fairly similar to non-EIV results, while in counties with incomplete data this
is not true. This suggests that our EIV-IV approach is correcting at least some of the bias.

         We next estimate the model using three diﬀerent imputation methods for the competitors’
ATMs. These results are described and reported in Table A2. For the most part, the results are
robust to these alternative imputation methods. While the coeﬃcient associated with competitors’
ATMs increases substantially in the last three models, this is because these models predict lower
    58
         These are results are consistent with Knittel and Stango (2004), which suggests the bulk of the reduced form
correlation between prices and ATM density is driven by observations from high density markets.
    59
         The linear relationship is: U tilChgP ercentk = −0.435 + 0.081 ln(P opDensk ).
    60
         One could also use the completeness of the data–for example, the fraction of banks in the local market for which
we observe data–analogously to a “reliability ratio,” which can be used in corrections for attenuation bias. However,
such corrections maintain the assumption that the actual measurement error is correlated with this share (which we
expect but can not conÞrm), while the Lewbel (1997) procedure makes no assumptions regarding which observations
display the greatest error.
                                                                                                                   25


levels of competitors’ ATMs, implying diﬀerent percentage changes. The welfare changes resulting
from post-1996 changes in ATM deployment and incompatibility are nearly identical in each case.

         We also test the robustness of our results to the incompatibility measure, presenting these
results in Table A3. While the standard errors are larger when using these alternative measures,
the general pattern of the coeﬃcients is unchanged.



7         Conclusions

In this paper, we estimate the importance of network eﬀects and incompatibility in a classic “hard-
ware/software” industry: Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) and ATM cards. Our empirical
setting represents a rare opportunity to measure a relatively discrete change in incompatibility be-
tween cards and ATMs. We estimate a structural model of consumer demand for deposit accounts
(ATM cards), allowing demand to depend not only on prices and characteristics directly associated
with the account, but also on the ATM services provided indirectly with the account.

         We Þnd that ATM-related services play an important role in consumer behavior regarding
deposit accounts. A bank’s own ATMs signiÞcantly aﬀect the demand for its deposit account
services. We also Þnd a strong indirect network eﬀect; consumers’ willingness to pay for deposit
accounts is aﬀected as well by the availability of competitors’ ATMs in the local market. This
suggests that other research examining ATM fees should consider the interplay between ATM fees,
ATM deployment and the demand for complementary deposit account services.

         Our particular focus is the extent to which the direct welfare losses from incompatibility are
oﬀset by changes in product attributes. Surcharging signiÞcantly reduces the indirect network
eﬀect associated with competitor ATMs. In some markets, however, increased deployment oﬀsets
this loss. In general, the largest markets–which also have higher population density–experience
increased welfare. This result is consistent with our demand estimates, which show that consumers
value ATMs more highly in dense areas; it therefore seems sensible that we would observe the
greatest increase in deployment in those area. It is possible that this result would be even stronger
if we considered the impact of (unobserved) ATM deployment by ISOs, who typically concentrate
their ATMs in metropolitan areas.61
    61
         Dove Consulting (1999) estimates that ISOs had deployed 20,000 ATMs by 1999–roughly ten percent of the
total deployed by banks. If all of this deployment could be attributed to incompatibility, and much was concentrated
in areas of high population density, our estimates of welfare gains in urban areas might be signiÞcantly higher.
                                                                                                  26


   This result has important implications for the policy debate in ATM markets, and also furthers
our understanding of the relationship between incompatibility and consumer welfare more generally.
To reprise the analogy from our introduction, it suggests that the competition between incompatible
platforms may beneÞt rather than harm consumers. Consumers can not mix and match hardware
and software in such cases, which is surely harmful. However, this arrangement may increase
platform owners’ incentives to vertically integrate and invest in developing high-quality software.

   Some open questions do remain. The social optimality of incompatible competition is something
we do not explore. It is possible, for example, that the shifts in product attributes associated with
incompatibility are ineﬃcient even though they beneÞt consumers. Another open issue is the
relationship between incompatibility and the intensity of price competition, an issue we do not
explore in this paper but which may be important.
                                                                                            27


References

 [1] Berry, Steven (1994), “Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Diﬀerentiation,” RAND
    Journal of Economics 25: 242-262.

 [2] Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market Equi-
    librium,” Econometrica 60(4): 889-917.

 [3] Biorn, Erik (2002), “Panel Data with Measurement Errors: Instrumental Variables and GMM
    Procedures Combining Levels and Diﬀerences,” mimeo.

 [4] Brynjolfson, Erik and Chris Kemerer (1996), “Network Externalities in Microcomputer Soft-
    ware: An Econometric Analysis of the Spreadsheet Market,” Management Science, Vol. 42,
    iss.12, pp. 1627-47.

 [5] Carlton, Dennis and M. Waldman (2002), “The Strategic Use of Tying to Preserve and Create
    Market Power in Evolving Industries,” RAND Journal of Economics 33: 194-220.

 [6] Chou, Chien-fu and Oz Shy (1990), “Network Eﬀects Without Network Externalities,” Inter-
    national Journal of Industrial Organization 8(2), pages 259-270.

 [7] Church, Jeﬀrey, and Neil Gandal, (1992), “Integration, Complementary Products, and Vari-
    ety,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 653-675.

 [8] Church, Jeﬀrey and Neil Gandal (1996), “Strategic Entry Deterrence: Complementary Prod-
    ucts as Installed Base,” European Journal of Political Economy 12: 331-54.

 [9] Church, Jeﬀrey and Neil Gandal (2000), “System Competition, Vertical Mergers and Foreclo-
    sure,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9: 25-51.

[10] Dagenais, M. G. and D. L. Dagenais (1997), “Higher Moment Estimators for Linear Regression
    Models with Errors in the Variables,” Journal of Econometrics.

[11] Dick, Astrid (2002), “Demand Estimation and Consumer Welfare in the Banking Industry,”
    Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2002-58. Washington: Board of Governors of the
    Federal Reserve System.

[12] Dove Consulting Inc. (1999), 1999 ATM Deployer Study.

[13] Dove Consulting Inc. (2002), 2002 ATM Deployer Study.
                                                                                              28


[14] Economides, Nicholas (1989), “Desirability of Compatibility in the Absence of Network Ex-
    ternalities,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 1165-1181.

[15] Economides, Nicholas and Steven Salop (1992), “Competition and Integration Among Com-
    plements, and Network Market Structure,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XL, iss. 1,
    pp. 105-123.

[16] Einhorn, Michael (1992), “Mix and Match Compatibility with Vertical Product Dimensions,”
    RAND Journal of Economics 23(4): 535-547.

[17] Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner (1992), “Converters, Compatibility and the Control of
    Interfaces,” Journal of Industrial Economics 40(1): 9-35.

[18] Fuller, W.A. (1987), Measurement Error Models. New York, NY: Wiley.

[19] Gandal, Neil (1994), “Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test for Net-
    work Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, iss. 1, pp. 160-170.

[20] Gandal, Neil (1995), “Competing Compatibility Standards and Network Externalities in the
    PC Software Market,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 599-608.

[21] Gandal, Neil, Shane Greenstein and David Salant (1999), “Adoptions and Orphans in the
    Early Microcomputer Market,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 57, iss. 1, pp. 87-105.

[22] Gandal, Neil, Michael Kende and Rafael Rob (2002), “The Dynamics of Technological Adop-
    tion in Hardware/Software Systems: The Case of Compact Disk Players,” RAND Journal of
    Economics.

[23] Greenstein, Shane (1994), “Did Installed Base Give an Incumbent any (Measureable) Advan-
    tages in Federal Computer Procurement,” RAND Journal of Economics 24(1), pp 19-39.

[24] Griliches, Zvi and Jerry Hausman (1986), “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of
    Econometrics 31: 93-118.

[25] Hannan, Timothy H. and John M. McDowell (1984a), “Market Concentration and the Diﬀusion
    of New Technology in the Banking Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 66, iss.
    4, pp. 686-691.

[26] Hannan, Timothy H. and John M. McDowell (1984b), “The Determinants of Technology Adop-
    tion: The Case of the Banking Firm,” RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 15, iss. 3, pp. 328-335.
                                                                                              29


[27] Hannan, Timothy H.; McDowell, John M (1990), “The Impact of Technology Adoption on
    Market Structure,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1990, Vol. 72, iss. 1, pp.
    164-68.

[28] Hannan, Timothy H., Elizabeth K. Kiser, James McAndrews and Robin A. Prager (2003),
    “To Surcharge or Not to Surcharge: An Empirical Investigation of ATM Pricing,” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 85(4): 990-1002.

[29] Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro (1986), “Product Compatibility Choice in a Market with
    Technological Progress,” Oxford Economic Papers 38: 146-165.

[30] Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro (1994), “Systems Competition and Network Eﬀects,” Jour-
    nal of Economic Perspectives 8(2), 1994 (Spring), pages 93-115.

[31] Kiser, Elizabeth (2003), “Household Switching Behavior at Depository Institutions: Evidence
    from Survey Data,” Antitrust Bulletin, forthcoming.

[32] Knittel, Christopher and Victor Stango (2004), “Compatibility and Pricing with Indirect Net-
    work Eﬀects: Evidence from ATMs,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
    10774, September 2004.

[33] Lancaster, K.J. (1966), “A New Approach to Consumer Theory,” Journal of Political Economy
    74: 132—157.

[34] Lewbel, Arthur (1997), “Constructing Instruments for Regressions with Measurement Error
    When no Additional Data are Available, with an Application to Patents and R&D,” Econo-
    metrica 65(5): 1201-1213.

[35] Massoud, Nadia and Dan Bernhardt (2002a), “Rip-Oﬀ ATM Surcharges,” RAND Journal of
    Economics 33(1): 96-115.

[36] Massoud, Nadia and Dan Bernhardt (2002b), “Endogenous ATM Location and Pricing,”
    mimeo.

[37] Matutes, Carmen and Pierre Regibeau (1988), “Mix and Match: Product Compatibility with-
    out Network Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, Summer, Vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 221-234.

[38] Matutes, Carmen and Pierre Regibeau (1992), “Compatibility and Bundling of Complementary
    Goods in a Duopoly,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 40, iss. 1, pp. 37-54.
                                                                                             30


[39] McAndrews, James J. (2001), “A Model of ATM Pricing: Foreign Fees and Surcharges,”
    mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[40] Nair, Harikesh, Pradeep Chintagunta and Jean-Pierre Dube (2003), “Empirical Analysis of
    Indirect Network Eﬀects in the Market for Personal Digital Assistants,” mimeo, University of
    Chicago.

[41] Nevo, Aviv (2000), “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random-Coeﬃcients Logit Models
    of Demand,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 9(4): 513-48.

[42] Ohashi, Hiroshi (2003), “The Role of Network Eﬀects in the U.S. VCR Market, 1978-86,”
    forthcoming, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.

[43] Prager, Robin (2001), “The Eﬀects of ATM Surcharges on Small Banking Organizations,”
    Review of Industrial Organization, Vol. 18, iss. 2, pp. 161-73.

[44] Radecki, Lawrence J. (1998), “The Expanding Geographic Reach of Retail Banking Markets,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, pp. 15-34.

[45] Radecki, Lawrence J. (1999), “Banks’ Payment-Driven Revenues,” Federal Reserve Bank of
    New York Economic Policy Review, July: 53-70.

[46] Rysman, Marc (2000), “Competition Between Networks: A Study of the Market for Yellow
    Pages,” mimeo, Boston University.

[47] Saloner, Garth and Andrea Shepard (1996), “Adoption of Technologies with Network Eﬀects:
    An Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines,” RAND Journal
    of Economics 26(3): 479-501.

[48] Shankar, Venkatesh and Barry L. Bayus (2002), “Network Eﬀects and Competition: An Em-
    pirical Analysis of the Home Video Game Industry,” mimeo, University of Maryland.

[49] Stavins, Joanna (1999), “Checking Accounts: What Do Banks Oﬀer and What Do Consumers
    Value?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston New England Economic Review, iss. March/April
    1999, pp. 3-14.
                                                                                                      31


A      Appendix

A.1     Tables

Table 1: ATM Deployment, Fees and Usage 1994-1999

Sources: Fee data from the Federal Reserve Board’s Annual Report to the Congress on Retail Fees and
Services of Depository Institutions, various years. Other data from Faulkner and Gray’s Card Industry
Directory, various years. Figures for total ATM deployment include ATMs deployed by banks and ISOs.

                                Variable:   1994   1995   1996    1997   1998   1999
                              ATM Fees:
      Percent banks charging foreign fee:   78.4   85.3    79.8   67.0   74.5    72.3
                     Average foreign fee:   0.95   1.03    1.10   1.06   1.10    1.17
      Percent banks charging surcharge:       –      –     44.8   60.1   77.9    82.9
                      Average surcharge:      –      –     1.19   1.14   1.20    1.26


                          ATMs (1000s):      109    123    139     165    187    227


                  ATM Cards (millions):      185    190    194     200    206    217


             Annual ATM Transactions:        705    807    890     915    930    907
                                per card    45.7   51.0    55.1   54.9   54.2    50.2
                       per ATM (1000s)      77.5   79.0    76.8   66.5   60.0    48.0
                                                                                                   32


Table 2: Yearly Means

                                        Variable:   1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999
                                  Deposit Share     0.147   0.142   0.139   0.137   0.136   0.121

                                          ATMs      11.1    11.1    11.1    13.9    16.3    16.7
                            Competitors’ ATMs       128.1   108.8   106.2   122.5   150.7   179.5

    Account Fees ($ per dollar of deposits/year):
                  Excluding Opp. Cost of Funds      0.006   0.005   0.008   0.010   0.011   0.013
                  Including Opp. Cost of Funds      0.048   0.062   0.058   0.060   0.060   0.057

                                 Foreign Fee ($)    1.34    1.42    1.52    1.48    1.56    1.54
                    Competitors’ Surcharges ($)      0       0       0      0.81    1.01    1.25

                                       Branches      8.7     8.5     8.9     8.7     8.7     8.5
                              Employees/Branch      23.4    22.1    21.4    21.4    22.9    21.4
                        Salary/Employee ($1000)     17.1    18.1    20.0    20.2    21.1    22.6
                            Number of Counties       16      17      23      43      66      79
                        Share with MM Accounts      0.997   0.996   0.997   0.999   0.999   1.000
                     Share with Brokerage Svcs.     0.729   0.737   0.767   0.842   0.881   0.894
    Observations are at the bank/county/year level. Number of observations is 9348.
                                                                                                33


Table 3: Nested Logit Results — Using variation in f + E(sc−j,kt )
     Variable:                                  OLS              IV               EIV-IV
                                       P rice         −1.42           −13.00∗∗∗     −11.63∗∗∗
                                                      (1.08)           (4.84)        (4.83)
                                 ln (AT Ms)j      0.044∗∗∗            0.140∗∗∗       0.098∗∗∗
                                                      (0.013)         (0.020)        (0.026)
                               ln (AT M s)−j      0.110∗∗∗            0.092∗∗∗       0.174∗∗∗
                                                  (0.014)             (0.026)        (0.033)
          ln (AT Ms)−j × (f + E (sc−j,kt ))       −0.011∗∗∗           −0.010∗∗      −0.014∗∗∗
                                                   (0.004)             (0.005)       (0.005)
     ln (AT Ms)−j × I(k ∈ St & t < 1996)              −0.008           −0.009        −0.016
                                                      (0.020)          (0.030)       (0.022)
                                   Branches       0.010∗∗∗            0.022∗∗∗       0.014∗∗∗
                                                  (0.002)             (0.003)        (0.003)
                        Employees/Branch           0.0004             0.0011∗∗       0.0005∗
                                                  (0.0003)            (0.0006)       (0.000)
                   Salary/Employee($1000)              0.002           0.004∗        0.003∗
                                                      (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)
                  ln (Number of counties)         0.017∗∗∗            0.074∗∗∗       0.045∗∗
                                                  (0.016)             (0.020)        (0.018)
                     Offer MM Accounts?                0.121            0.094         0.119
                                                      (0.179)          (0.197)       (0.183)
                   Of fer Brokerage Svcs.?             0.000           −0.013        −0.004
                                                      (0.021)          (0.023)       (0.022)
                                           σ      0.832∗∗∗            0.412∗∗∗       0.662∗∗∗
                                                  (0.015)             (0.067)        (0.053)
                         σ × I (year = 1995)       −0.004              −0.030        −0.018
                                                   (0.009)             (0.019)       (0.017)
                         σ × I (year = 1996)      −0.025∗∗∗           −0.065∗∗∗     −0.056∗∗∗
                                                   (0.009)             (0.020)       (0.018)
                         σ × I (year = 1997)      −0.018∗             −0.057∗∗∗     −0.049∗∗
                                                   (0.010)             (0.021)       (0.020)
                         σ × I (year = 1998)      −0.035∗∗∗           −0.078∗∗∗     −0.060∗∗∗
                                                   (0.011)             (0.024)       (0.022)
                         σ × I (year = 1999)      −0.060∗∗∗           −0.118∗∗∗     −0.090∗∗∗
                                                   (0.013)             (0.028)       (0.025)
                                Instruments:
                     Price and within share?            No              Yes            Yes
                        Measurement Error?              No              No             Yes
          ∗∗∗   – signiÞcant at .01 or better
           ∗∗   – signiÞcant at .05 or better
            ∗   – signiÞcant at .10 or better

   Notes: N=9348. Standard Errors are in parentheses. All speciÞcations include bank/county
and year Þxed eﬀects.
                                                                                                  34


Table 4: Aggregate Post-1996 Shifts in ATM-Related Variables

                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                                                   ln (AT Ms)−j ×
    Variable:           ln (AT Ms)j       ln (AT Ms)−j     (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))   (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))
    t                     0.101∗∗∗          0.081∗∗∗            0.086∗∗∗               0.393∗∗∗
                          (0.006)            (0.005)             (0.004)                (0.023)

    I (year = 1997)       0.072∗∗∗          0.077∗∗∗            0.704∗∗∗               2.854∗∗∗
                          (0.016)            (0.011)             (0.011)                (0.058)

    I (year = 1998)       0.045∗∗           0.098∗∗∗            0.908∗∗∗               3.776∗∗∗
                          (0.022)            (0.016)             (0.015)                (0.080)

    I (year = 1999)       0.032∗∗∗          0.116∗∗∗            1.024∗∗∗               4.525∗∗∗
                          (0.014)            (0.020)             (0.019)                (0.103)

    Standard errors in parentheses. Bank/County Þxed eﬀects also included.
                                                                                                           35


Table 5: Estimated Welfare Changes, 1994-1999

This table reports means and standard deviations of estimated welfare changes from surcharges. The Þrst
three calculations hold ATMs constant, while the Þnal three account for the increased growth of ATMs. We
use three methods for estimating the growth rates in the ATM-related variables. “Within-County Changes”
estimates a single regression with county Þxed eﬀects. “State-Level Changes” estimates a separate regression
for each state in our sample. Finally, “County-Level Changes” estimates a separate regression for each county
in our sample. Calculations use sample average 1994-1999 shifts in ATM-related variables (see Table IV).
Price units are dollars per year, per dollar of transaction deposit balances. Percent Þgures divide price unit
changes by (bank-level) prices.

                                                               Metric:
                                                Price Units ($)          Percent
     Surcharging Only:
                  Within-County Changes             −0.0051              −9.01%
                                                    (0.0017)             (3.44)
                      State-Level Changes           −0.0053              −9.54%
                                                    (0.0037)             (6.86)
                   County-Level Changes:            −0.0049              −8.74%
                                                    (0.0042)             (7.85)
     Surcharging and ATM Deployment:
                  Within-County Changes             −0.0034              −6.05%
                                                    (0.0017)             (3.26)
                      State-Level Changes           −0.0020              −3.77%
                                                    (0.0272)             (48.50)
                    County-Level Changes            −0.0026              −4.59%
                                                    (0.0131)             (23.82)
                                                                                                       36


      Table 6: High and Low Travel Cost Markets

Low travel cost markets are deÞned as having a population density below the median, while high travel cost
markets are deÞned as having a population density above the median.

 Variable                                 Low Travel Costs     High Travel Costs
 ln (AT Ms)j                                    0.025              0.134∗∗∗
                                               (0.048)              (0.026)
 ln (AT Ms)−j                                   0.077              0.269∗∗∗
                                               (0.060)              (0.034)
 ln (AT Ms)−j × (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))           −0.026∗∗            −0.010∗∗
                                               (0.012)              (0.005)
  Standard Errors are in parentheses.
 Bank/County and year Þxed eﬀects are also included.
 ∗∗∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .01 level,
 ∗∗   signiÞcance at the .05 level, and
 ∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .10 level.




Table 7: Estimated Welfare Changes for Split Sample Model, 1994-1999

This table reports means and standard deviations of estimated welfare changes from surcharges for Low and
High Travel Cost counties. We focus on the “County-Level Changes” in ATMs to be more comparable to
Figures 3 and 4.

                                                        Low Travel Costs              High Travel Costs
                                                Price Units ($)     Percent        Price Units ($)   Percent
       Surcharging Only:
                    County-Level Changes:          −0.0092         −16.15%            −0.0052        −9.41%
                                                   (0.0086)         (16.04)           (0.0042)        (7.65)
       Surcharging and ATM Deployment:
                    County-Level Changes           −0.0104         −18.23%             0.0808        14.47%
                                                   (0.0097)         (18.13)           (0.0285)       (52.00)
                                                                                                                   37


Table A1: Nested Logit Results–Observability and EIV-IV Results


                                        Card ID Share>50%               Card ID Share<50%
 Variable                               No EIV              EIV         No EIV             EIV        diﬀ-in-diﬀ
 ln (AT Ms)j                              0.172          0.071∗∗         −0.074       0.111∗∗∗         −0.084
                                         (0.164)         (0.036)         (0.183)          (0.034)
 ln (AT Ms)−j                             0.096         0.131∗∗∗         0.298∗∗      0.144∗∗∗         −0.119
                                         (0.101)         (0.051)         (0.118)          (0.042)
 ln (AT Ms)−j × (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))     −0.025          −0.010         −0.111∗∗∗     −0.021∗∗∗        −0.075
                                         (0.025)         (0.007)         (0.038)          (0.008)
 Observations                                        3778                          5360
  Standard Errors are in parentheses. Bank/County and year Þxed eﬀects are also included.
 ∗∗∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .01 level,   ∗∗   signiÞcance at the .05 level, and
 ∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .10 level.




Table A2: Alternative Imputation Methods

Model 2 measures issuer size using categorical variables rather than the logarithm of deposits. Model 3 im-
putes one ATM per branch for those which lack data. Model 4 sets ATMs per branch for these banks equal
to the median for observed banks within the same deposit level quartile. Model 5 sets ATMs per branch
equal to the median for observed banks within the same deposit level quartile for MSAs and non-MSAs.


 Variable                                     Base          Model 2       Model 3          Model 4       Model 5
 ln (AT Ms)j                              0.098∗∗∗          0.105∗∗∗      0.091∗∗∗           0.059        0.043
                                             (0.026)         (0.026)       (0.026)          (0.059)      (0.056)
 ln (AT Ms)−j                             0.174∗∗∗          0.115∗∗∗      0.179∗∗∗         0.416∗∗∗      0.420∗∗∗
                                             (0.033)         (0.025)       (0.032)          (0.042)      (0.042)
 ln (AT Ms)−j × (fjt + E (sc−j,kt ))    −0.014∗∗∗∗          −0.014∗∗∗     −0.016∗∗∗       −0.021∗∗∗     −0.021∗∗∗
                                             (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.005)          (0.005)      (0.005)
  Standard Errors are in parentheses.
 ∗∗∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .01 level,   ∗∗   signiÞcance at the .05 level, and
 ∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .10 level.
                                                                                                       38


Table A3: Alternative Measures of Incompatibility

Model 2 uses expected surcharges for the incompatibility measure, while Model 3 uses a post-1996 indicator
variable.

 Variable                          Base        Model 2    Model 3
 ln (AT Ms)j                   0.098∗∗∗        0.126∗∗∗   0.131∗∗∗
                                (0.026)        (0.028)    (0.026)
 ln (AT Ms)−j                  0.174∗∗∗        0.115∗∗∗   0.145∗∗∗
                                (0.033)        (0.036)    (0.034)
 ln (AT Ms)−j × Incomp        −0.014∗∗∗∗       −0.044     −0.033
                                (0.005)        (0.035)    (0.029)
  Standard Errors are in parentheses.
 ∗∗∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .01 level,
 ∗∗   signiÞcance at the .05 level, and
 ∗   denotes signiÞcance at the .10 level.




Table A4: Estimated Price Elasticities


                           Mean     Median      25th Percentile      75th Percentile
 Own Price Elasticity      1.214     1.195           1.023               1.372
                                                                                   39


A.2   Figures
  6
  4
  2
  0




      -1                 -.5                0                  .5              1
                        Surcharges Only               Surcharge and ATMs


           Figure 1: Kernel Density Estimate of County-Level Welfare Changes
                                                                                      40


           .2-5.55e-17
Welfare Change
      -.2  -.4
           -.6




                         0                2      4             6       8         10
                                              ln(Population Density)
                         bandwidth = .5


   Figure 2: County-Level Welfare Changes and Population Density — Surcharging Only
                                                                                          41


       1
       .5
Welfare Change
       0
       -.5
       -1




                 0                2           4             6              8         10
                                           ln(Population Density)
                 bandwidth = .5


                     Figure 2: County-Level Welfare Changes and Population Density
                                                                                           42


        2      1
Welfare Change
     0  -1
        -2




                   0     2              4             6              8                10
                                     ln(Population Density)
                                  Base Model      Split Sample


       Figure 3: County-Level Welfare Changes For Base Model and Split Sample Model
                                                                                                          43


               3
Welfare Change (split sample)
     0         1
               -1         2




                                0                2            4             6               8        10
                                                           ln(Population Density)
                                bandwidth = .5


                                     Figure 4: Split Sample Welfare Changes and Population Density
