                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE INTEGRATION OF CHILD TAX CREDITS AND WELFARE:
              EVIDENCE FROM THE NATIONAL CHILD BENEFIT PROGRAM

                                             Kevin Milligan
                                              Mark Stabile

                                          Working Paper 10968
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10968


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We thank David Green, Mike Veall, and seminar participants at the Department of Finance and the CPEG
conference for helpful comments. Milligan thanks the NBER for hosting him while the paper was being
written and gratefully acknowledges the support of a SSHRC Standard Research Grant. Stabile gratefully
acknowledges support from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
 © 2004 by Kevin Milligan and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Integration of Child Tax Credits and Welfare: Evidence from the National Child Benefit
Program
Kevin Milligan and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 10968
December 2004
JEL No. H24, I38

                                           ABSTRACT

In 1998, the Canadian government introduced a new child tax credit. The innovation in the program

was its integration with social assistance (welfare). Some provinces agreed to subtract the new

federally-paid benefits from provincially-paid social assistance, partially lowering the welfare wall.

Three provinces did not integrate benefits, providing a quasi-experimental framework for estimation.

We find large changes in social assistance take-up and employment in provinces that provided the

labour market incentives to do so. In our sample, the integration of benefits can account for around

one third of the total decline in social assistance receipt between 1997 and 2000.

Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC
V6T 1Z1 Canada
and NBER
kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

Mark Stabile
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON
M5S 3G7 Canada
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca
   1. Introduction

   Policies such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Medicaid Health

Insurance Program in the US have targeted low-income families with children as priority

recipients of government assistance. In Canada, the Canada Child Tax Benefit and the

National Child Benefit (NCB) have similarly been designed to provide assistance

primarily for families with children. Along with the goal of providing assistance to these

families, both the EITC and the NCB have also been designed to encourage families to

participate in the labour force, with the long-term objective of helping these families

provide for themselves.

       Given the explicit objective of the EITC to help promote labour force

participation, much of the economics literature on the EITC has examined its labour

market effects. Because the EITC is a federal program, these studies have tended to rely

on variation in the program over time (Eissa and Liebman, 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum,

2001), or on variation within the program across families (Eissa and Hoynes, 1998,

Dickert, Houser and Scholz, 1995). Hotz and Scholz (2003) summarize the findings from

these and other studies and draw the following broad conclusions: the EITC positively

affects labour force participation of single-parent households and these effects are

substantial. The EITC has a modest negative effect on labour force participation for

secondary workers in two-parent families. Finally the EITC has a negative effect on

hours worked for those already in the labour force, although the negative hours effect, in

the aggregate, is smaller than the participation effect.

       Research on European working tax credits is more limited.           In the United

Kingdom, Bingley and Walker (1997) find that the Family Credit increased part-time

work, while Blundell et al. (2000) simulate the effects of the Working Family Tax Credit,

                                                                                        1
uncovering positive work effects for single mothers but negative effects for married

women. Several other European countries have, or have plans, to introduce similar

measures. Immervoll et al. (2004) describe the pan-European landscape and simulate the

effects of in-work versus universal benefits, concluding that universal benefits are only

preferred if the government has a very large taste for redistribution.

           We examine the labour market effects of the National Child Benefit program in

Canada. The unique feature of the NCB relative to policies in other countries is its

integration with social assistance (welfare) payments. Provinces agreed to subtract the

federally-paid National Child Benefit Supplement benefits from provincially-paid social

assistance payments. This structure allowed former welfare recipients to carry part of

their social assistance payments with them into the work force, effectively lowering the

welfare wall. Because certain provinces chose to not deduct the new federal benefit from

recipients’ social assistance cheques, we have a large and transparent source of

identifying variation on which to base our estimates. In addition to the integration of

benefits, several provinces also introduced small earned income supplements as part of

the National Child Benefit program. Using this variation, we are able to compare the

relative efficacy of these two methods of improving labour market incentives.

           We calculate the federal and provincial benefits available to each family in our

survey using a detailed tax and benefit simulator for the Canadian tax system. This

allows us to directly estimate the marginal effects of changes in the NCB on labour force

participation, social assistance receipt, hours worked, total earnings, and social assistance

dollars.     The continuity of the measures available offers an improvement over an

approach that simply compares outcomes across discrete test and control groups.




                                                                                           2
       Our findings suggest that there were strong labour market effects from the

integration of child benefits with welfare for single mothers. An additional $1,000 in

benefits deducted from social assistance payments is associated with a six percentage

point decrease in social assistance take-up, and a 3.9 percentage point increase in having

worked. Evidence for earnings and weeks of work on the intensive margin is much

weaker, with no strong evidence of a response. Both of these findings are consistent with

theory and the previous literature. Further, we find little effect of the provincial earned

income benefit programs on work incentives. We speculate that this may be related to

the relative visibility of social assistance integration versus the earned income benefits.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 explains the National Child

Benefit Program in detail. Section 3 presents our empirical strategy; section 4 describes

the data sets and tax information used in our analyses. Sections 5 and 6 present our

results, and section 7 concludes.




   2. The National Child Benefit Program

       The National Child Benefit (NCB) program was introduced in July, 1998 as a

component of the Canada Child Tax Benefit. The NCB encompasses two programs, a

federally-provided refundable tax-credit (called the National Child Benefit Supplement –

NCB Supplement) and provincially-provided initiatives. The stated goals of the program

were to reduce child poverty, promote attachment to the labour force, and reduce overlap

between federal and provincial initiatives (Department of Finance 1997).

       The benefit level for each family is determined by family income and the number

of children. Benefits are paid quarterly starting in July. The family income used to



                                                                                              3
determine benefits comes from amounts reported on the tax filing of the previous

calendar year, so the benefits starting in July of 1999 used income from the 1998 calendar

year. Families must apply to receive benefits; applications are typically included with

birth registration and other government documents at the hospital when the child is born.

         The annual benefit amount in 1998 was $605 for the first child, $405 for the

second, and $330 for the third and additional children. The benefits are reduced with

family income, starting at a threshold of $20,921 (for 1998).1 The clawback rates were

set such that the benefit would be reduced to zero when income reached $25,921 for all

family sizes.2       Figure 1 traces out the benefits as a function of family income.

Importantly for our empirical strategy, the incentive to work (so long as income is less

than $25,921) differs sharply by the number of children.                       In 2002-03, the federal

government spent $7.8 billion on the Canada Child Tax Benefit.                               This amount

represented a real increase of 32 percent over the amount spent in 1997-1998.3 Most of

this increase was a result of the introduction and subsequent expansions of the NCB

Supplement.

         At a province’s discretion, the NCB Supplement benefits could be integrated with

provincial social assistance programs by deducting the NCB Supplement from social

assistance payments dollar for dollar. The provinces, in return, were to use the funds

saved from the social assistance payments to provide spending programs to assist low

income families and for provincial income supplements.                                 Three provinces


1
  We refer to the reduction of the benefit with increasing family income as a clawback. Somewhat
confusingly, the reduction of social assistance resulting from the integration of benefits under the NCB is
also often referred to as a ‘clawback’ in Canadian policy discussions. To maintain clarity, we use
‘clawback’ only to refer to the reduction of benefits with family income. When referring to the reduction
of social assistance, we refer to ‘integration’ and the ‘crowding out’ of social assistance benefits.
2
  The clawback rates in 1998 were 12.1% for one child, 20.2 % for two children, and 26.8% for three
children.
3
  Dollar amounts taken from the Public Accounts of Canada (Receiver General of Canada 2003).

                                                                                                              4
(Newfoundland, New Brunswick, and Quebec) chose to not implement the integration of

social assistance benefits, meaning that the incentive to work (described in detail below)

did not exist in these provinces.4 Moreover, British Columbia’s integrated Family Bonus

program was introduced in 1996 and had a similar structure. We use all of this across-

province through-time variation in our estimation of the effect of integration.

        The Quebec and British Columbia cases require more clarification. The Quebec

government reduces the level of Quebec Family Allowance for each dollar of federal

benefits. In British Columbia, the Family Bonus has also been adjusted by the provincial

government each time the federal NCB Supplement has changed. These adjustments

mean that increases in the federal benefit leave the family no better off, but re-allocate the

cost of the total benefit between levels of government. These changes in who pays the

benefits, however, are not relevant for our study of the integration of the NCB

supplement with social assistance. We are concerned with the incentive to leave social

assistance. For our purposes, it matters not whether the benefits come from the federal or

the provincial government, but only whether the family’s social assistance payment is

reduced to account for the NCB supplement. In British Columbia, the reduction is made

while in Quebec it is not. For this reason, we classify Quebec as a no-integration

province and British Columbia as an integration province.

        The integration of social assistance benefits under the NCB produces a strong

incentive to join the labour market.5 Figure 2 presents a static labour supply model with a

stylized social assistance benefit. With no work, an individual receives social assistance

in the amount of AB. Between B and C, extra work results in a dollar-for-dollar decrease


4
  Since 2001, Manitoba has stopped integrating NCB and social assistance for families that have children
under age 7. Our data only cover until 2000, so we ignore this in our analysis.
5
  Hotz and Scholz (2003) provide a thorough treatment of the static labour supply incentives in the EITC.

                                                                                                            5
in the social assistance benefit – the 100 percent marginal tax rate often called the welfare

wall. At C, the social assistance benefit is exhausted and earnings lead to increased

consumption until point D. The standard result is represented by points X0 and B. In the

absence of social assistance, someone with the preferences embodied in the utility curves

in the figure would prefer to be at point X0. With social assistance, point B is preferred,

however, and the individual chooses no work.

       The line segments EFG represent the change in incentives introduced by the

integration of social assistance benefits under the NCB program.          Because the 100

percent tax rate now ends earlier at point E, the individual keeps more of his or her

earnings for work between points E and G. This may lead the individual to prefer a point

such as X1 instead of point B, meaning that the individual would join the labour force.

       Figure 2 also makes the ambiguous predictions of the model for those who were

already in the labour market when the benefit was introduced. For some of them, the

parallel shift of the budget constraint out to EF delivers a work-reducing income effect.

For those on the FG segment, both the income and the substitution effects lead to less

work. Finally, for those operating to the left of point G, there is no change in incentives

as the benefit is zero because of their high income.

       Provincially-provided initiatives comprise the second part of the National Child

Benefit program.     The initiatives included both non-cash spending programs and

provincial tax credit programs. The non-cash spending programs provided funding for

such projects as child-care subsidies and health promotion programs, while the tax credits

took the form of straight transfers or earned income credits. The provincial credits also

affect and provide variation in incentives to work. For example, Ontario provides a Child

Care Supplement for Working Families. In 2000, families must have at least $5,000 of


                                                                                           6
earnings to qualify, and the yearly benefits were $1,100 + $210 (per child under the age

of seven) if the family is a single parent family. Benefits are then clawed back starting at

$20,000 of family income. The details of the provincial child credits for all provinces are

provided in an Appendix.

       While much of our analysis focuses on the NCB Supplement, we do incorporate

the provincial programs into our analysis as they also provide work incentives to mothers.

Our analysis therefore allows us to compare the NCB Supplement integration with social

assistance to the more EITC-like provincial programs. As these programs differ in both

size and method of delivery, contrasting the two may provide some insight into the

relative efficacy of each program structure.

       In addition to the earned income benefits, several provinces and the federal

government provide a basic level of child benefits that are not tied to employment

earnings. These benefits are expected to diminish the incentive to work by extending the

distance between A and B in Figure 2. With more income at zero hours of work, less

work will be observed. We incorporate these ‘automatic’ benefits into our analysis and

account for their impact in developing our empirical strategy below.

       In total, the NCB program provides clear incentives to join the work force for

families currently on social assistance by partially replacing social assistance with a

benefit that, on net, is only received if working. In addition, the provincially-run earned

income supplements provide more incentive to join the labour force. However, in both

cases, the prediction for work on the intensive margin is unclear – those already working

may face higher marginal tax rates on their labour so they may choose to work less.




                                                                                          7
    3. Empirical Strategy

        Our empirical strategy aims for transparent identification of the effects of the

NCB Supplement on female labour supply decisions. An alternative strategy might

incorporate the kinks and twists in the budget constraint generated by child benefit

policies into a structural model of behaviour. While there are advantages to either

approach, we believe that our method is fruitful for answering a relatively direct policy

question about a small change in benefit incentives within the existing system.

        To test if child benefits have affected labour supply decisions, we run regressions

of the type

     Y pyki = β 0 + β 1 Benefit pyki + β 2 X pyki + β 3 prov p + β 4 yeary + β 5 kids k + e pyki ,

where p indexes provinces, y indexes years, k indexes number of children, and i indexes

families. We observe labour supply outcomes Ypyki for each family and regress them on

that family’s observed benefits Benefitpyki, a set of province dummies provp, a set of year

dummies yeary, a set of dummies for the number of children kidsk, and a vector of other

relevant controls Xpyki, leaving a residual term epyki.

        The vector Xpyki contains demographic controls about the family as well as 2nd

order interaction terms between the province, year, and children dummies.                      In this

standard triple-difference specification, identification of the policy effect comes from

variation within province-year cells; between families of different sizes. In other words,

the policy effect is measured by comparing, for example, women in Ontario in 1997 with

no kids to those with other numbers of children in the same province in the same year.

This strategy is therefore robust to any shock that may differentially affect provincial

labour markets and is correlated with the policy variable.



                                                                                                     8
       Specifically, provincial spending programs under the NCB typically do not

discriminate based on the number of children in the family. Since our strategy compares

women with different numbers of children within provinces, the NCB non-cash spending

programs shouldn’t affect our estimates. Similarly, if there are other labour market

policies we do not consider in our empirical model that vary at the province-year level,

our estimates will not be affected so long as the excluded policy affects everyone in a

given province in a given year in the same way.

       A key assumption underlying this approach is the exogeneity of the province of

residence, year, and number of children. For the province, this assumption would be

violated if individuals switched provinces in order to benefit from different incentive

structures. We consider this possibility unlikely, as the benefits are unlikely to surpass

the costs of moving.      The number of children may also be influenced by benefits.

Assuming that children are exogenous to benefits is standard in the EITC literature in the

US (see Hotz and Scholz 2003), but the assumption may be violated if fertility decisions

depend on fiscal incentives. Milligan (2002) found strong evidence that fertility did

respond to fiscal incentives in Quebec’s Allowance for Newborn Children program in the

late 80s and early 90s, but found much less evidence of a response among women more

likely to be at-risk for being on welfare.

       We pursue two strategies to overcome this challenge. First, we present our results

using only the province-year variation in the benefits, finding results consistent with

those that also incorporate the variation induced by the number of children. Second, we

also present results excluding children under age 6.      Since the NCB program was

introduced in 1998 and our data run only until 2000, the decision to have the older




                                                                                        9
children clearly preceded the introduction of the program and therefore could not have

been influenced by its incentives.



Endogeneity of benefits

       The observed benefit depends on the province, year, number of children, and

income of the family.      Importantly, family income is determined by many of the

outcomes we intend to study as regressands, such as earnings, hours, and weeks worked.

This introduces a mechanical endogeneity between observed benefits and the measures of

labour supply.

       To overcome the endogeneity problem, we implement an instrumental variables

strategy similar to one pioneered by Currie and Gruber (1996). The essence of the

strategy is to form an instrument that simulates benefits using only the exogenous

determinants of benefits. As no particular family’s income influences the simulated

benefit, the mechanical endogeneity is purged.

       In our case, we assume that the province of residence, year, and number of

children are exogenous components. To form our instrument, we take a sample of

families and calculate the benefits for each province-year-number of children

combination. The simulation sample is a 10 percent random sample of the families in our

five years of SLID data. As we have 5 years of data, 10 provinces, and 4 family sizes (0

to 3 children), this means that we must perform 200 benefit simulations for each family in

the simulation sample. Importantly, the same set of families is put through the benefit

calculator for each province-year-children combination, meaning that the benefits

calculated in each cell do not embody differences in income or other characteristics

across cells. The mean benefit over the simulation sample of families in each cell is then


                                                                                       10
matched back to the original dataset by province, year and number of children to be used

as the instrument. It can be expected to predict well each family’s benefit, but will not

depend on a particular family’s observed labour market outcomes.                        The process is

repeated over province-year cells to form our province-year simulated instrument.

        Some of our dependent variables are binary, so our estimation uses a linear

probability model.        Blundell and Powell (2004) compare a semi-parametric control

function approach to linear probability and probit results, finding the parametric models

estimate a slope that is too steep. Their method requires a parsimonious set of covariates

in order to be tractable, so it is not appropriate for our policy framework which requires a

large set of controls to isolate the policy effect. However, their findings may suggest

some caution in the interpretation of our results.



    4. Data

        We use the Census Family and Person files of the Survey of Labour and Income

Dynamics (SLID) for the years 1996 to 2000. The SLID is conducted annually by

Statistics Canada with a stratified random sampling of Canadians. With survey weights,

the data are potentially nationally representative. There is evidence, however, that the

SLID has under-sampling of low income families.6 While this does not imperil our

empirical strategy, it might limit the degree to which our results are nationally

representative. The SLID provides detailed information on demographics, income and

labour market activity at the individual level, as well as information on the family size

and structure at the family level. The sample size per year is around 35 thousand census

6
  Frenette, Green, and Picot (2004) show that low income families are under-represented in the SLID
relative to administrative tax data and to Census data. While the weights correct for under-sampling by
age, province, and sex, the weights are not adjusted for under-coverage by income group.

                                                                                                          11
families made up of 60 thousand individuals aged 15 and higher. We select our sample

based on the person files, merging in family characteristics from the family files. The

focus of our analysis is mothers with children, so we keep females age 18 to 50.7 Single

women face a different employment decision than married women, so we exclude

married women from our analysis.8

        The benefit calculations are made using the observed income information on each

woman, along with information on the province of residence, year, and number of

children. Using a tax simulator, we calculate the child benefits owing to each woman

under federal and provincial refundable tax credit programs. We use the output of the

simulator to form our main policy variable to measure the incentive to work, which we

call INTEBENS. This variable reflects the amount of child benefits that is integrated with

social assistance; that crowd out social assistance payments. The reaction of labour

market decisions to this variable describes what would happen if a province were to make

more (or less) benefits be subtracted from provincial social assistance.

        We form INTEBENS by first calculating the NCB Supplement payment owed to

the family. For the provinces that reduce social assistance by the amount of the NCB

Supplement payments, INTEBENS equals the amount of NCB Supplement payment in

the year. For provinces that do not reduce SA payments, INTEBENS takes the value zero.

For 1996 and 1997, there was no NCB Supplement benefit so the value of INTEBENS is

zero in all provinces, with one exception explained below.                     For 1998, the NCB

Supplement began in July so we impute half the NCB Supplement value for that year to
7
 Those under 18 are typically not eligible for social assistance. Those over 50 have few children.
8
 Married women are much less likely to be on social assistance. In our sample, 4.2 per cent of married
women have some social assistance income compared to 16.5 per cent of single women. Among women
with children, 43.5 percent of single women are on social assistance while only 4.4 percent of married
women are. Moreover, the husband’s income pushes most married women over the income threshold
($25,921 in 1998) at which all NCB Supplement benefits are gone. In our simulated benefits, 74.7 percent
of single mothers receive some NCB Supplement while only 17.8 percent of married mothers do.

                                                                                                      12
the INTEBENS variable. Finally, in British Columbia, the BC Family Bonus was clawed

back from social assistance cheques starting in July 1996, so INTEBENS incorporates

both the BC Family Bonus and the NCB Supplement for British Columbia.

         We form the instruments described earlier in the paper using the same tax

simulator. After putting our sample of families through the simulator, we select those

who had positive employment earnings and take the average value of the benefit variables

by province-year and by province-year-child cells.                  For the province-year cells, we

exclude families without children from the simulation sample. For the province-year-

children cells, we assign each family in the simulation 0 through 3 children in turn, so

that we can get a benefit measure for the same set of families for all family sizes. The

resulting benefits represent an exogenous measure of what benefits a working family

could expect to receive given its province, year, and family size.

         The outcomes we study in our analysis include four binary variables of labour

market behaviour and five continuous measures of the intensity of work. We have a

binary variable for any receipt of social assistance and one for having any earnings.

These dummies are relatively blunt tools, as even a small amount of income will turn the

outcome variable to a one. A more subtle measure is also provided in the SLID that

indicates the ‘major’ source of income for the family.9 We form a dummy for having

government transfers as the major source of income, and a dummy for earnings as the

major source of income. The continuous measures include earnings, social assistance

income, total income, hours worked, and weeks worked. All of these are measured over

the calendar year in question.


9
  The major source of income variable is defined by the SLID. Across several income categories (earned
income, pensions, government transfers, etc.), the major source is defined as the category with the highest
level of income.

                                                                                                          13
       Table 1 shows our labour market dependent variables across different family

sizes. Except for earnings, all measures of labour supply decrease monotonically with the

number of children, while the measures of social assistance increase monotonically with

the number of children.     Single women with children are large recipients of social

assistance. More than half of single women with three or more children show some

social assistance income, and 55.7 percent of them have transfers as the major source of

income. Still, more than 63 percent of them have some earnings in the year.

       Descriptive statistics for our independent variables are provided in Table 2. The

first column presents the means and standard deviations of many of our variables for the

full sample of single women. The next three columns present the same statistics for

subsamples of interest – mothers of children, major transfer recipients and those who are

not major transfer recipients. The 34,018 women in the full sample receive, on average

over all years, $87.65 of integrated NCB benefits (INTEBENS). Looking just at mothers

of children, the benefits are higher at $419.39. The mean over observations with positive

of INTEBENS is $1,179.99.       For major transfer recipients, INTEBENS is larger on

average than for those who are not major transfer recipients.

   Over 16 percent of women have positive social assistance income, rising to over 43

percent of single women with children. Correspondingly, positive earnings is higher for

the full sample of women than for the subsample of mothers, at 0.817 compared to 0.703.

Looking in the last two columns, it is clear that those who have transfers as their major

source of income work much less than those who do not. The education levels of the

different samples vary significantly. Transfer recipients are much more likely to be high

school dropouts, at 31.3 percent versus 11.1 percent for those who are not major transfer

recipients. Finally, major transfer recipients are more likely to have children, and those


                                                                                       14
children are more likely to be young, than single women who are not major transfer

recipients.

   Table 3 provides further detail on our policy variables. We show the mean of four

different policy variables for single mothers for each year and province in our sample.

The upper left section of the table shows the values for INTEBENS. Newfoundland, New

Brunswick, and Quebec show zero in all years because these provinces do not reduce

social assistance payments for child benefits received. The British Columbia row shows

the introduction of the BC Family Bonus half way through 1996 and for the full year in

1997. The provinces that integrated have the NCB Supplement introduced in July, 1998,

and fully in place for 1999 and 2000. The observed differences among provinces that are

integrated reflect differences in characteristics such as income and number of children.

Our IV strategy will discard these differences and focus on the policy variation. The

discussion of the other policy variables in Table 3 is deferred until Section 6 when the

results for those variables are discussed.



   5. Main Results

To begin our analysis of results, we present graphs of some of our labour market outcome

variables through time. We then report results for OLS regression that do not account for

the mechanical endogeneity of benefits with work in order to motivate the need for our

instrumental variables strategy. Next, we present results for INTEBENS using our IV

strategy based on province-year cells, followed by a similar strategy that allows for

variation in the number of children. Finally, we show the sensitivity of our results to

several alternative sample selection criteria.




                                                                                      15
Graphs of dependent variables through time

   Figures 3 through 6 graph our binary outcomes variables for provinces who integrated

social assistance and child benefits and for those who did not. Because British Columbia

effectively reduced social assistance for the entire period, it is omitted from these graphs

to maintain clarity. Figure 3 shows the proportion of women having positive social

assistance income. Before 1998, when there was no NCB Supplement, social assistance

receipt was trending downward in both sets of provinces, possibly reflecting improving

national labour market conditions.      After 1998, social assistance receipt in those

provinces that reduced social assistance (referred to as integration provinces) drops below

that seen in the no-integration provinces, consistent with people moving from welfare to

work following the NCB Supplement incentives.

   Figure 4 repeats the analysis for the variable indicating positive earnings. There is

little difference to be seen between the two lines over time as both increase by more than

15 percentage points over this time period. In Figures 5 and 6, however, the results are

much clearer. Figure 5 has the graph for having government transfers as the major source

of income. There is a clear drop in the integration provinces from 45.5 percent in 1998 to

31.7 percent in 2000. The line for the no-integration provinces, however, is flat. An

equal and opposite reaction is seen for the variable indicating earnings as the major

source of income. From 1998 to 2000, there was an increase of over 12 percentage points

in the crowd-out provinces and only 2 percentage points in the no-integration provinces.

   The graphical analysis has provided some preliminary visual indication that a sharp

change in employment and social assistance receipt may have occurred after 1998 in the

integration provinces, but not in the no-integration provinces. The regression analysis in



                                                                                         16
the rest of this section aims to uncover stronger more convincing evidence of what can be

seen in the figures.



OLS Results

       Our main regression results are reported in Table 4. We report the coefficient on

INTEBENS, scaled in $1,000s of 2000 Canadian dollars. This means that the estimated

coefficient represents the predicted change in the outcome variable when $1,000 more

child benefits becomes subject to the social assistance crowd out through the integration

of benefits and social assistance. All reported standard errors are corrected by clustering

on the level of aggregation of the benefit variable, which in some cases is province-year

cells and for others is province-year-children cells.

   The first column reports OLS regression results of the outcome variables on

INTEBENS and the set of control variables for the sample of single mothers. For each

regression, we only report the coefficient on the benefit variable. Since benefit levels

first rise with earnings and then later fall for those with higher family income, the

predicted sign for the estimated coefficients is unclear – those with zero benefits could be

women who did not work at all or they could be women who earned very much and saw

their benefits completely clawed back. Correspondingly, the estimated coefficients are

hard to interpret.     The estimated coefficient on social assistance receipt is 0.136,

suggesting a 13.6 percentage point increase in receipt when benefits increase by $1,000.

Having positive earnings, however, is predicted to decrease by 8.1 percentage points.

High earning women have their benefits completely clawed back because of their higher

family income, so high earners tend to have no benefits. This mechanical endogeneity



                                                                                         17
demonstrates the difficulties inherent in using observed in-work benefit amounts to study

labour market behaviour.



IV Results

   To correct for this endogeneity, we turn to our first set of IV estimates in the second

column. Here, we maintain our focus on women with children. As an instrument for

benefits, we use the simulated province-year cell mean of INTEBENS. This measure of

benefits throws away any individual variation in family size or income and picks up only

across-province, across-time variation in benefit levels. The first stage is a regression of

INTEBENS on the province-year cell mean of simulated benefits. The first stage is very

strong, with a $1 increase in the cell mean benefits predicted to increase individual

imputed benefits by $0.916.

   The four measures of labour market participation all have the expected sign, and three

are statistically significant. A $1,000 increase in benefits leads to a 5.2 percentage point

decrease in having positive social assistance income. The mean social assistance receipt

in this population is 43.5 percent, so the estimate implies an 11.9 percent decrease in

social assistance receipt. The variable indicating transfers as the major income source is

more responsive, with an estimated coefficient of -0.092.        The binary measures of

earnings have weaker results, with the indicator for positive earnings showing an

insignificant coefficient. However, the variable for having earnings as the major income

source is highly responsive, with a predicted increase of 7.3 percentage points. The mean

of this variable in the sample of women with children is 0.502, so the estimate represents

a 14.5 percent increase over the mean. The stronger results for the ‘major source’



                                                                                         18
variables indicate that most of the response comes from women with a little labour force

attachment who move to have greater labour force attachment, rather than from women

with precisely zero attachment joining the labour force.

     To put these estimates in context, consider a woman with one child contemplating

the welfare or work decision. On welfare, assume that she would receive $850 per

month, or $10,200 annually. If she worked at an $8 per hour job for 40 hours per week

for 52 weeks, she would earn $16,640; an increment of $6,440 over social assistance. A

thousand dollar increase in INTEBENS would imply that the increment to income from

choosing work would increase by 15.5 percent to $7,440. For the social assistance

receipt variable therefore, the implied elasticity in this example is 0.77 (11.9 percent /

15.5 percent). In the US literature on the EITC, Hotz and Scholz (2003) conclude that the

range of credibly estimated elasticities is between 0.69 and 1.16. So, our first estimate

lies comfortably in that range.

       The continuous labour supply measures show a mixed response.              The point

estimate on earnings is quite high – suggesting that earnings increase by $1,010.9 for a

$1,000 increase in integrated benefits, although the standard error is quite large. With the

higher earned income, it is not surprising that total income is also predicted to be higher

with more integration. Finally, we estimate an increase in hours worked of 97.7 but no

significant increase in weeks worked.

       For social assistance, the estimated effect of making another thousand dollars

subject to integration is a decrease of $747. This result is composed of two effects. First,

some families move from social assistance to work and therefore no longer collect any

social assistance. Second, for those who stay on social assistance, the dollar-for-dollar

crowd-out of social assistance income also leads to a mechanical decrease in social


                                                                                         19
assistance income when INTEBENS increases. Because not all women in the sample are

on social assistance, we shouldn’t expect the dollar-for-dollar crowd out to result in a

coefficient of –1000.0.

        In the third column we expand the sample to include single women without

children. We form the instrument for this sample by using the same province-year cells

as before, but now include benefits at zero for the childless families. These women serve

as a control for unobserved factors in each province-year location such as labour market

conditions or other labour market policies, as the childless single women live in the same

province and act in the same labour markets but do not receive any benefits. We include

dummies for having no children, as well as second order interactions of having no

children with province and year effects. In such a specification, the policy effect is

therefore identified by differences in labour supply between childless women and women

with children in any given province-year combination.

    For the binary labour market indicators, the point estimates are uniformly larger when

we include the childless women in column (3). Welfare receipt is now predicted to

decrease by 6.5 percentage points for a $1,000 increase in integrated benefits. The

positive earnings indicator is still not statistically significant, but the point estimate is 2.3

percentage points larger than the previous specification.

    The continuous measures of labour supply again show less of a response than the

binary indicators. The estimated effect on earnings is now almost exactly zero. This may

indicate that the previous large positive estimate was simply picking up trends in earnings

across provincial labour markets or some other unobserved factor. Social assistance

income is still strongly negative, with an estimated average crowd out of $825.2 for each




                                                                                              20
$1,000 in integrated benefits. We still find a positive impact on hours worked, with a

predicted increase of 70.4 hours per year.

     Finally, in the fourth column of the table we use a more flexible instrument that

allows for variation in the benefit corresponding to the number of children in the family.

While this contributes more identifying variation, it could be argued that the variation is

not exogenous; that the number of children might respond to the benefits incentive. We

examine this possibility later in this section. The point estimates in this column are very

similar to the previous specification, but more precisely measured. The coefficient on the

indicator for having positive earnings is now slightly stronger and reaches the 10 percent

level of statistical significance.

     Using the estimated coefficient for social assistance receipt of -6.0 percentage points,

we can assess the magnitude of the contribution of the NCB Supplement integration to

the overall downward trend in social assistance receipt. We take 1997 as the base year as

it is the last full year before the NCB was introduced.10 In provinces with crowd-out,

social assistance take-up among single women declined from 48.7 percent to 35.4 percent

in our sample between 1997 and 2000. The average value for INTEBENS in integration

provinces was $1097.55, compared to $290.6 in 1997, a difference of $806.95.11 The

coefficient of -6.0 per thousand dollars suggests that this increase in integrated benefits

can account for a decline in social assistance receipt of 4.8 percentage points, which is

36.5 percent of the total decline of social assistance receipt of 13.3 percentage points in

the integration provinces over the 1997-2000 period. So, our estimates suggest that the




10
  The calculation produces a similar result using 1996 as the base year.
11
  Before 1998, residents of British Columbia were eligible for the BC Family Bonus which was subtracted
from social assistance. The value of INTEBENS in all other provinces was zero before 1998.

                                                                                                     21
integration of the NCB Supplement with provincial social assistance programs can

account for about one third of the decline in social assistance receipt.



Sample Sensitivity Checks

   To assess the sensitivity of our results to some of our assumptions, we present the

results for alternative samples in Table 5. For the results in column (2), we identify a

population that we might expect to have a larger response and see if it is so. Women with

children under age six have much greater childcare demands than those of school-going

age. For this reason, the responsiveness of mothers with young children may be limited.

Restricting the sample to women with children at least 6 years old also helps as a

robustness check against the possibility that fertility may be endogenous. Children aged

six or more were born before the NCB policy was contemplated, so can be considered

exogenous to the policy. Compared to the base results, the restricted sample has much

larger coefficients. The coefficient on integrated benefits for the regression with positive

social assistance income, for example, more than doubles to -0.130.

   In the third column, we try another restriction for a sample we think may be more

responsive. Most women over age 24 will have completed their education, while a large

proportion of women in their late teens are still potentially in school. By selecting a

sample of women more active in the labour market, we expect to see a higher sensitivity

to the incentives in the NCB.           We find point estimates that are statistically

indistinguishable from the base case, although they are uniformly larger. Taken together

with the results in column 2, the results appear to vary sensibly in suitably chosen

subsamples.



                                                                                         22
       The final column of Table 5 shows the results excluding Quebec.           Because

Quebec did not participate in the NCB (although Quebec residents still receive the NCB

Supplement) and because Quebec’s policy environment differs in many other ways, we

restrict our sample in column 4 to provinces other than Quebec. The results suggest that

the possibly confounding Quebec factors are not driving our results.


   6. Results including other policy variables

   Contemporaneous with the introduction of the NCB Supplement and the integration

with social assistance payments, several provinces introduced new child benefit

programs. In addition, there were other changes at the federal benefit level over our

sample period. Finally, social assistance rates continued to evolve between 1996 and

2000. The impact of any of these policy changes on the labour market behaviour of

single women is of interest on its own. However, it is of particular interest here because

other policy changes may be confounding our findings for the integration of social

assistance payments through the NCB program. In this section, we pursue analysis of all

of the policy changes mentioned above.

       The first additional policy variable we create is WORKBENS. This variable

records the benefits of earned income credits for those who work. This includes the in-

work benefits available in some provinces as part of the provincial component of the

NCB program as well as the federal Working Income Supplement and the small Goods

and Services Tax Credit. (More information on these programs is available in the

Appendix.) We next compute a variable we call AUTOBENS. This variable accounts for

benefits that are paid ‘automatically’ to families without conditioning on earnings.

Included in this measure are several provincial benefits and the federal Canada Child Tax


                                                                                       23
Credit. This measure also accounts for the net increase in benefits (if any) received in

provinces that don’t integrate the NCB Supplement with social assistance benefits.12 The

final policy variable we form is PROVSA. This variable measures the statutory level of

social assistance benefits payable to the family if it were on social assistance. We gather

the data on provincial social assistance from the National Council on Welfare (2003).

The available rates vary by province and by year, and as well between single families

with no children and with children.

        The province-year variation in these policy variables can be seen in Table 3. For

WORKBENS in 1996 and 1997, the federal Working Income Supplement was in effect.

The amounts vary in the table by province because of differing income levels – our

instrumental variables strategy removes this income variation leaving no identifying

information from the Working Income Supplement since our year dummies will account

for national variation. For the last three years, residents of New Brunswick, Ontario,

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia were eligible for earned income

supplements.13      For the automatic benefits, the policy variation comes from small

provincial credits under the NCB program, as well as increased automatic benefits for the

provinces that did not integrate NCB payments.                 Finally, statutory social assistance

payments changed little over this period, with the observed within-province variation

reflecting differing price-indexation across provinces and differences in family

composition across cells.

     In Table 6, we present evidence using the alternative benefit measures to gauge the

importance of other provincially-varying benefits versus the NCB Supplement. In all

12
   Because British Columbia and Quebec reduce provincial child benefits when federal benefits increase,
AUTOBENS does not increase when the NCB Supplement is introduced in these provinces.
13
   New Brunswick’s earned income credit was introduced in 1997, before the NCB. Details on all
programs are provided in the Appendix.

                                                                                                          24
cases we use the same specification as column (4) of Table 4, exploiting child, year, and

provincial variation. For WORKBENS and AUTOBENS we use the same IV strategy as

we used for INTEBENS to predict benefits, but for PROVSA we simply use the statutory

benefit rates available to the family as the policy variable.

    The results in Table 6 use each of the policy variables in isolation, and then combine

them together in the fifth column. The first column uses INTEBENS and so reproduces

the results from the previous table. The second column uses WORKBENS. Higher

provincial in-work benefits provide an incentive to work very similar to the EITC. The

estimates are much less precise than for INTEBENS, meaning that it is difficult to find

significant coefficients. The signs and magnitudes are not dissimilar to those measured in

Column 1, with the exception of transfer major source which is about half again as large

and statistically significant.

    The third column uses the AUTOBENS variable.                Because more benefits not

conditional on earnings decrease the incentive to work, we expect to find opposite signs

than we found for the first two columns. The results do show the expected sign pattern,

with both of the ‘major source’ variables showing strongly significant coefficients.

    The effect of provincial social assistance rates is estimated to be strong and positive

for having any social assistance income. However, the other three point estimates are

uniformly close to zero, although imprecisely estimated. The lack of strong variation in

provincial social assistance rates over this period may contribute to these inconclusive

findings.

    The final column puts all four policy variables in the same regression. For all four

dependent variables, the point estimate and significance level for INTEBENS is stronger

in column (4) than in column (1), suggesting that other provincial programs omitted from


                                                                                        25
the regressions are not driving the results we saw in the main results. The estimates for

WORKBENS and PROVSA are positive for having any social assistance income, but

insignificant for the other three dependent variables.

    From this evidence we draw two conclusions; one strong and one more tentative. The

stronger conclusion is that our main results on the impact of the integration of NCB

benefits with social assistance are not driven by these other policies. The more tentative

conclusion is that integration is a more effective policy than earned income credits or

lower social assistance payments in increasing work among single females. The point

estimates are almost all larger for the integration policy, but the imprecision of the earned

income supplement estimates renders this conclusion more speculative.

        One potential explanation for the stronger effect of integration compared to

earned income credits is that the NCB Supplement is directly subtracted from the

recipients’ monthly social assistance cheques. Recipients are therefore made well aware

that they must work to receive additional benefits. On the other hand, the provincial

programs are often administered separately, or through tax returns. While the incentive

structure may be similar, recipients may not be as aware of potential work incentives and

crowd-out effects. Previous work has documented the relationship between take-up and

the visibility of the program (Currie, 2004). In our case individuals need not apply

separately for the federal and provincial programs, and as such differential take-up is not

driving differences here. However, the transparency of the mechanisms by which the

programs promote workforce participation does differ and transparency arguments may

indeed explain part of the differential effects on labour supply. However, we can not

directly test this explanation.




                                                                                          26
   7. Conclusions

   In this paper, we study the introduction of the National Child Benefit program in

Canada in 1998. Because some provinces chose to integrate the benefits with their social

assistance programs and some did not, cross-province variation in the incentives to leave

social assistance were introduced.     We exploit these differences and find a large,

statistically and economically significant effect on social assistance take-up and work.

The magnitudes of the effects we estimate are within the range of those found in the

EITC literature in the United States. Our estimates suggest that about one third of the

total decline in social assistance receipt can be accounted for by the integration of social

assistance payments. We find that the federal National Child Benefit program has much

stronger effects on work than do the provincial earned income credit programs that were

also designed to promote labour force participation, although the latter effects were

imprecisely estimated. We speculate that a possible reason for these differences in

efficacy lie in the relative transparency of the relationship between the benefit and labour

force participation.

   Saez (2002) stresses the importance of differentiating between the extensive and the

intensive elasticities when evaluating labour market incentives. His optimal tax model

recommends a benefit with a smaller transfer and an earnings exemption before receiving

any benefit when the extensive elasticity is large, and a benefit with larger transfers and

clawbacks starting at very low incomes when the extensive elasticity is less responsive.

In the context of this model, the large extensive elasticities that we estimate may provide

some justification for the integration of benefits under the NCB, as the integration

effectively acts as an earnings exemption, with benefits received only by those who are

working.

                                                                                         27
Appendix – Details on Child Benefits

Below we provide details on the federal and provincial child benefits we include in our
tax calculator. The discussion is split between the in-work benefits and the automatic
benefits. Unless otherwise stated, the description applies to the year 2000. In all cases,
the family income measured used to claw back benefits is from line 236 of the federal tax
form, which is net family income (total income less deductions).


In-work Benefits
In-work benefits condition on having some employment income.

Federal Goods and Services Tax Supplement: 1991

A credit of $106 is phased in at a rate of 2 percent for income over $6,546. Only
childless single adults are eligible. It is clawed back along with the Goods and Services
Tax Credit at a rate of 5 percent for income over $26,284.

Federal Working Income Supplement: 1993

This credit paid benefits of $500 until 1996 and $605, $405, and $330 for one, two and
three children in 1997. It was phased in at a rate of 8 per cent for income higher than
$3,750, and clawed back at a rate of 10 percent for family income over $20,921. It was
cancelled in 1998.

New Brunswick Working Income Supplement: 1997

For each dollar of earned income over $3,750, a family with children receives 4 cents
more Working Income Supplement up to a maximum of $250. Family income over
$20,921 reduces the Supplement by 5 cents until it is completely clawed back.

Ontario Child Care Supplement for Working Families: 1998

Benefits increase with earned income over $5,000 by 21 cents per dollar for one child
under age 7, 42 cents for two children under 7, and 63 cents for three or more children
under 7. The maximum benefit is $1,100 for single families and $1,310 for married
families. For income greater than $20,000, the benefit is decreased by 8 cents per dollar
of family income.

Saskatchewan Employment Supplement: 1998

The benefit is zero until $1,500 of earned income. For earnings greater than $1,500, the
benefits are increased by 25 to 45 cents per dollar, depending on the number of children.
The maximum benefit is $2,100 for the first child, plus $420 for each additional child.
The clawback threshold is $12,900 and the clawback rate is 25 cents per dollar of
earnings over the threshold.


                                                                                          28
Alberta Family Employment Tax Credit: 1998

The benefit pays up to $500 to families with one child and up to $1000 for families with
two children. The benefit starts when earned income reaches $6,500 and rise by 8 cents
per dollar of income over the threshold. They begin to be clawed back at $25,000 at a
rate of 4 cents per dollar.

British Columbia Earned Income Benefit: 1998

The benefit pays up to $605 for the first child, $405 for the second, and $330 for the third
and fourth child. The benefit is clawed in between $3,750 and $10,000 at the rate
necessary to ensure the maximum benefit is reached at $10,000. The benefit is clawed
back for earnings over $20,921 at 12.1% for one child, 20.2% for two children, and
26.8% for three children.

Automatic Benefits
Automatic benefits do not condition on having employment income. They are transferred
to eligible families even if they have zero earned income.

Federal Goods and Services Tax Credit

The benefit pays $202 per adult and $106 per child. It is clawed back with family income
at a rate of 5 percent in excess of $26,284.

Federal Canada Child Tax Benefit

The benefit pays up to $1,104 per child. It is clawed back with family income at a rate of
2.5 percent for one child and 5 percent for two or more children for family income in
excess of $26,284.

Newfoundland and Labrador Child Benefit: 1999

The benefit pays $204 for one child, an additional $312 for a second child, $336 for the
third child, and $360 for a fourth or subsequent child. It is clawed back on family income
in excess of $15,921 until the income level of $20,921 when it is exhausted.

Nova Scotia Child Benefit: 1998

The benefit pays $403 for one child, an additional $319 for a second child, and $286 for a
third or subsequent child. It is clawed back with family income in excess of $16,000
until the income level of $20,921 when it is exhausted.

New Brunswick Child Tax Benefit: 1997




                                                                                         29
The benefit pays $250 per child. It is clawed back at a rate of 2.5 percent for one child or
5 percent for two or more children for family incomes in excess of $20,000.

Quebec Family Allowance: 1998

The benefit pays $625 per child, with an extra $1,300 for the first child of a single-parent
family. It is clawed back with family income in two tiers. First, at a rate of 25 percent
(35% for singles with one child) until a minimum benefit level is reached. Following
that, it is clawed back at a rate of 5 percent for incomes higher than $50,000. Increases in
federal child benefits result in corresponding decreases in the Quebec Family Allowance.

Saskatchewan Child Benefit: 1998

The benefit pays $720 for one child, an additional $924 for a second child, and $996 for a
third or subsequent child. It is clawed back with family income in excess of $15,921 at
rates between 15 percent and 60.6 percent, depending on the number of children.

British Columbia Family Bonus: 1996

This benefit is integrated with the National Child Benefit Supplement. Each child entitles
the parent to $1,332 per year, from which the National Child Benefit Supplement amount
is subtracted. This benefit is also integrated with provincial social assistance as social
assistance payments are reduced dollar for dollar with the Family Bonus. The Bonus is
clawed back on family income in excess of $18,000 at a rate of 8 percent for families
with one child and 16 percent for families with two or more children.




                                                                                         30
References
Bingley, Paul and Ian Walker (1997), “The labour supply, unemployment and
       participation of lone mothers in in-work transfer programmes,” The Economic
       Journal, Vol. 107, No. 444, pp. 1375-1390.

Blundell, Richard, Alan Duncan, Julian McCrae, and Costas Meghir (2000), “The labour
      market impact of the Working Families’ Tax Credit,” Fiscal Studies, Vol. 21, No.
      1, pp. 75-104.

Blundell, Richard W. and James L. Powell (2004), “Endogeneity in semiparametric
      binary response models,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp. 655-
      679.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996), “Health insurance eligibility, utilization of
        medical care, and child health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 2,
        pp. 431-466.

Currie, Janet (2004), “The Take Up of Social Benefits,” NBER Working Paper No.
        10488.

Department of Finance (1997), “Working together towards a national child
      benefit system,” Budget Documents 1997. Ottawa. Available at
      http://www.fin.gc.ca/budget97/child/childe.html.

Dickert, Stacey, Scott Houser, and John Karl Scholz (1995), “The Earned Income
       Tax Credit and transfer programs: A study of labour market and program
       participation,” in James M. Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 9.
       Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Eissa, Nada and Hillary Williamson Hoynes (1998), “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
        the labor supply of married couples,” NBER Working Paper No. 6856.

Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman (1996), “Labor supply responses to the Earned
        Income Tax Credit,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 2, pp. 605-
        637.

Frenette, Marc, David Green, and Garnett Picot (2004), “Rising income inequality amid
       the economic recovery of the 1990s: An exploration of three data sources,”
       Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper No. 219, Statistics Canada. Catalogue
       No. 11F0019MIE.

Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz (2003), “The Earned Income Tax Credit,” in
       Robert Moffitt (ed.) Means-tested Transfer Programs in the United States.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                                                                       31
Immervoll, Herwig, Henrik Kleven, Claus Thustrup Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez (2004),
      “Welfare reform in European countries: A micro-simulation analysis,” CEPR
      Discussion Paper No. 4324.

Meyer, Bruce (2002), “Labor supply at the extensive and intensive margins: The
       EITC, welfare, and hours worked,” American Economic Review Papers and
       Proceedings, Vol. 92, pp. 373-379.

Meyer, Bruce and Dan T. Rosenbaum (2001), “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
       and the labor supply of single mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
       116, No. 3, pp. 1063-1114.

Milligan, Kevin (2002), “Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives
       and fertility,” NBER Working Paper No. 8845.

National Council on Welfare (2003), “Welfare Incomes 2002.” Ottawa, ON.
       Available at http://www.ncwcnbes.net/index.htm.

Receiver General of Canada (2003) “Public Accounts of Canada,” Vol. 1, Ottawa.

Saez, Emmanuel (2002), “Optimal income transfer programs: Intensive versus
       extensive labor supply responses,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117,
       No. 3, pp. 1039-1073.




                                                                                      32
                                     Figure 1: NCB Supplement benefit rates for 1998
                1600


                1400                                                             Three Children
                                                                                 Two Children
                1200                                                             One Child


                1000
Benefit level




                800


                600


                400


                200


                   0
                       0
                     00
                     00
                     00
                     00
                     00
                     00

                  10 0
                  11 0
                  13 0
                  14 0
                  15 0
                  16 0
                  18 0
                  19 0
                  20 0
                  22 0
                  23 0
                  24 0
                  26 0
                  27 0
                  28 0
                  29 0
                      0
                     0
                    40
                    70
                    00
                    30
                    60
                    90
                    20
                    50
                    80
                    10
                    40
                    70
                    00
                    30
                    60
                    90
                   13
                   26
                   39
                   52
                   65
                   78
                   91




                                                       Family Income


                                          Figure 2: Static Labour Supply


                       Consumption


                                 D

                                             F
                                     G

                                                      X1


                                             X0
                                                            E
                                                                       B
                                                  C




                                                                       A

                                                                                  Leisure




                                                                                                  33
                                    Figure 3: Social Assistance Receipt




             .55
Social Assistance Receipt
  .4        .45
             .35       .5




                            1996      1997              1998              1999                 2000
                                                        Year
                                   No−integration provinces            Integration provinces



                                         Figure 4: Positive Earnings
             .8   .75
Positive earnings
 .65       .7.6
             .55




                            1996      1997              1998              1999                 2000
                                                        Year
                                   No−integration provinces            Integration provinces




                                                                                                      34
                             Figure 5: Transfers are Major Income Source




          .5    .45
Transfers major
      .4  .35
          .3




                      1996        1997              1998           1999                 2000
                                                    Year
                               No−integration provinces         Integration provinces



                             Figure 6: Earnings are Major Income Source
          .6
           .55
Earnings major
.5        .45




                      1996        1997              1998           1999                 2000
                                                    Year
                               No−integration provinces         Integration provinces




                                                                                               35
                     Table 1: Dependent Variables By Number of Children


                                         All
                                       single           Zero           One             Two            Three
                                       women          children         child         children        children
observations                           34018           25994           4447           2682             895

Positive social assistance              0.165          0.094           0.403          0.460           0.520

Transfers major source                  0.200          0.138           0.384          0.471           0.557

Positive earnings                       0.817          0.847           0.737          0.670           0.635

Earnings major source                   0.716          0.772           0.560          0.452           0.364

Weeks worked                            35.8            36.8            34.1           30.8            26.3
                                       (21.9)          (21.3)          (23.4)         (24.2)          (24.4)

Hours worked                           1139.2         1158.7          1137.1          1018.4          853.6
                                       (900.4)        (887.3)         (944.7)         (941.1)        (914.7)

Earnings                              16396.4         16546.6         17088.2        14775.7         12803.0
                                     (18629.7)       (18818.4)       (18259.0)      (17248.7)       (17358.7)

Social assistance                      1196.1           587.9         2905.0          3927.9          5113.2
                                      (3173.1)        (2163.2)       (4329.9)        (5080.2)        (6111.1)

Total income                          19972.6         18511.8         24579.0        26187.1         27964.4
                                     (18290.0)       (18673.5)       (16021.7)      (15165.9)       (14042.0)

Notes: All dollar values in 2000 Canadian dollars. Standard deviations are beneath continuous variables.




                                                                                                       36
                             Table 2: Descriptive Statistics




                                        All          Single           Major          Not major
                                      single       women with        transfer         transfer
                                      women         children        recipients       recipients
observations                          34018          8024              7272            26746

INTEBENS                               87.65          419.39         255.45            45.79
                                      (394.4)         (777.9)        (675.5)          (267.9)

Positive social assistance             0.165          0.435           0.683            0.036

Positive earnings                      0.817          0.703           0.279            0.951

Age                                    30.0            35.6           32.2             29.5
                                       (9.7)           (7.6)          (9.4)            (9.7)

Education - dropout                    0.151          0.200           0.313            0.111

Education - secondary graduate         0.134          0.159           0.148            0.131

Education - some post secondary        0.564          0.552           0.494            0.582

Education - university graduate        0.151          0.089           0.045            0.177

Number of children                     0.332          1.589           0.770            0.223

Child under age 6                      0.074          0.352           0.218            0.037

Notes: All dollar values in 2000 Canadian dollars. Standard deviations are beneath
continuous variables.




                                                                                                  37
                                         Table 3: Policy Variation By Year and Province




                       1996     1997     1998    1999      2000                           1996     1997     1998    1999     2000

          Average value of INTEBENS among single mothers                    Average value of WORKBENS among single mothers
Newfoundland               0      0       0         0        0     Newfoundland              67     88     0         0         0
Prince Edward Island       0      0     313        882     1137    Prince Edward Island     180    227     0         0         0
Nova Scotia                0      0     397        992     1183    Nova Scotia              114    107     0         0        0
New Brunswick              0      0       0         0        0     New Brunswick             97    198    74        63        86
Quebec                     0      0       0         0        0     Quebec                    95    165     0         0         0
Ontario                    0      0     304        797      945    Ontario                   80    139    164       250      241
Manitoba                   0      0     346       1027     1112    Manitoba                 162    226     0         0         0
Saskatchewan               0      0     378       1040     1226    Saskatchewan             175    269    788       802      703
Alberta                    0      0     289        695      862    Alberta                  193    257    278       337      243
British Columbia         849     1653   1540      1700     1619    British Columbia         124    151    238       297      240

         Average value of AUTOBENS among single mothers                       Average value of PROVSA among single mothers
Newfoundland            1900   1912   2560      2938       3678    Newfoundland            11271 11373 11449 11508           11607
Prince Edward Island    1896   2032   2291      2072       2117    Prince Edward Island    10250   9984    9680     9282     9599
Nova Scotia             2214   2222   2842      2508       2663    Nova Scotia             10568 10571 10394 10158           10047
New Brunswick           1946   2170   2771      2992       3382    New Brunswick            9580   9851    9934     9930     9926
Quebec                  2280   2190   4177      4323       4459    Quebec                  11537 11104 10835 10547           10295
Ontario                 2067   1962   2278      2002       2063    Ontario                 11949 11976 11670 11277           11097
Manitoba                1902   2021   2335      2433       2246    Manitoba                 9644   9647    9344     8946      8975
Saskatchewan            2234   2267   3351      3155       3110    Saskatchewan            10389 10393     9298     9488      9458
Alberta                 2139   2086   2281      1954       1954    Alberta                  9198   9278    9194     9084      8972
British Columbia        2975   2149   2054      2078       2210    British Columbia        11973 11928 11624 11237           11161




                                                                                                                                     38
                                     Table 4: Main Regression Results


                               (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                              OLS                    IV                    IV                    IV
sample                       single                single              all single            all single
                            mothers               mothers               women                 women

Instrument variation            --               Prov-year            Prov-year-            Prov-year-
                                                                     has children         number children
observations                  8024                 8024                 34018                 34018

First stage                     --                 0.916 ***             0.906 ***             0.915 ***
                                                  (0.026)               (0.014)               (0.011)

Positive SA                   0.136 ***            -0.052 **             -0.065 **             -0.060 ***
                             (0.013)              (0.024)               (0.026)               (0.016)

Transfers major source        0.158 ***           -0.092 ***            -0.106 ***             -0.113 ***
                             (0.013)              (0.022)               (0.021)               (0.018)

Positive earnings             -0.081 ***           0.007                 0.030                 0.039 *
                             (0.013)              (0.023)               (0.025)               (0.020)

Earnings major source         -0.193 ***           0.073 ***             0.074 ***             0.079 ***
                             (0.014)              (0.020)               (0.020)               (0.016)

Earnings                    -10035.5 ***          1010.9 *                -4.1                 570.0
                             (627.0)              (555.5)               (503.7)               (529.3)

Social assistance            1040.6 ***            -746.9 **            -825.2 ***            -886.3 ***
                             (136.4)              (292.8)               (289.8)               (206.2)

Total Income                -7610.4 ***           1087.1 **             -844.5                -389.9
                            (571.0)               (419.7)               (605.6)               (405.7)

Weeks worked                   -6.5     ***         1.3                   1.2                   1.2
                              (0.7)                (1.0)                 (0.8)                 (0.9)

Hours worked                 -290.7     ***         97.7     ***         70.4       ***        86.2       **
                             (27.8)                (34.6)               (26.0)                (33.8)

Notes: Reported is the coefficient on INTEBENS scaled in thousands of 2000 Canadian dollars. One,
two, and three asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All specifications include dummies foryear, province, number of children, age of woman, education
 level, and presence of a child under age 6. In the third column there are second-order interactions
 betweeen province, year, and presence of children dummies. In the fourth column there are second-
order interactions between province, year, and number of children dummies.




                                                                                                               39
                             Table 5: Sensitivity Regression Results


                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                                 Exclude
                                                 mothers               Just
                               Base             of children         women over            Exclude
                              results             under 6             age 24              Quebec
observations                  34018               31314               19280               27553

First stage                    0.915 ***          0.853 ***            0.895 ***            0.882 ***
                              (0.011)            (0.011)              (0.016)              (0.017)

Positive social assistance     -0.060   ***       -0.130 ***           -0.062 ***           -0.101 ***
                              (0.016)            (0.029)              (0.016)              (0.023)

Transfers major source        -0.113 ***          -0.150 ***          -0.131 ***           -0.111 ***
                              (0.018)            (0.038)              (0.022)              (0.032)

Positive earnings              0.039 *            0.080 **             0.054 ***            0.027
                              (0.020)            (0.036)              (0.020)              (0.022)

Earnings major source          0.079 ***          0.112 ***            0.093 ***            0.078 ***
                              (0.016)            (0.040)              (0.020)              (0.030)

Notes: Reported is the coefficient on INTEBENS reported in thousands of 2000 Canadian dollars. One,
two, and three asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively.
All specifications include dummies foryear, province, number of children, age of woman, education
 level,and presence of a child under age 6. There are second-order interactions betweeen province, year,
 and family size dummies.




                                                                                                             40
                         Table 6: Regressions Including Other Benefits

                       (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)                   (5)
                    INTEBENS           WORKBENS             AUTOBENS            PROVSA                 ALL
observations          34018              34018                34018              34018                34018

                                               Positive social assistance
INTEBENS              -0.060 ***             --                   --                 --               -0.088 ***
                      (0.016)                                                                         (0.020)
WORKBENS                 --               -0.037                  --                 --                0.158 **
                                          (0.057)                                                     (0.074)
AUTOBENS                 --                  --                 0.012                --                0.005
                                                               (0.008)                                (0.010)
PROVSA                   --                  --                   --               0.041 ***           0.066 ***
                                                                                  (0.014)             (0.015)
                                                  Transfers major source
INTEBENS              -0.113 ***             --                   --                 --               -0.113 ***
                      (0.018)                                                                         (0.030)
WORKBENS                 --               -0.164 **               --                 --                0.041
                                          (0.064)                                                     (0.086)
AUTOBENS                 --                  --                 0.036 ***            --                0.005
                                                               (0.009)                                (0.016)
PROVSA                   --                  --                   --              -0.008               0.014
                                                                                  (0.018)             (0.018)
                                                    Earnings positive
INTEBENS               0.039 *               --                  --                  --                0.040
                      (0.020)                                                                         (0.026)
WORKBENS                 --                0.037                  --                 --               -0.060
                                          (0.065)                                                     (0.104)
AUTOBENS                 --                  --                -0.012                --               -0.006
                                                               (0.010)                                (0.018)
PROVSA                   --                  --                   --              -0.011              -0.012
                                                                                  (0.010)             (0.020)
                                                  Earnings major source
INTEBENS               0.079 ***             --                   --                 --                0.088 ***
                      (0.016)                                                                         (0.032)
WORKBENS                 --                0.068                  --                 --               -0.117
                                          (0.052)                                                     (0.075)
AUTOBENS                 --                  --                -0.024 ***            --               -0.009
                                                               (0.006)                                (0.013)
PROVSA                   --                  --                   --               0.004              -0.020
                                                                                  (0.013)             (0.014)

Notes: Reported are the coefficients on the noted policy variables, scaled in thousands of 2000 Canadian dollars.
One, two and three asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively. The
control variables are the same as in Table 4, column 4. INTEBENS, WORKBENS, and AUTOBENS are
instrumented using the corresponding policy instrument.




                                                                                                           41
