NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCE, INEQUALITY, AND POVERTY:
CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10979
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10979
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt: World Bank; Levine: University of Minnesota and the NBER. We would like to
thank Aart Kraay for sharing his data with us. Biagio Bossone, Francois Bourguignon, Gerard Caprio, Maria
Carkovic, Michael Fuchs, Alan Gelb, Patrick Honohan, Aart Kraay, Ashoka Mody, Martin Ravallion, and
seminar participants at Brown University, the University of Minnesota, and the World Bank provided helpful
comments. We thank Meghana Ayyagari and April Knill for outstanding research assistance. This paper’s
findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2004 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Finance, Inequality, and Poverty: Cross-Country Evidence
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10979
December 2004
JEL No. O11, O16, G00
ABSTRACT
While substantial research finds that financial development boosts overall economic growth, we
study whether financial development disproportionately raises the incomes of the poor and alleviates
poverty. Using a broad cross-country sample, we distinguish among competing theoretical
predictions about the impact of financial development on changes in income distribution and poverty
alleviation. We find that financial development reduces income inequality by disproportionately
boosting the incomes of the poor. Countries with better-developed financial intermediaries
experience faster declines in measures of both poverty and income inequality. These results are
robust to controlling for other country characteristics and potential reverse causality.
Throsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I.

Introduction
Stunningly high levels of poverty characterize much of the world. In 2001, 2.7 billion

people, more than half of the earth’s inhabitants, lived on less than $2 a day, and 1.1 billion lived on
less than $1 a day.1 Even these figures mask the extremes plaguing some parts of the world. In
South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, only one-quarter of the people live on more than $2 per day.
In accounting for changes in poverty, the literature notes that poverty alleviation can be
decomposed into two parts: Faster economic growth and changes in the distribution of income.
Indeed, depending on the precise definition of poverty, an arithmetic identity links poverty
alleviation, growth, and changes in income distribution (Bourguignon, 2004).2 Besley and Burgesss
(2003) illustrate the potential importance of both growth and changes in income distribution. They
calculate that (1) developing countries need a GDP per capita growth rate of 3.8 percent to cut
poverty in half by 2015, which is twice the growth rate of recent decades, and (2) a one standard
deviation decline in the Gini coefficient of inequality would cut poverty by about half in regions
with highly skewed income distributions such as Latin America and Africa.3 Thus, both GDP per
capita growth and changes in income distribution may reduce poverty.4
Although a large literature finds that financial development produces faster economic
growth, it is unclear whether financial development alleviates poverty. The bulk of existing

1

These are based on Purchasing Power Parity exchange rates from the World Bank.
For example, let YP equal the per capita income of the lowest quintile, Y equals average income per capita, and L is
the Lorenz curve which related the share of income received to the share of the population. Then, Yp = Y*L(0.2)/0.2.
Now differentiate with respect to time and compute growth rates, letting g(x) represent the growth rate of variable x.
This yields g(Yp) = g(Y) + g(L(0.2). The growth of per capita income of the poorest quintile equals the growth of
average per capita income plus the growth of the Lorenz curve, which captures changes in income distribution.
3
In terms of income inequality, the poorest fifth of the families in the average country received less than 6% of that
nation’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This statistic examines income inequality within each country and then
averages across countries. When focusing on people, not countries, world income is even more skewed. According the
UN Development Report, the poorest 20 percent of the people receive less than 1.5% of the world’s income.
4
In terms of determining whether growth or income distribution changes accounts for more of poverty alleviation,
Kraay (2004) finds that growth accounts for the bulk of poverty reductions in a broad cross-country study, while
Ravallion (2001) provides specific country examples where both matter for poverty alleviation.
2

1

empirical research suggests that financial development is positively associated with growth and this
relationship is not due to reverse causality.5 Thus, if financial development does not intensify
income inequality, financial development will help reduce poverty by boosting overall economic
growth (Dollar and Kraay 2002). But, researchers have not determined whether financial
development benefits the whole population, whether it primarily benefits the rich, or whether
financial development disproportionately helps the poor.
This paper examines the relationship between financial development and both changes in the
distribution of income and changes in the level of poverty. We do not reexamine the finance-growth
link, nor do we reexamine the relationship between financial development and the level of income
inequality (Clarke, Xu, and Zou, 2003) or the level of poverty (Honohan, 2004a). Rather, we
provide the first assessment of the impact of financial development on changes in income inequality
and changes in poverty. Thus, our approach complements the finance and growth literature by
examining whether financial development exerts a disproportionately large influence on the poor.
Theory provides conflicting predictions about the relationship between financial
development and changes in poverty and income distribution. Some models imply that financial
development enhances growth and reduces inequality. Financial market imperfections, such as
informational asymmetries, transactions costs, and contract enforcement costs, may be especially
binding on poor entrepreneurs who lack collateral, credit histories, and connections. These credit
constraints will impede the flow of capital to poor individuals with high-return projects (Galor and
Zeira, 1993),6 thereby reducing the efficiency of capital allocation and intensifying income
5

While much research indicates that finance causes growth, considerable debate remains. For reviews of this literature,
see Levine (1997, 2005). Aghion, Howitt, and Mayer-Foulkes (2005) raise serious questions about whether the financial
development affects steady-state growth, and instead find that finance influences the rate of convergence.
6
Banerjee and Newman (1993) and Aghion and Bolton (1997) introduce moral-hazard considerations with limited
liability as the explicit financial market imperfection and study the impact on income distribution and growth. Benabou
(1996), Mookherjee and Ray (2003), and Aghion and Howitt (1998, chapter 1) provide additional theoretical
contributions on the linkages between inequality and economic growth.

2

inequality. From this perspective, financial development reduces poverty by (i) disproportionately
relaxing credit constraints on the poor and reducing income inequality and (ii) improving the
allocation of capital and accelerating growth.
Other theories, however, question whether financial development reduces poverty. Some
research suggests that the poor primarily rely on informal, family connections for capital, so that
improvements in the formal financial sector primarily help the rich.7 Along these lines, Greenwood
and Jovanovic (1990) develop a model that predicts a nonlinear relationship between financial
development and income inequality during the process of economic development. At early stages of
development, only the rich can afford to access and profit from financial markets so that financial
development intensifies income inequality. At higher levels of economic development, financial
development helps an increasing proportion of society. Furthermore, some models imply that if
financial development reduces income inequality, this could slow aggregate growth and increase
poverty. Specifically, if the rich save more than the poor, and financial development reduces income
inequality, this could reduce aggregate savings and slow growth with adverse ramifications on
poverty (Bourguignon, 2001a).8 Thus, empirical evidence on the impact of finance on the
distribution of income and poverty will help distinguish among competing theoretical predictions.
Methodologically, this paper assesses the relationship between financial development,
poverty alleviation, and changes in the distribution of income using broad cross-country
comparisons. Since different problems plague income distribution and poverty data, we use both to
assess the robustness of the results. More specifically, we use two specifications to examine the
7

See discussions surrounding this theme in Haber, et al. (2003) and Bourguignon and Verdier (2000). But, more
competitive financial markets may permit greater access to financial services (Rajan and Zingales, 2003).
8
Galor and Moav (2005) develop a model that integrates two themes in the inequality and growth literature. Under the
assumption that savings rates are an increasing function of wealth, inequality positively impacts growth at early stages
of economic development when physical capital accumulation is the key source of growth. At later stages of
development, credit market imperfections become crucial as human capital accumulation becomes the prime engine of
growth. Thus, income equality ameliorates the adverse implications of credit constraints on human capital accumulation
with positive ramifications on economic growth.

3

relationship between finance and income distribution and two additional specifications to
investigate the finance-poverty alleviation nexus. First, we examine the impact of financial
development on the growth rate of the income of each economy’s poorest 20 percent. We assess the
effect of finance on income growth of the poor while controlling for average per capita GDP
growth. Although income growth of the poor is not a consistent measure of poverty across countries
at different levels of economic development, this specification provides information on whether
financial development influences the poorest quintile differently from its effect on average growth.
By conditioning on average growth, we test whether financial development exerts a
disproportionately large impact on the poor. Second, we continue our assessment of the
distributional consequences of financial development by examining the growth rate of the Gini
coefficient, which measures deviations from perfect income equality. Again, by controlling for
average per capita GDP growth, we provide information on how financial development alters the
distribution of income beyond its impact on aggregate growth. Then, we turn to direct measures of
poverty alleviation. In our third specification, we examine the growth rate of the percentage of the
population living under $1 a day (and $2 a day in robustness tests). By controlling for average per
capita GDP growth, we test whether financial development exerts a positive, negative, or no
influence on poverty beyond the impact of finance on average per capita GDP growth. Finally, we
conduct the same experiment, but we use the growth rate of the Poverty Gap measure, which not
only measures the percentage of the population living under $1 a day, but also weighs this
percentage by how far below $1 a day incomes lie. Again, we assess the impact of financial
development on poverty alleviation while controlling for average growth.

4

We find that financial development alleviates poverty and reduces income inequality. Thus,
the data indicate that financial development exerts a disproportionately positive influence on the
poor. Since existing work finds that financial development accelerates aggregate growth, our
findings suggest that financial development alleviates poverty both by boosting growth and by
reducing income inequality.
More specifically, there are three key findings. First, even when controlling for real per
capita GDP growth, financial development boosts the growth rate of the poorest quintile’s income.
This suggests that financial development reduces income inequality. Second, financial development
induces a drop in the Gini coefficient measure of income inequality. Again, the negative
relationship between financial development and the growth rate of the Gini coefficient holds when
controlling for real per capita GDP growth. This result further emphasizes that financial
development reduces income inequality beyond the relationship between finance and aggregate
growth. Third, financial development reduces the fraction of the population living on less than $1 a
day (or $2 a day) and financial development lowers the Poverty Gap. Again, the positive
relationship between financial development and poverty alleviation holds even when controlling for
average per capita GDP growth. Furthermore, these results hold when using instrumental variables
to control for the endogenous determination of financial development and when conditioning on a
large number of other country characteristics. In sum, using different datasets, we find that financial
development lowers poverty and reduces income inequality by exerting a disproportionately
positive impact on the poor.
This paper is related to a large public policy oriented literature on the relationship between
inequality and economic growth. While “… the conventional textbook approach is that inequality is
good for incentives and therefore good for growth” (Aghion et al, 1999, p. 1615), considerable work

5

actually suggests that income inequality hurts growth.9 To explain this negative relationship
between inequality and growth, many theoretical models assume financial market imperfections
impede the efficient allocation of capital (e.g., Aghion and Bolton, 1997; Banerjee and Newman,
1993; Galor and Zeira, 1993). Taking the financial market frictions as given and ignoring incentive
effects, these models suggest that public policies that redistribute income from the rich to the poor
will alleviate the adverse growth effects of income inequality and therefore boost aggregate growth.
Our paper instead highlights an alternative policy approach: Financial sector reforms that reduce
market frictions will lower income inequality and boost growth without the potential incentive
problems associated with policies that redistribute resources.
Our research also relates to work on how capital market imperfections influence child labor
and schooling. Using household data from Peru, Jacoby (1994) finds that lack of access to credit
perpetuates poverty because poor households reduce their kids’ education. Jacoby and Skoufias
(1997) show that households from Indian villages without access to credit markets tend to reduce
their children’s schooling when they receive transitory shocks more than households with greater
access to financial markets. Similarly, Dehejia and Gatti (2003) find that child labor rates are higher
in countries with under-developed financial systems, while Beegle, et al. (2003) show that transitory
income shocks lead to greater increases in child labor in countries with poorly functioning financial
systems. We contribute to this research by examining the aggregate relationship between financial
development and both poverty alleviation and income inequality.
While our results are robust to different specifications, our analyses face several limitations.
First, we use cross-country regressions, so the results are subject to the usual criticisms of crosscountry studies (Levine and Zervos, 1993). Nonetheless, each methodology suffers from various
9

See Alesina and Rodrik (1994), Perotti (1993, 1996), Person and Tabellini (1994), Clarke (1995), and Easterly (2002).
Though, also see Banerjee and Duflo (2003), Barro (2000), Forbes (2000), and Lundberg and Squire (2003). For
reviews of the literature, see Benabou (1996) and Aghion, Caroli, and Garcia-Penalosa (1999).

6

shortcomings and these cross-country comparisons provide evidence on a crucial issue: poverty
alleviation. Second, we use an aggregate index of financial development that equals credit issued by
financial intermediaries to private firms as a share of GDP. This index does not measure the degree
to which the population in general or the poor in particular access financial services. Nevertheless,
in this initial study, it is crucial to ascertain whether a standard measure of financial development,
which past studies find explains economic growth, also helps account for cross-country differences
in poverty reduction rates and changes in income inequality. Third, income distribution and poverty
are measured with error (Lundberg and Squire, 2003; Dollar and Kraay, 2002). However, unless
this measurement error is correlated with financial development in a very particular manner,
measurement error will bias the results against finding a relationship between financial
development and changes in income inequality. Finally, although our results show the importance
of financial intermediaries for the poor, they are silent on how to foster poverty-reducing financial
development.10 Future work needs to examine the linkages between particular policies toward the
financial sector and poverty alleviation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and describes
the methodology. Section 3 discusses the results and section 4 concludes.

10

For instance, on bank supervision, see Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2004, 2005; Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine,
2004; and Caprio, Laeven, and Levine 2004).

7

II.

Data, Summary Statistics, and Econometric Methodologies
This section describes the variables, provides summary statistics and correlations, and

discusses the econometric methodologies we use to assess the relationship between financial
development, poverty alleviation, and changes in income distribution. Table 1 lists the main
variables by country.

A. Data: Financial Development
To measure financial development, we would ideally like indicators of the degree to which
the financial system ameliorates information and transactions costs and facilitates the mobilization
and efficient allocation of capital. Specifically, we would like indicators of how well each financial
system researches firms and identifies profitable projects, exerts corporate control, facilitates risk
management, mobilizes savings, and eases transactions. Unfortunately, no such measures are
available across countries. Consequently, we rely on a commonly used measure of financial
development that existing work shows is robustly related to economic growth.
Private Credit equals the value of credit by financial intermediaries to the private sector
divided by GDP. This measure excludes credits issued by the central bank and development banks.
Furthermore, it excludes credit to the public sector, credit to state-owned enterprises, and cross
claims of one group of intermediaries on another. Thus, Private Credit captures the amount of credit
channeled from savers, through financial intermediaries, to private firms. Private Credit is a
comparatively comprehensive measure of credit issuing intermediaries since it also includes the
credits of financial intermediaries that are not considered deposit money banks. After controlling for
endogeneity, Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000) and Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000) show a robust
positive relationship between Private Credit and the growth rate of GDP per capita. Data on Private

8

Credit are from the updated version of the Financial Structure Database (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and
Levine, 2001). There is a wide variation in Private Credit, ranging from less than 5% in Ghana,
Sierra Leone, and Uganda to more than 120% in Hong Kong, Japan, and the Netherlands using data
over the period 1980 to 2000. As we describe below, we sometimes use data averaged over the
period 1960-1999, and sometimes we use data over the period 1980-2000 depending on the other
variables and specification.

B. Data: Changes in Income Distribution and Poverty Alleviation
To assess the impact of financial development on the poor, we examine (i) the growth of the
income of the poorest quintile in each economy, (ii) the growth of the Gini coefficient, (iii) the
growth of the percentage of the population living on less than $1 (and $2) dollars per day, and (iv)
changes in a poverty gap indicator, which not only measures the fraction of the population living
below $1 dollar per day, but also how far below this line incomes lie. The remainder of this
subsection defines these dependent variables in more depth.
Income Growth of the Poor equals the annual growth rate of the average per capita income
of the lowest income quintile, computed over the period 1960-1999 (Dollar and Kraay, 2002). More
specifically, we calculate the annual growth rate of the per capita income of the lowest income
quintile by taking the difference between the log of the average income per capita of those in the
lowest income quintile for the last observation and the log of the average income per capita of those
in the lowest income quintile for the first observation, and dividing this log difference by the
number of years between the two observations. Income of the poorest quintile is computed in
constant 1985 US dollars using PPP exchange rates.

9

We use Income Growth of the Poor to assess how financial development influences the
poorest segment of each economy. Income Growth of the Poor is not a direct measure of income
distribution, nor is it a consistent measure of poverty across countries. The poorest quintile in a rich
country could be quite affluent compared to the median person in a poor country. Nevertheless,
since we also control for the growth rate of overall GDP per capita, examining Income Growth of
the Poor allows us to assess whether financial development exerts a disproportionately large impact
on the poorest quintile. Some countries enjoyed rates of Income Growth of the Poor above five
percent per annum (Finland, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Norway, and Singapore). Others actually
suffered negative rates of Income Growth of the Poor of worse than two percent per year (Panama,
Sierra Leone, and Zambia).
Growth of Gini equals the annual growth rate of each country’s Gini coefficient, computed
over the period 1960-1999. More specifically, the Gini coefficient is derived from the Lorenz curve,
which plots the cumulative percentage of the population on the horizontal axis and the cumulative
percentage of income on the vertical axis for each country. A 45-degree diagonal line on this graph
depicts a situation where there is perfectly even income distribution, such that, for example, 20
percent of the population receives 20 percent of the income, and 50 percent of the population
receives 50 percent of the income. To measure income inequality, the Gini coefficient equals the
ratio of the area between the Lorenz curve and the 45-degree line divided by the area below the 45degree line. Since the Lorenz curve equals the 45-degree line when there is perfect income equality,
the Gini coefficient equals zero when perfect equality holds. The Gini coefficient ranges between
zero – perfect equality -and one, where larger values imply greater income inequality. 11 We use the
first and last observation from the Dollar and Kraay (2002) database and calculate the annual

11

We confirm the conclusions using the standard deviation of the income shares, which is highly correlated with the
Gini coefficient.

10

growth rate by dividing the log difference of the last and the first observations by the number of
years between the two observations.
For both Income Growth of the Poor and Growth of Gini, we require a minimum of 20 years
difference between the first and last observation when computing growth rates. On average, there
are 30 years between the first and last observation when computing growth rates, with a maximum
of 40 years.12 This produces identical coverage for the two data series (Income Growth of the Poor
and Growth of Gini) and yields a sample of 52 developing and developed countries. Critically, we
match other data – e.g. Private Credit and GDP per capita growth and Private Credit – with the
sample period covered by Growth of Gini (and Income Growth of the Poor) in regressions where
Growth of Gini (or Income Growth of the Poor) is the dependent variable.
It is worthwhile comparing information on Income Growth of the Poor and Growth of Gini.
From Table 1, note that in Egypt, Finland, France, and Norway, the Gini coefficient shrank at a rate
of more than one percent per annum, while the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and the United States
saw the Gini coefficient grow at almost one percent per annum. Also, observe that Egypt, Finland,
France, Japan, and Singapore, and Norway Hong Kong enjoyed rapid rates of Income Growth of the
Poor. As stressed by Besley and Burgess (2003), countries may experience very rapid Income
Growth of the Poor because of rapid declines in Gini coefficients (Egypt, Finland, France, and
Norway) and countries may enjoy rapid Income Growth of the Poor because the economy is
enjoying rapid overall growth (Japan, Singapore, and Hong Kong).
Next, we consider two measures of poverty intensification.
Growth of Headcount equals the growth rate in the percentage of the population living
below $1 dollar per day (or $2 dollars per day). These data are based on household surveys (Chen

12

We could not compute regression-based growth rates because many countries do not have data for every year and
therefore lack sufficient observations.

11

and Ravallion, 2001). We use data for 58 developing countries. To assess the robustness of our
results, we use two alternative definitions of poverty: $1 per day and $2 per day.13 Using
Purchasing Power Parity exchange rates, these two definitions of poverty are converted into local
currency and we determine the fraction of the population living below each line. Then, we compute
the annual log growth rate using the last and first available observations on the fraction of the
population living below the $1 and $2 per day poverty lines respectively, divided by the number of
years between the first and last observation.14
Growth of Poverty Gap equals the growth rate of the Poverty Gap, where the Poverty Gap
is computed as a weighted measure of (i) the fraction of the population living on less than one dollar
per day and (ii) how far below one dollar per day incomes lie. Specifically, the Poverty Gap is the
mean shortfall from the poverty line, expressed as a percentage of the poverty line. Again, we
define the poverty line as either 1$ or 2$ per day and convert this into local currency using PPP
exchange rates. Thus, the Poverty Gap measures both the breadth and depth of poverty (Chen and
Ravallion, 2001). Then, we compute the Growth of Poverty Gap as the log difference between last
and first available observation on the Poverty Gap, divided by the number of years between the first
and last observation.
There are greater data limitations regarding the direct measures of poverty intensification
(Growth of Headcount and Growth of Poverty Gap) than for Income Growth of the Poor and
Growth of Gini. The data on Headcount and Poverty Gap are only available for the 1980s and
1990s, and frequently only for the 1990s. Thus, we do not use a 20-year minimum and simply
calculate the annualized growth rates of Headcount and Poverty Gap for the longest available time

13
14

However, see Pritchett (2003) who proposes much higher poverty lines.
These data are available at http://research.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/jsp/index.jsp.

12

span.15 Using shorter time frames could magnify the influence of any outlier observations and
make the results more sensitive to business cycle fluctuations or crises. Therefore, we assess the
robustness of our results by (i) limiting the sample to countries for which the growth rate in
Headcount and Poverty gap is calculated over at least five years and (ii) eliminating outliers.
Table 1 indicates that there is wide variation across countries in poverty alleviation rates
over the last two decades. The share of population living on less than a dollar per day increased at
an annual rate of 39% in Poland between 1992 and 1998. Headcount decreased by an annual rate of
21% in Jamaica between 1988 and 2000.

C. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Panel A of Table 2 presents descriptive statistics and Panels B and C present correlations for
the 1960-99 and 1980-99 samples, respectively. Consistent with earlier work, financial development
is positively and significantly correlated with GDP per capita growth. Private Credit is also
positively and significantly correlated with the Income Growth of the Poor, but is not significantly
correlated with Growth of Gini. The Table confirms the Dollar and Kraay (2002) result that the
Income Growth of the Poor is closely correlated (0.81) with overall GDP per capita growth. Also,
there is a significant, negative correlation (-0.49) between the Income Growth of the Poor and
Growth of Gini, which can be partly explained by the very high correlation between the income
share of the poorest income quintile and the Gini coefficient. There is not a significant correlation
between GDP per capita growth and either Growth of Headcount or Growth of Poverty Gap.
However, Private Credit is significantly and negatively correlated with both Growth of Headcount
and Growth of Poverty Gap, indicating that countries with more developed financial systems
15

Unlike in the income distribution regressions, we include poverty data of transition economies outside the Former
Soviet Union after 1990. We do not include the countries of the Former Soviet Union due to data quality and
availability.

13

experienced a faster reduction in the number of people living in poverty. We also find a very high
correlation (0.93) between Growth of Headcount and Growth of Poverty Gap.

D. Econometric Methodologies: Basic Regression Specifications
This subsection sketches the basic regression specifications used to examine the relationship
between financial development and poverty alleviation and income inequality. Here, we simply
describe ordinary least squares equations (OLS). The next subsection discusses how we deal with
potential simultaneity bias. We use cross-country regressions, calculating growth rates of income,
inequality and poverty over the longest available time period and averaging financial intermediary
development and other explanatory variables over the corresponding time period. This approach
differs from Dollar and Kraay (2002) and Lopez (2003) who use panel techniques. We focus on
cross-country regressions for two reasons. First, we are assessing theories that focus on the longrun relationship between financial development and poverty alleviation, and therefore we want to
abstract of business-cycle forces and crises that may influence banking systems and poverty in the
short-run. Second, the poverty data in particular, but also the inequality data, are available for only
a limited number of years and sometimes with gaps in the time-series. Since small samples can
make the dynamic panel estimates unstable and unreliable as discussed in Beck and Levine (2004a),
we examine the long-run relationship between financial development and (i) income growth of the
poor, (ii) changes in income inequality, and (iii) rates of poverty alleviation.16

D.1. Income Growth of the Poor
To evaluate the impact of financial development on income growth of the poorest income

16

Also, the GMM difference estimator used by Lopez (2003) abstracts from cross-country variation and only assesses
time-series relationships.

14

quintile, we use data averaged over the period 1960-99 and use the following regression
specification.

( yi , p ,t − yi , p ,t −n ) / n = αyi , p ,t −n + βFDi + γX i + ε i ,

(1)

In this regression, yi,p,t is the logarithm of average per capita income of the poorest income quintile
in country i in year t, yi,t is the logarithm of average overall GDP per capita, FDi is our Private
Credit measure of financial development in country i, and Xi is a set of conditioning information for
country i.17 We control for the logarithm of the average years of school attainment in 1960 as an
indicator of the initial human capital stock in the economy (Schooling 1960), the growth rate of the
GDP deflator over the period 1960-99 to control for the macroeconomic environment (Inflation)
and the sum of exports and imports as share of GDP to capture the degree of international openness
(Trade Openness). As noted, the period of aggregation, n, is at least 20 years.
The coefficient β in regression equation (1) captures the relationship between financial
development and the growth rate of the average income of the poorest 20 percent of society. This
regression set-up does not allow us to assess how much of the effect of Private Credit is due to its
positive effect on overall GDP per capita growth and how much is due to distributional effects that
influence the poorest income quintile relative to other income groups.
To better understand the distributional effect of financial development, we follow Dollar and
Kraay (2002) and control for real GDP per capita growth in the regression. Specifically, we modify
equation (1) by including average growth as a regressor.

( yi , p ,t − yi , p ,t −n ) / n = α ( yi ,t − yi ,t −n ) / n + βFDi + γX i + λyi , p ,t −n + ε i ,
The coefficient α indicates the relationship between the growth rate of average per capita

17

In line with the finance and growth literature (Levine, 2005), we include Private Credit in logs to control for nonlinearities in the relationship.

15

(2)

income of the poor and overall per capita GDP growth. If the average income of the poorest quintile
grows faster than average per capita GDP growth, α will be greater than one. If the income of the
poorest quintile grows more slowly than average, α will be less than one.
The coefficient β indicates whether there is any differential effect of financial development
on income growth of the poorest quintile beyond any impact on overall GDP per capita growth.
Thus, if financial development only boosts the income growth of the poor by increasing overall
economic growth, then β will equal zero. If financial development exerts a particularly positive
impact on the rich, then β will be negative. And, if financial development exerts a
disproportionately positive impact on the poorest quintile, then β will enter positively.18
D.2. Growth of Gini
To further assess the distributional effects of financial development, we examine Growth of
Gini:

(G i ,t − G i ,t − n ) / n = α ( y i ,t − y i ,t − n ) / n + β FD i + γX i + λ G i ,t − n + ε i ,

(3)

where Gi,t is the log of the Gini coefficient in country i in period t. As before, the time period n is at
least 20 years. As in regression (2), we include the GDP per capita growth rate to (a) separate the
distributional effect of Private Credit from the aggregate growth effect and (b) control for any effect
that GDP per capita growth has on income distribution (Bourguignon, 2001b). If financial
development does not affect the distribution of income, then β will equal zero. If financial
development reduces income inequality, then β will be negative. And, if financial development
exacerbates income inequality, then β will enter positively.

18

Unlike Dollar and Kraay (2002), we also include log of initial income of the poor to control for convergence forces.
As shown, however, the findings hold when excluding initial income.

16

D.3. Growth of Headcount and Growth of Poverty Gap
We also explore the impact of financial development on direct measures of poverty
alleviation. To do this, we regress Growth of Headcount and Growth of Poverty Gap on financial
development, while controlling for the overall growth rate of GDP per capita, and each country’s
initial poverty level.

( Pi ,t − Pi ,t − n ) / n = α ( y i ,t − y i ,t − n ) / n + β FD i + γX i + λ Pi ,t − n + ε i

(4)

In this equation, Pi, t is the log of Headcount or Poverty gap in country i in year t.
Again, by controlling for GDP per capita growth, we identify the relationship between
financial development and poverty alleviation conditional on aggregate economic growth. Thus, this
equation also captures the distributional effect of Private Credit on poverty alleviation because we
control for the effect of financial development on poverty that runs through overall economic
growth. Since the sample periods vary significantly across countries, we match the sample period
for GDP per capita growth with the period used to compute Growth of Headcount and Growth of
Poverty Gap. We take the average of Private Credit over the period 1980 to 2000 to abstract from
business cycle or crisis frequencies.19

E. Econometric Methodologies: Instrumental Variables
To control for potential reverse causation and simultaneity bias, we use instrumental
variable (IV) regressions. The relationship between financial intermediary development and
changes in income distribution and poverty might be driven by reverse causation. For example,
reductions in poverty may stimulate demands for financial services. As another example,

19

For the transition economies, we include Private Credit averaged over the period 1991 to 2000.

17

reductions in income inequality might lead to political pressures to create more efficient financial
systems that fund projects based on market criteria, not political connections.
To select instrumental variables for financial development, we focus on exogenous national
characteristics that theory and past empirical work suggest influence financial development. We
follow the finance and growth literature and use the legal origin of countries and the absolute value
of the latitude of the capital city, normalized between zero and one, as instrumental variables. In
particular, an extensive literature holds that British common law countries do a comparatively better
job than French civil, German civil, Scandinavian civil, or Socialist law countries at protecting
private property rights, fostering private contracting, and hence promoting financial development
(See La Porta et al, 1997, 1998; and the review by Beck and Levine, 2004b). Furthermore, an
extensive literature holds that natural resource endowments, which are imperfectly proxied by
latitude, help explain the development of national institutions (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson,
2001; Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; and Easterly and Levine, 2003). Previous research
demonstrates that both legal origin and latitude explain cross-country differences in financial
development (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2003). We also tried alternative instrument sets,
including the religious composition of countries and ethnic fractionalization based on research by
Stulz and Williamson (2003) and Easterly and Levine (1997) respectively, and obtained very
similar results.
To test the appropriateness of the instruments, we use the Hansen test of the overidentifying
restrictions, which assesses whether the instrumental variables are associated with the dependent
variable beyond their ability to explain cross-country variation in Private Credit. Under the joint
null hypothesis that the excluded instruments (i.e., the instruments not included in the second stage
regression) are valid instruments, i.e., uncorrelated with the error term, and that the excluded

18

instruments are correctly excluded from the estimated equation, the Hansen test is distributed χ2 in
the number of overidentifying restrictions. Failure to reject the null hypothesis implies a failure to
reject the validity of the instrumental variables. In the tables, we provide the p-values of this test of
the overidentifying restrictions and refer to it as “OIR Test”. Furthermore, appropriate instruments
must explain cross-country variation in financial development. In all the regressions reported
below, we reject the null hypothesis that the exogenous variables do not explain cross-country
variation in financial development.

III.

Empirical Results

A.

Changes in Income Distribution
A.1. Income Growth of the Poor
The Table 3 results indicate that (i) financial development increases the growth rate of the

incomes of the poorest quintile and (ii) financial development exerts a disproportionately large
positive impact on the poor since finance is positively related to growth even when controlling for
the growth rate of average per capita GDP. These results are robust to controlling for various
country characteristics and to using instrumental variables to mitigate simultaneity bias.
Consider first regression 1, where we conduct a preliminary analysis of the direct
relationship between financial development and the growth rate of the incomes of the poor without
controlling for average growth. This regression is very similar to standard cross-country growth
regressions except that here the dependent variable is the per capita growth rate of the income of the
poorest quintile. As in standard growth regressions, we condition on the logarithm of the initial
level of income, which in this specification is the initial level of income of the poorest quintile in
1960 (Initial Income of the Poor). The regression indicates that the average income of the poorest

19

quintile grows faster in countries with better-developed financial intermediaries. The log of initial
average income of the poorest quintile enters significantly and negatively, suggesting conditional
convergence of the poorest income quintile, i.e., the incomes of the poor grow faster in countries
where the poor start out poorer. Since we are focusing on the income distributional consequences of
financial development and its impact on poverty, we now turn to specifications where we control
for average GDP per capita growth. Nonetheless, we note that (a) the regression 1 results are robust
to controlling for Schooling in 1960, Inflation and Trade Openness and (b) the results hold when
using instrument variables to extract the exogenous component of financial development.
Next, by controlling for average GDP per capita growth, we examine whether financial
development benefits the poorest income quintile relatively more than the overall population (Table
3, regression 2). Specifically, the results in regression 1 do not distinguish the impact of financial
development on overall per capita GDP growth from the impact of finance on the distribution of
income. Regression 2 separates the growth and distributional effects by regressing the growth rate
of the average income of the poorest quintile on the overall GDP per capita growth rate, log of
initial income of the poor and Private Credit. The coefficient on Private Credit thus captures the
effect of financial development on the poorest income quintile beyond its overall growth effect.
There are two key results in regression 2: Financial development is particularly beneficial to
the poor and the average income of the poor rises approximately one-for-one with overall economic
growth. First, the positive and significant coefficient on Private Credit indicates that financial
development disproportionately boosts the growth rate of the incomes of the poor. That is, financial
development is positively associated with income growth of the poor beyond finance’s effect on
overall growth. GDP per capita growth enters positively and significantly in regression 2. Second,
consistent with Dollar and Kraay (2002), we cannot reject at the 10% level that the coefficient on

20

GDP per capita growth equals one, so that the average income of the poor increases proportionally
with overall GDP per capita growth. In robustness tests, we confirm that these OLS results are
robust to controlling for Inflation and Trade Openness. Finally, note in regression 3 of Table 3 that
the results hold when excluding the logarithm of Initial Income of the Poor from the regression.
Figure 1 (i) displays the positive relationship between Private Credit and Income Growth of
the Poor while controlling for GDP per capita growth and (ii) illustrates the potential importance of
controlling for outliers. In particular, Figure 1 presents a partial scatter plot of Income Growth of
the Poor against Private Credit and includes the estimated regression line. Using regression 2 of
Table, which regresses Income Growth of the Poor against GDP per capita growth and Private
Credit, this figure represents the two-dimensional representation of the regression plane in Income
Growth of the Poor – Private Credit space. To obtain this figure, we regress Income Growth of the
Poor on GDP per capita growth and Initial Income of the Poor, collect the residuals, and call them
e(Income Growth of the Poor | X). Next, we regress Private Credit against GDP per capita growth
and Initial Income of the Poor, collect the residuals, and call them e( Private Credit | X ). Figure 1
plots e(Income Growth of the Poor | X) against e( Private Credit | X ). Figure 1 suggests that
outliers may exert an excessively large influence on the relationship between financial development
and income growth of the poor. To assess the impact of outliers, therefore, we used the
recommendations of Besley, Kuh, and Welsch (1980) for assessing the influence of individual
observations. We (i) computed the change in the coefficient on Private Credit when the ith
observation is omitted from the regression, (ii) scale the change by the estimated standard error of
the coefficient, (iii) take the absolute value, and (iv) call the result ∆βi. Then, we use the Belsley,
Kuh, and Welsch recommendation of a critical value of two, and identify those observations where
abs (∆βi) > 2/sqrt (n), where abs(x) yields the absolute value of x, sqrt(x) yields the square root of x,

21

and n represents the number of observations in the regression. When we do this and omit outlier
countries (those countries where abs (∆βi)>2/sqrt (n)), we obtain the same results.20 Indeed,
omitting these “outliers” increases the t-statistics on Private Credit’s estimated coefficient to above
six without changing the coefficient estimate appreciably.
When using instrumental variables to control for the potential endogenous determination of
financial development, we continue to find that financial development exerts a disproportionately
positive impact on the growth rate of incomes of the poor. Regressions 4-7 use instrumental
variables for financial development, control for average per capita GDP growth, and also condition
on different country characteristics.21 Private Credit enters positively and significantly in all of the
regressions, suggesting that financial development boosts the incomes of the poor above and
beyond its affect on average growth. The control variables do not enter significantly. This does not
suggest that Trade Openness, Schooling, and Inflation are unimportant for growth. Rather, this
result suggests that Trade Openness, Schooling, and Inflation do not have income distribution
effects when controlling for the level of financial development. Moreover, for this paper’s purposes,
controlling for these country traits does not change the size or the significance of the coefficient on
Private Credit.22 In terms of assessing the validity of the instruments, the first-stage R-squares are
all above 0.59 and we reject the hypothesis that the exogenous variables do not explain Private
Credit. Moreover, we do not reject the test of the overidentifying restrictions in any of the
regressions.
In robustness tests, we examined whether the relationship between financial development
and income growth of the poor depends on the level of economic development or the level of

20

The influential observations that are omitted are Sierra Leone, Panama, Sri Lanka, and Turkey. Figure 1 indicates
that Sierra Leone is a particularly large outlier. The results hold even when we only exclude Sierra Leone.
21
We present only IV regressions, but the OLS regressions yield the same findings.
22
Furthermore, controlling for measures of fiscal policy does not change the results on Private Credit.

22

educational attainment based on insights by Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) and Galor and Moav
(2005). Besides including the level of educational attainment, we added the level of GDP per capita
to the Table 3 regressions. We added GDP per capita both when including and excluding the level
of education. In these specifications, the data continued to indicate that finance exerts a
disproportionately positive effect on the poor even when controlling both economic growth and the
level of economic development. Furthermore, we included (i) the interaction term of financial
development and the level of economic development and (ii) the interaction term of financial
development and educational attainment. These interaction terms do not enter significantly. Thus,
we found no evidence that the relationship between financial development and income growth of
the poor varies with the level of GDP per capita or the level of educational attainment.
The distributional effect of Private Credit is not only statistically significant but also
economically relevant. First, note that the coefficient on Private Credit in regression 1, which does
not control for GDP per capita growth, is 0.031, while the coefficient on Private Credit in the same
specification that controls for GDP per capita growth is 0.017 (regression 2). These coefficients
suggest that about half of the overall effect of Private Credit on the income growth of the poorest
quintile does not occur through the impact of financial development on average growth. Next,
consider the case of Brazil. The instrumental variable results in Table 3 regression 2 indicate that
average income of the poor in Brazil would have grown at more than 1.5% instead of 0% annually
over the period 1960-99 if Brazil (Private Credit = 28%) had the same level of financial
intermediary development as Korea (74%).23 This suggests an economically large impact of
financial development on income growth of the poor given that Brazil’s GDP per capita grew at 2%

23

To get this, recall that the regressors are in logs and note that the ln(0.740) - ln(0.276) = 0.99. Multiplying this with
the coefficient in column 2 (0.016) suggests that growth would be more than 1.5% faster. Note this is only an
illustrative example. Such conceptual experiments do not explain how to improve financial development and the
changes discussed above are not marginal.

23

over the same period.

A.2.: Growth of Gini
In Table 4, we use the growth rate of the Gini coefficient measures of income distribution to
assess the distributional consequences of financial development. The dependent variable is the
annual growth rate in the Gini coefficient over the period 1960 - 99. Since the Gini coefficient is a
direct measure of income distribution, we do not use the standard growth equation framework (as in
regression 1 of Table 3). Rather, we focus on the income distribution consequences of financial and
use specifications that include GDP per capita growth, the initial level of the Gini coefficient in
1960 (Initial Gini), and also control for different country traits. 24 Regression 1 presents simple OLS
results and the other regressions use two stage least squares and different control variables. In
sensitivity checks, we confirm that the OLS results hold when using these different control
variables.
The results indicate that financial development reduces income inequality. Private Credit
enters negatively and significantly in all of the specifications. When controlling for Initial Gini,
GDP per capita growth, Schooling 1960, the macroeconomic and international environments
(Inflation and Trade Openness), and when using, or not using, instrumental variables to extract the
exogenous component of Private Credit, there is a negative relationship between financial
development and Growth of Gini. In the IV regressions, the OIR is not rejected and the instrumental
variables (legal origins and latitude) jointly explain financial development in all the regressions. In
terms of the other variables, Initial Gini enters negatively, suggesting that countries with initially
highly unequal income profiles (high Initial Gini) tend to see faster reductions in income inequality
holding other things constant. Also, the IV regressions suggest that GDP per capita growth is
24

We also tested for non-linearities by including the squared term of Private Credit, but it never entered significantly.

24

associated with increases in income inequality when conditioning on financial development. This
may create concerns that financial development intensifies income inequality by boosting growth,
while exerting a negative direct effect on income inequality. On net, however, financial
development reduces income inequality. We continue to find a negative and significant coefficient
on Private Credit when we omit GDP per capita growth from the regression or when we omit Initial
Gini. Thus, the negative impact of financial development on income inequality does not depend on
conditioning on either GDP per capita growth or Initial Gini.
Figure 2 provides the partial scatter plot of the Growth of Gini against Private Credit and
again suggests that possible role of outliers. We use the same methodology to construct Figure 2 as
we used to construct Figure 1. While there is clearly substantial variability, the figure illustrates a
strong negative relationship between financial development and the growth rate of income
inequality. Furthermore, we use the same methodology to remove observations that may exert an
exceptionally large impact on the slope of the regression line. Thus, following, Besley, Kuh, and
Welsch (1980) we omit those countries where abs (∆βi)>2/sqrt (n)).25 Omitting these “outliers”
actually strengthens the relationship between financial development and the growth rate of the Gini
coefficient, i.e., both the absolute value of the estimated coefficient Private Credit and its t-statistic
increase. Thus, outliers do not seem to drive the negative association between finance and changes
in income inequality.
In sum, the results in Tables 3 and 4 indicate that financial intermediary development exerts
a disproportionately positive impact on the poor and reduces income inequality. Private Credit
raises the incomes of the lowest income quintile beyond the overall income growth rate of incomes
in the economy. Moreover, Private Credit reduces income inequality, as measured by the Gini
25

The influential observations that are omitted are Sierra Leone, Panama, Sri Lanka, the United States, and Finland.

25

coefficient, when controlling for the initial level of income inequality in the economy and average
growth. Both results hold when using two-stage least squares to control for simultaneity bias.

B. Poverty Alleviation
Next, we examine the relationship between financial development and measures of poverty
alleviation. This has the advantage of directly assessing the focus of our investigation: poverty
alleviation. The disadvantage is that the data cover far fewer years. For the Income Growth of the
Poor and Growth of Gini analyses, we examined growth rates computed over an average of 30
years, with a minimum of 20 and a maximum of 40 years. Thus, we were testing the impact of
finance on long-run growth rates of incomes of the poor and Gini coefficients. Now, we directly
examine poverty alleviation, but the growth rates are sometimes computed for less than five years
and frequently for less than 10 years. This reduces confidence that these poverty alleviation results
capture the relationship between financial development and reductions in poverty over long periods.
To address concerns about limited time-series data on poverty, we do three things. First, we
control for GDP per capita growth. Besides isolating the relationship between financial
development and poverty alleviation beyond the relationship between finance and aggregate
growth, including GDP per capita growth controls for higher frequency economic fluctuations and
therefore provides some comfort that we assessing the long-run relationship between financial
development and poverty alleviation. Second, we confirm the Table 5 results when limiting the
sample to only those countries where we have a minimum of five years of data. Finally, we control
for the logarithm of the initial values of Headcount and the Poverty Gap, respectively, and also
condition on the general macroeconomic and international environment (Inflation and Trade

26

Openness).26 Besides providing general sensitivity checks, controlling for these country
characteristics increases confidence that we are identifying the long-run relationship between
financial development and poverty alleviation and not convergence effects or changes in the
macroeconomic or international environment that induce a spurious correlation between finance and
poverty alleviation.
Financial development reduces the growth rate of the two poverty indicators: Growth of
Headcount and Growth of Poverty Gap (Table 5). Private Credit enters negatively and significantly
in the OLS regressions (regressions 1 and 2). Private Credit also enters negatively and significantly
in all of the instrumental variables with different control variables, except in the Growth of Poverty
Gap regression when we control for Schooling 1980 (regressions 3-10). In the IV regressions, the
specification tests suggest that the instruments are valid. The test of overidentifying restrictions is
not rejected and the instruments jointly explain cross-country variation in Private Credit.
Figure 3 is a partial scatter plot of the Growth of Headcount against Private Credit, which
both illustrates the strong negative relationship between financial development and changes in
poverty and suggests the potential influence of outliers. We use the same methodology to construct
Figure 3 that we describe above in relation to Figures 1 and 2. Figure 3 clearly illustrates that
greater financial development is associated with poverty alleviation. Next, we use the Besley, Kuh,
and Welsch (1980) methodology for identifying and removing observations that exert an
exceptionally large impact on the slope of the regression line. As described in detail above, we omit
those countries where abs (∆βi)>2/sqrt (n)).27 Omitting these “outliers” does not change the
estimated coefficient on Private Credit or its t-statistic. Thus, outliers are not producing the
negative association between finance and changes in poverty.
26

27

As noted above, these results hold when controlling for differences in fiscal policy across countries.
The influential observations that are omitted are Uganda, Ghana, Laos, and Poland.

27

The effect of Private Credit on poverty alleviation is not only statistically but also
economically substantial. Compare Chile (Private Credit = 54%) with Peru (Private Credit = 13%).
In Chile, the percentage of the population living on less than $1 a day (Headcount) decreased at an
annual growth rate of 14% between 1987 and 2000. In Peru, the Headcount increased at an annual
growth rate of 19% over the period 1985 to 2000. The OLS results in column 1 indicate that if Peru
had had Chile’s level of financial intermediary development, Headcount would have increased only
at an annual rate of 5% per year, which would have resulted in a share of the population living on
less than one dollar of about 2% in 2000 rather than the actual value of 15%.28 Thus, the economic
impact of financial development on the poverty is quite large. The IV results provide an even
stronger assessment of the economic impact of well-developed financial intermediaries.
While we have stressed the robustness of the results to various permutations throughout the
presentation, we emphasize two additional sensitivity tests in closing. First, there may exist
concerns that we have not controlled for the level of real per capita GDP in the poverty alleviation
regressions. Instead, we control for the initial level of the poverty indicators in Table 5.
Nevertheless, when we control for the initial level of real per capita GDP, none of the results
changes. Second, selecting a poverty line is inherently arbitrary. Thus, we re-did the analyses of
poverty alleviation using the $2 a day poverty line. We confirm the Table 5 results: Financial
development reduces the fraction of the population living below $2 a day.

28

To get this, recall that the regressors are in logs and note that the ln(0.54) - ln(0.13) = 1.42. Multiplying this with the
coefficient in column 1 (-0.1), yields 0.14. Thus, instead of growing at a rate of 0.19, Peru’s Headcount would have
grown at an annual rate of 0.05. Starting from an initial value of Headcount of 1.1 percent and accumulating over 15
years, yields the result in the text.

28

IV.

Conclusions

An extensive literature shows that financial development is positively associated with the
growth rate of per capita GDP. This does not necessarily mean, however, that financial development
reduces poverty. If financial development increases average growth only by increasing the incomes
of the rich and hence by increasing income inequality, then financial development will not lower
poverty rates.
Given the extremely high rates of poverty around the world, this paper focuses on whether
financial development reduces poverty. Because of measurement problems, we assess the impact of
financial development on poverty alleviation in two ways. First, we assess the relationship between
financial development and changes in the distribution of income. Here, we use data on 52
developing and developed economies with data averaged over the period 1960 to 1999. Second, we
assess the direct relationship between financial development and poverty alleviation. Here, we use
data on 58 developing countries with data over the period 1980 to 2000.
This paper finds that greater financial development induces (i) incomes of the poor to grow
faster than average GDP per capita, (ii) income inequality to fall more rapidly, and (iii) poverty
rates to decrease at a faster rate. All of these results hold when controlling for the average rate of
economic growth, which suggests that financial development alleviates poverty beyond its affect on
aggregate growth. Furthermore, these results hold when using instrumental variables to control for
endogeneity bias. Thus, we find that financial development reduces poverty by exerting a
disproportionately positive effect on the poor. Future research needs to identify which policies
induce poverty-alleviating improvements in the financial system.

29

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, 2001. The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review
91, 1369-1401.
Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton, (1997). A Trickle-Down Theory of Growth and
Development with Debt Overhang, Review of Economic Studies 64, 151-72.
Aghion, Philippe, Caroli, Eve, and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa (1999). Inequality and Economic
Growth: The Perspective of the New Growth Theories, Journal of Economic Literature 37, 16151660.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1998) Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and David Mayer-Foulkes (2005), The Effect of Financial
Development on Convergence: Theory and Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994): Distributive Politics and Economic Growth, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109, 465-90.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo (2003): Inequality and Growth: What Can the Data Say?
MIT mimeo, June.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Newman, Andrew (1993): Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development, Journal of Political Economy 101, 274-98.
Barro Robert J. (2000): Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries, Journal of Economic
Growth, 5, 5-32.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (1993), International Data on Education Attainment: Updates
and Implications, Oxford Economic Papers, 2001. (Updated data are available from:
http://worldbank.org/research/growth/ddbarlee.htm)
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine (2004): Bank Supervision and Regulation:
What Works Best? Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-48.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine (2005). Rethinking Bank Supervision and
Regulation: Until Angels Govern. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine (2004a): Stock Markets, Banks and Growth: Panel Evidence,
Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 423-442.
Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine (2004b). Legal Institutions and Financial Development. In
Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, Eds., Handbook of New Institutional Economics. The
Netherlands: Springer Press, forthcoming.

30

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza, (2000): Finance and the Sources of Growth.
Journal of Financial Economic 58, 261-300.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, (2001): The financial structure database.
In Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R. (Eds.), Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A CrossCountry Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 1780.
Beck, Thorsten; Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, (2003): Law, Endowments and Finance,
Journal of Financial Economics 70, 137-81.
Beegle, Kathleen, Rajeev H. Dehejia, and Roberta Gatti, (2003): Child Labor, Crop Shocks, and
Credit Constraints, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 10088.
Benabou, Roland (1996): Inequality and Growth, NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 11, 11-74.
Besley, Kuh and Welsch, 1980. Regression Diagnostics: Identifying Influential Data and Sources
of Collinearity. New York: Wiley
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess, (2003): Halving Global Poverty, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17, 3-22.
Bourguignon, Francois (2001a): Pareto-Superiority of Unegalitarian Equilibria in Stiglitz’s
Model of Wealth Distribution with Convex Savings Function, Econometrica 49, 1469-75.
Bourguignon, Francois (2001b): The Pace of Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction, Paper
presented at LACEA 2001 Conference.
Bourguignon, Francois (2004): The Poverty-Growth-Inequality Triangle. World Bank mimeo.
Bourguignon, François and Thierry Verdier (2000): Oligarchy, democracy, inequality and
growth, Journal of Development Economics (62)2, 285-313
Caprio, Gerry; Luc Laeven and Ross Levine (2004): Governance and Bank Valuation, World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper, #3202.
Chen and Ravillion, 2001” How Did the World’s Poor Fare in the 1990s? Review of Income and
Wealth 47, 283-300.
Clarke, George (1995): More evidence on income distribution and growth,” Journal of
Development Economics Vol. 47, 403-427.
Clarke, George; Lixin Colin Xu and Heng-fu Zou (2003): Finance and Income Inequality, Test
of Alternative Theories, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, #2984.
Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Roberta Gatti, (2003): Child Labor: The Role of Income Variability and
Credit Constraints Across Countries, World Bank mimeo
31

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. (2004): Regulations, Market Structure,
Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36,
593-622.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay (2002): Growth is Good for the Poor, Journal of Economic Growth
7, 195-225.
Easterly, William (2002): Inequality Does Cause Underdevelopment, Center for Global
Development Working Paper, 1.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997), Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Division, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 1203-1250.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2003), Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 3-39.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L Sokoloff, 1997. Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies, in How Latin America Fell Behind.
Stephen Haber, ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 260-304.
Fernandez, R. and R. Rogerson (1996): Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of
Public Education, Quarterly Journal of Economic 111, 135-164.
Forbes, Kristin (2000): A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and Growth,
American Economic Review, 90, 869-887.
Galor, Oded and J. Zeira. (1993): Income Distribution and Macroeconomics. Review of
Economic Studies 60, 35-52.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav (2005): From Physical to Human Capital Accumulation: Inequality
and the Process of Development. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Jovanovic, Boyan (1990): Financial Development, Growth, and the
Distribution of Income, Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076-1107.
Haber, Stephen. H., Armando Razo, and Noel Maurer (2003), The Politics of Property Rights:
Political Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, Cambridge
University Press.
Honohan, Patrick (2004a): Financial Development, Growth and Poverty: How Close are the
Links, in Charles Goodhart (ed.): Financial Development and Economic Growth: Explaining the
Links, (London: Palgrave), forthcoming.
Jacoby, Hanan G. (1994): Borrowing Constraints and Progress Through School: Evidence from
Peru, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 151-60.
Jacoby, Hanan G. and Emmanuel Skoufias (1997): Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital,
32

Review of Economic Studies 64, 311-335.
Kraay, Aart (2004): When is Growth Pro-Poor: Evidence form a Panel of Countries, World Bank
mimeo.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997.
Legal Determinants of External Finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei, Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, (1997):
Legal Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.
Levine, Ross (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 35: 688-726.
Levine, Ross (2005): Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence. In Handbook of Economic
Growth, Eds. Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland Elsevier
Publishers, forthcoming.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck, (2000): Financial Intermediation and
Growth: Causality and Causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. (1993): What We Have Learned About Policy and Growth From
Cross-Country Regressions. American Economic Review 83, 426-430.
Lopez, Humberto (2003): Pro-Growth, Pro-Poor: Is there a Tradeoff? World Bank mimeo.
Lundberg, Mattias and Lyn Squire, (2003): The Simultaneous Evolution of Growth and
Inequality. Economic Journal 113, 326-44.
Mookherjee, D. and D. Ray (2003): Persistent Inequality. Review of Economic Studies 70, 369393.
Perotti, Roberto (1993): Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution, and Growth, Review of
Economic Studies 60, 755-76.
Perotti, Roberto (1996): Growth, Income Distribution, and Growth, Journal of Economic Growth
1, 149-87
Person, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994): Is Inequality Harmful for Growth? American
Economic Review 84, 600-21.
Pritchett, Lant (2003): Who is Not Poor? Proposing a Higher International Standard for Poverty,
Harvard University mimeo.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, (2003): Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists:
Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity. New
York: Crown Business.

33

Ravallion, Martin (2001): Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Looking Beyond Averages, World
Development 29, 1803-15.
Stulz, Rene M. and Rohan Williamson (2003), Culture, Openness, and Finance, Journal of
Financial Economics, 70, 313-349.

34

Table 1: Financial Development and Growth of Inequality and Social Indicators
GDP per capita is in constant 1995 US$ and averaged over the period 1960-1999. Private Credit equals claims of financial institutions on the
private sector as a share of GDP averaged over the period 1960-1999. Income Growth of the Poor equals the annual growth rate of income per
capita of the poorest quintile over the period 1960-1999.Growth of Gini is the annual growth rate of the Gini coefficient over the period 19802000. Growth of Headcount is the annual growth rate of the percentage of the population living below the national poverty line, as defined as
living on $1 a day. Growth of Poverty Gap is the annual growth rate of the mean shortfall from the poverty line expressed as a percentage of the
poverty line. Detailed variable definitions and sources are in the appendix.

Australia
Burundi
Burkina Faso
Bangladesh
Bulgaria
Bahamas, The
Bolivia
Brazil
Botswana
Canada
Chile
Cote d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Colombia
Costa Rica
Germany
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Algeria
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Spain
Ethiopia
Finland
France
United Kingdom
Ghana
Gambia
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Hong Kong, China
Honduras
Croatia
Hungary
Indonesia
India
Jamaica
Japan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Lao PDR
Sri Lanka
Lesotho
Morocco
Madagascar

GDP per capita
19,045
181
241
291
1,536
13,057
887
4,217
2,751
18,947
3,621
916
761
2,122
3,126
27,272
32,113
1,590
1,636
1,746
958
13,514
107
25,114
25,210
17,732
352
366
11,057
1,434
757
18,691
699
4,430
4,622
794
327
1,970
37,559
338
8,093
345
646
490
1,258
265

Private Credit
0.535
0.095
0.134
0.202
0.089
0.473
0.288
0.273
0.116
0.744
0.538
0.310
0.190
0.284
0.160
0.966
0.413
0.258
0.311
0.233
0.325
0.783
0.162
0.628
0.891
0.856
0.034
0.159
0.398
0.160
0.336
1.483
0.297
0.323
0.286
0.300
0.251
0.266
1.475
0.306
0.861
0.060
0.190
0.151
0.307
0.147

Income Growth of
the Poor
Growth of Gini
0.020
0.004

35

0.015

0.002

0.018
0.010
0.003

-0.008
-0.005
0.007

0.020
0.011

0.004
0.005

0.021
-0.001
0.018
0.027
-0.002

0.000
0.001
0.000
0.002
0.009

0.003
0.042
0.032

0.011
-0.010
-0.004

0.057
0.044
0.014

-0.018
-0.010
0.008

0.022

0.003

-0.001
0.052
0.013

-0.006
0.005
-0.003

0.044
0.022
0.015
0.055

-0.002
-0.004
-0.007
-0.007

0.066

0.001

0.034

-0.005

-0.017

-0.002

Growth of
Headcount

Growth of Poverty
Gap

0.031
-0.084
0.019
0.296

0.083
-0.161
0.018
0.170

0.109
-0.018
-0.010

0.230
-0.018
0.002

-0.143
0.092
-0.128
0.002
-0.105

-0.133
0.144
-0.159
-0.015
-0.115

-0.059
0.209
-0.028

-0.140
0.263
-0.026

-0.019

-0.025

-0.003
-0.118

0.006
-0.163

-0.083
-0.183

-0.122
-0.214

-0.037
0.045
0.139
-0.088

-0.047
-0.112
0.139
-0.127

-0.209

-0.261

-0.084

-0.168

0.235
-0.033
0.022
-0.092
0.010

0.354
-0.048
0.048
-0.155
0.016

GDP per capita
Mexico
3,298
Mali
264
Mongolia
430
Mauritania
446
Malaysia
3,386
Niger
242
Nigeria
251
Nicaragua
512
Netherlands
24,810
Norway
30,246
Pakistan
436
Panama
2,910
Peru
2,278
Philippines
1,095
Poland
2,953
Portugal
9,582
Paraguay
1,832
Romania
1,658
Senegal
562
Singapore
18,526
Sierra Leone
273
El Salvador
1,495
Slovenia
10,091
Sweden
27,103
Thailand
2,009
Trinidad and Tobago
4,502
Tunisia
1,910
Turkey
2,519
Uganda
259
Uruguay
5,512
United States
25,730
Venezuela
3,533
Vietnam
253
South Africa
4,137
Zambia
478

Private Credit
0.172
0.131
0.089
0.315
0.894
0.120
0.139
0.276
1.215
0.814
0.237
0.559
0.135
0.333
0.155
0.721
0.182
0.079
0.276
0.974
0.036
0.058
0.258
1.078
0.711
0.436
0.587
0.155
0.025
0.317
0.944
0.321
0.150
0.521
0.062

Income Growth of
the Poor
Growth of Gini
0.012
0.002

36

0.041
-0.013
-0.005

0.002
0.007
0.003

0.035
0.052
0.028
-0.023
0.001
0.016

-0.009
-0.012
0.000
0.010
-0.006
0.004

0.039

-0.006

-0.005
0.052
-0.077
-0.012

0.002
0.002
0.006
0.001

0.033
0.031
0.021
0.036
0.029

-0.009
0.004
0.002
-0.002
-0.002

0.011
0.001

0.009
0.003

-0.027

0.004

Growth of
Growth of Poverty
Headcount
Gap
-0.022
0.006
0.296
0.451
0.221
0.324
-0.045
-0.078
-0.188
-0.230
0.124
0.334
0.006
0.015
0.006
0.013

-0.114

-0.160

0.191
-0.026
0.389

0.238
-0.039
0.570

0.123
0.230
-0.177

0.231
0.118
-0.314

0.034
-0.139

0.013
-0.139

-0.127
0.141
-0.110
-0.041
-0.003
-0.056

-0.246
0.400
-0.105
-0.041
-0.014
-0.048

0.038
0.039
0.010
-0.002

0.089
0.054
0.029
-0.025

Table 2: Summary Statistics and Correlations
Panel A presents the descriptive statistics and Panels B and C present the correlations.
Income Growth of the Poor equals the annual change in the logarithm of the level of income per capita of the poorest quintile over the period
1960-1999. Growth of Gini is the annual change in the logarithm of the Gini coefficient over the period 1960-99. GDP Per capita growth equals
the growth rate of real GDP per capita over the periods 1960-99 and 1980–00 respectively. Private Credit equals claims of financial institutions
on the private sector as a share of GDP averaged over the periods 1960-99 and 1980-00 respectively. Growth of Headcount is the annual growth
rate of the percentage of the population living below the national poverty line, as defined as living on $1 a day, over the period 1980-2000.
Growth of Poverty Gap is the annual growth rate of the mean shortfall from the poverty line expressed as a percentage of the poverty line, over
the period 1980-2000. Panel B presents correlations for the period 1960-99. Panel C presents correlations for the sample 1980 – 2000. Detailed
variable definitions and sources are in the appendix.

Panel A:
Variable
Income growth of poor
Growth of Gini
GDP per capita growth 60-99
GDP per capita growth 80-00
Private Credit: 60-99
Private Credit: 80-00
Growth of Headcount
Growth of Poverty Gap

Obs

Mean

52
52
52
58
52
58
58
58

Std. Dev.

0.018
0.000
0.020
0.015
0.415
0.245
0.008
0.012

0.025
0.006
0.017
0.022
0.302
0.161
0.131
0.187

Panel B:
Income growth
of poor
Growth of Gini
GDP per capita growth 60-99
Private Credit: 60-99

-0.491***
0.805***
0.620***

GDP per capita
Growth of Gini growth 60-99
-0.072
-0.206

0.646***

***, ** and * represent significance at 1, 5 and 10% level respectively.

Panel C:
Growth of Poverty Gap
GDP per capita growth 80-00
Private Credit: 80-00

Growth of
Headcount
0.934***
-0.125
-0.411***

Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.129
-0.349***

***, ** and * represent significance at 1, 5 and 10% level respectively.

37

GDP per capita
growth 80-00

0.221

Min
-0.077
-0.018
-0.021
-0.057
0.048
0.025
-0.209
-0.314

Max
0.066
0.011
0.067
0.063
1.477
0.894
0.389
0.570

Table 3: Finance and Income Growth of the Poor
The dependent variable is Income Growth of the Poor, which equals the annual growth rate in the income per capita of the poorest
quintile over the period 1960-1999. The regressors are as follows. Initial Income of the Poor equals the logarithm of the initial level of
income per capita of the poorest quintile (e.g., 1960 data). GDP per capita growth equals the growth rate of real GDP per capita over
the period 1960-1999. Trade Openness equals the logarithm of the share of exports plus imports relative to GDP averaged over the
period 1960-1999. Inflation is the growth rate of the GDP deflator over the period 1960-1999. Schooling 1960 is the logarithm of
secondary school attainment from the Barro-Lee dataset in 1960. Private Credit equals the logarithm of claims of financial institutions
on the private sector as a share of GDP averaged over the period 1960-1999. Specifications (1) - (3) are estimated using OLS with
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Specifications (4)-(7) are estimated using two-stage least squares with heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors, where instrumental variables are used for Private Credit. The instrumental variables are three dummy
variables for the legal origin of the country and the country’s latitude. Specifically, Common, French and German equal one for
countries with the respective legal origin and zero otherwise. Latitude is the absolute value of the capital city’s latitude. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. Specifications (1) - (3) report the regression R-squared. Specifications (4) - (7) report the
first-stage R-squared and the test of the over-identifying restrictions (OIR test), which tests the null hypothesis that the instruments are
uncorrelated with the residuals of the second stage regression. Detailed variable definitions and sources are in the appendix.

Initial income of the
poor

1
Income
Growth of
the Poor

2
Income
Growth of
the Poor

-0.009***
[0.003]

-0.005**
[0.002]
0.777***
[0.119]
0.016***
[0.005]

GDP per capita growth
Private Credit

0.031***
[0.005]

3
Income
Growth of
the Poor

0.852***
[0.113]
0.011**
[0.004]

4
Income
Growth of
the Poor

5
Income
Growth of
the Poor

6
Income
Growth of
the Poor

7
Income
Growth of
the Poor

0.583**
[0.223]
0.021***
[0.007]

-0.011*
[0.006]
0.429
[0.307]
0.032**
[0.013]
-0.004
[0.004]

-0.011
[0.006]
0.408
[0.375]
0.033**
[0.017]

-0.017
[0.010]
-0.007
[0.587]
0.047**
[0.023]

Trade Openness
Inflation

0.003
[0.003]

Schooling 1960
Constant
Estimation Procedure:
R-squared
R-squared (1st stage)
OIR Test (p-values)
Observations

0.099***
[0.018]
OLS
0.588

52

0.043***
[0.016]
OLS
0.726

52

0.014**
[0.006]
OLS
0.713

52

***, ** and * represent significance at 1, 5 and 10% level respectively

38

0.030**
[0.012]
IV

0.116**
[0.056]
IV

0.095*
[0.053]
IV

-0.001
[0.003]
0.154*
[0.086]
IV

0.597
0.364
52

0.743
0.1377
52

0.756
0.1132
52

0.721
0.5111
48

Table 4: Finance and Changes in Income Distribution
The dependent variable is Growth of Gini, which equals the annual growth rate in the Gini coefficient over the period 1960-1999. The
regressors are as follows. Initial Gini equals the logarithm of the value of the Gini coefficient in 1960. GDP per capita growth equals
the growth rate of real GDP per capita over the period 1960-1999. Private Credit equals the logarithm of claims of financial
institutions on the private sector as a share of GDP averaged over the period 1960-1999. Trade Openness equals the logarithm of the
share of exports plus imports relative to GDP averaged over the period 1960-1999. Inflation is the growth rate of the GDP deflator
over the period 1960-1999. Schooling 1960 is the logarithm of secondary school attainment from the Barro-Lee dataset in 1960.
Specification (1) is estimated using OLS with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Specifications (2) – (5) are estimated
using two-stage least squares with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, where instrumental variables are used for Private
Credit. The instrumental variables are three dummy variables for legal origin of the country and the country’s latitude. Specifically,
Common, French and German equal one for countries with the respective legal origin and zero otherwise. Latitude is the absolute
value of the capital city’s latitude. Specification (1) reports the regression R-squared. Specifications (2) – (5) report the first-stage Rsquared and the test of the over-identifying restrictions (OIR test), which tests the null hypothesis that the instruments are uncorrelated
with the residuals of the second stage regression. Detailed variable definitions and sources are in the appendix.

1

2

3

4

5

Growth of Gini Growth of Gini Growth of Gini Growth of Gini Growth of Gini
Initial Gini
GDP per capita growth
Private Credit

-0.013***

-0.023***

-0.023***

-0.019***

-0.020***

(0.003)
0.044
(0.051)
-0.004***
(0.001)

(0.007)
0.314**
(0.135)
-0.015***
(0.005)

(0.006)
0.220**
(0.100)
-0.013***
(0.004)
0.003
(0.002)

(0.006)
0.280**
(0.128)
-0.015***
(0.005)

(0.006)
0.295**
(0.138)
-0.015***
(0.005)

Trade Openness
Inflation

-0.002
(0.002)

Schooling 1960
Constant
Estimation Procedure:
OIR Test
Observations
R-squared
R-squared (1st stage)

0.041***
(0.012)
OLS
52
0.212

0.063***
(0.021)

0.053***
(0.020)

0.053***
(0.019)

0.003*
(0.002)
0.053***
(0.017)

IV

IV

IV

IV

0.744
52

0.347
52

0.440
52

0.258
48

0.607

0.665

0.660

0.670

***, ** and * represent significance at 1, 5 and 10% level respectively

39

Table 5: Finance and Poverty Alleviation
The dependent variables are Growth of Headcount, which equals the annual growth rate of the share of population living below the poverty line of $1/day over the period 1980-2000 and Growth of Poverty Gap, which is the
annual growth rate in the e mean shortfall from the poverty line of $1/day expressed as a percentage of the poverty line over the period 1980-2000.
The regressors are as follows. Initial Value is the logarithm of the initial Headcount or Poverty Gap, respectively. GDP per capita growth equals the growth rate of real GDP per capita over the period 1980-2000. Private
Credit equals the logarithm of claims of financial institutions on the private sector as a share of GDP averaged over the period 1980-1999. Trade Openness equals the logarithm of the share of exports plus imports relative to
GDP averaged over the period 1980-1999. Inflation is the growth rate of the GDP deflator over the period 1980-1999. Schooling 1980 is the logarithm of secondary school attainment from the Barro-Lee dataset in 1980.
Specifications (1) and (2) are estimated using OLS with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Specifications (3) - (10) are estimated using two-stage least squares with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors,
where instrumental variables are used for Private Credit. The instrumental variables are three dummy variables for the legal origin of the country and the country’s latitude. Specifically, Common, French and Socialist equal
one for countries with the respective legal origin and zero otherwise. Latitude is the absolute value of the capital city’s latitude. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Specifications (1) and (2) report the
regression R-squared. Specifications (3) - (10) report the first-stage R-squared and the test of the over-identifying restrictions (OIR test), which tests the null hypothesis that the instruments are uncorrelated with the residuals
of the second stage regression. Detailed variable definitions and sources are in the appendix.

Initial Value
GDP per capita growth
Private Credit

1
Growth of
Headcount
-0.035***
(0.011)
-0.934
(0.625)
-0.095***
(0.020)

2
Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.053***
(0.015)
-1.516*
(0.891)
-0.133***
(0.028)

3
Growth of
Headcount
-0.041***
(0.012)
-0.778
(0.678)
-0.163***
(0.034)

4
Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.055***
(0.017)
-1.492
(0.903)
-0.148**
(0.062)

Trade Openness

5
Growth of
Headcount
-0.040***
(0.011)
-0.779
(0.778)
-0.158***
(0.032)
-0.002
(0.034)

6
Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.056***
(0.017)
-1.358
(0.992)
-0.147**
(0.055)
-0.019
(0.046)

Inflation

7
Growth of
Headcount
-0.041***
(0.014)
-0.784
(0.704)
-0.161***
(0.038)

8
Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.055***
(0.020)
-1.496
(0.952)
-0.146**
(0.068)

-3.69E-05
(0.015)

-1.40E-04
(0.020)

Schooling 1980
Constant
Estimation Procedure:
OIR Test
Observations
R-squared
R-squared (1st stage)

-0.059
(0.040)
OLS

-0.131**
(0.051)
OLS

58
0.387

58
0.362

9
Growth of
Headcount
-0.036**
(0.016)
-1.468
(0.998)
-0.112**
(0.044)

10
Growth of
Poverty Gap
-0.054**
(0.026)
-2.008
(1.493)
-0.048
(0.079)

-0.045
(0.060)
0.052
(0.146)
IV
0.678
47
0.353

-0.159***
(0.058)
IV
0.514
58

-0.154
(0.098)
IV
0.503
58

-0.143
(0.153)
IV
0.485
58

-0.078
(0.223)
IV
0.538
58

-0.155**
(0.069)
IV
0.504
58

-0.151
(0.099)
IV
0.500
58

0.010
(0.040)
-0.092
(0.098)
IV
0.623
47

0.329

0.377

0.399

0.452

0.358

0.402

0.303

***, ** and * represent significance at 1, 5 and 10% level respectively.

40

Figure 1: Partial Scatter Plot of Income Growth of the Poor against Private Credit
Using regression 2 of Table 3, which regresses Income Growth of the Poor against GDP per capita
Growth, log of Initial Income of the Poor and Private Credit, this figure represents the twodimensional representation of the regression plane in Income Growth of the Poor – Private Credit
space. To obtain this figure, we regress Income Growth of the Poor on GDP per capita Growth and
log of Initial Income of the Poor, collect the residuals, and call them e(Income Growth of the Poor |
X). Next, we regress Private Credit against GDP per capita Growth and log of Initial Income of the
Poor, collect the residuals, and call them e(Private Credit | X ). Then, we plot e(Income Growth of
the Poor | X) against e(Private Credit | X ).

41

Figure 2: Partial Scatter Plot of Growth of Gini against Private Credit
Using regression 1 of Table 4, which regresses Growth of Gini against log of initial Gini, GDP per
capita Growth and Private Credit, this figure represents the two-dimensional representation of the
regression plane in Growth of Gini – Private Credit space. To obtain this figure, we regress Growth
of Gini on log of initial Gini and GDP per capita Growth, collect the residuals, and call them
(Growth of Gini | X). Next, we regress Private Credit against log of initial Gini and GDP per capita
Growth, collect the residuals, and call them e(Private Credit | X ). Then, we plot e(Growth of Gini |
X) against e(Private Credit | X).

42

Figure 3: Partial Scatter Plot of Growth of Headcount against Private Credit
Using regression 1 of Table 5, which regresses Growth of Headcount against log of initial
Headcount, GDP per capita Growth and Private Credit, this figure represents the two-dimensional
representation of the regression plane in Growth of Headcount – Private Credit space. To obtain
this figure, we regress Growth of Headcount on log of initial Headcount and GDP per capita
Growth, collect the residuals, and call them (Growth of Headcount | X). Next, we regress Private
Credit against log of initial Headcount and GDP per capita Growth, collect the residuals, and call
them e(Private Credit | X ). Then, we plot e(Growth of Headcount | X) against e(Private Credit | X).

43

Appendix: Variable Definitions
Variable

Variable Definition

Source

Income Growth of the Poor

GDP per capita growth of the lowest income quintile group

World Development Indicators (WDI),
Dollar and Kraay (2002)

Growth of Gini

The Gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the Lorenz Curve, which plots share Dollar and Kraay (2002)
of population against income share received, to the area below the diagonal. It lies
between 0 and 1, where 0 is perfect equality and 1 is perfect inequality. The growth rate
is calculated as the log difference between the last and the first available observations,
divided by the number of years.

Growth of Headcount

Headcount is the percentage of the population living below the national poverty line,
as defined as living on $1 a day. The growth rate is calculated as the log difference
between the last and the first available observations, divided by the number of years.

Povcal Net, World Bank

Growth of Poverty Gap

The poverty gap is defined as the mean shortfall from the poverty line, expressed as
a percentage of the poverty line. The growth rate is calculated as the log difference
between the last and the first available observations, divided by the number of years.

Dollar and Kraay (2002)

GDP per capita

GDP per capita in constant 1995 US$

WDI

GDP per capita Growth

GDP per capita growth, annual %

WDI, Dollar and Kraay (2002)

Private Credit

The claims on private sector by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions as a share of GDP

IFS, own calculations

Schooling in 1960/1980

The logarithm of the average years of school attainment in 1960 or 1980

Barro-Lee dataset; Barro and Lee (1993)

Inflation

The growth rate of the GDP deflator

WDI

Trade Openness

The logarithm of the share of imports plus exports in GDP

WDI

Latitude

The absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values
between 0 and 1

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (henceforth LLSV, 1999)

Common

A dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the origin of the country’s legal
system is British and zero otherwise.

LLSV (1999)

A dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the origin of the country’s legal
system is French and zero otherwise.

LLSV (1999)

A dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the origin of the country’s legal
system is German and zero otherwise.

LLSV (1999)

French

German

44

Socialist

A dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the country is a transition economy
and zero otherwise.

45

LLSV (1999)

