NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THEFT AND TAXES
Mihir A. Desai
Alexander Dyck
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 10978
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10978
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

A previous version of this paper circulated under the title Corporate Governance and Taxation. We thank
Mehmet Beceren, Kent McNellie, Bill Simpson, and James Zeitler for their valuable research assistance. We
also thank Milton Harris (who suggested the title), Joel Slemrod, Per Stromberg, René Stulz, and participants
at seminars at the University of Chicago, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of
Michigan, the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard Business School, the NBER University Research
Conference, the NBER Public Economics Summer Institute, Vanderbilt University, the Wharton School and
Moscow’s NES for their comments. Desai and Dyck thank the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School and Zingales the Center for Research on Security Prices and the George Stigler Center at the
University of Chicago for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Mihir A. Desai, Alexander Dyck, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Theft and Taxes
Mihir A. Desai, Alexander Dyck, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 10978
December 2004
JEL No. G0, G1, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the interaction between corporate taxes and corporate governance. We show that
the characteristics of a taxation system affect the extraction of private benefits by company insiders.
A higher tax rate increases the amount of income insiders divert and thus worsens governance
outcomes. In contrast, stronger tax enforcement reduces diversion and, in so doing, can raise the
stock market value of a company in spite of the increase in the tax burden. We also show that the
corporate governance system affects the level of tax revenues and the sensitivity of tax revenues to
tax changes. When the corporate governance system is ineffective (i.e., when it is easy to divert
income), an increase in the tax rate can reduce tax revenues. We test this prediction in a panel of
countries. Consistent with the model, we find that corporate tax rate increases have smaller (in fact,
negative) effects on revenues when corporate governance is weaker. Finally, this approach provides
a novel justification for the existence of a separate corporate tax based on profits.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
Alexander Dyck
University of Toronto
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca
Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

1.

Introduction
The state, thanks to its tax claim on cash flows, is de facto the largest minority shareholder in

almost all corporations. Yet, the state’s actions are not part of the standard analysis of corporate
governance, which has typically emphasized legal protections for outside investors (as in La Porta et al.
(1998) and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002)), the role of boards (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)),
and the presence of large shareholders (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988)).1 At the same time, the
public finance literature on taxation typically ignores any effects of governance on the functioning of the
corporate tax system (see Auerbach (2002), Hassett and Hubbard (1999), and Slemrod andYitzhaki
(2002)).
In this paper, we provide a simple reason for why the analysis of corporate governance and
taxation should be integrated. Most transactions aimed at diverting corporate value toward controlling
shareholders also reduce corporate tax liabilities. Similarly, many procedures aimed at enforcing a
corporate tax liability make it more difficult for controlling shareholders to divert corporate value to
their own advantage. More generally, the level of diversion and the amount of taxes paid are determined
in a game that involves three parties – the state, insiders, and outside shareholders. Our claim is simply
that each bilateral interaction has important spillover effects on the third party. How the state designs
and enforces taxes influences the relationship between insiders and outside shareholders and the nature
of the relationship between insiders and outside shareholders (corporate governance) influences the
corporate taxation system.
In a model that adopts this simple insight, we analyze how the corporate tax system affects the
level of managerial diversion. A higher tax rate increases the return to stealing by controlling
shareholders and worsens governance outcomes. By contrast, increased tax enforcement reduces the
amount of private benefits these shareholders can enjoy. Most interestingly, an increase in tax
enforcement can increase the amount outside shareholders will receive, even accounting for increased
levels of taxation. Accordingly, for a given tax rate, an increase in tax enforcement can increase (rather
than decrease) the stock market value of a company.

1
This absence is even more remarkable, given that corporate taxes are an integral part of the literature on corporate financing and
investment decisions (e.g. Graham (2003)).

2

Much as the structure of taxation affects corporate governance, the model introduced in the paper
also demonstrates that corporate governance affects the working of the tax system. When it is difficult to
divert income, we derive the standard result of a relatively direct relation between tax rates and tax
revenues. By contrast, when the corporate governance system is ineffective (i.e., when it is easy to
divert income) an increase in the tax rate can reduce tax revenues, generating a hump-shaped
relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate tax revenues. This arises for the simple reason
that when it is easy to divert income, the manager will behave as a residual claimant, accentuating his
incentive to shelter income to avoid taxation. As a result, the revenue maximizing tax rate is higher in
countries with a better corporate governance system.
This corporate governance view of taxes provides a novel justification for the existence of a
corporate tax. A separate tax on corporate profits generates an incentive for the government to verify
income, ameliorating the agency problem between insiders and outside shareholders. This rationale for
the corporate tax is also able to explain why interest payments are tax deductible: being in cash, interest
payments do not need any additional certification by the government, and hence have no reason to be
subject to a “certification” tax.
We then test the corporate governance and tax policy predictions of our model. To test the
corporate governance implications, we focus on Russia, an environment where both managerial
diversion and tax evasion are manifest. We study the effect that an increase in tax enforcement (which
followed Putin’s election) had on stock prices and the value of control (a proxy for the amount of
managerial diversion). As predicted by the model, the stock market values of companies targeted by
enforcement actions increase and the voting premium for these stocks decrease after the increase in tax
enforcement. We also document that increased tax enforcement leads to substantial organizational
changes in the targeted companies, changes that make managerial diversion more difficult.
We then test the corporate tax implications of our model by using a panel of countries that vary
with respect to their corporate governance rules. In particular, we test the model prediction that the
relationship between tax rates and tax revenues will depend upon the underlying corporate governance
relationship between inside and outside shareholders. We do this by investigating the revenue
consequences of corporate tax rate changes from 1979-1997. Consistent with the model, we find that
corporate tax rate increases have a lower impact on tax revenues in countries characterized by weaker
3

corporate governance. In particular, the empirical estimates suggest that corporate tax rate increases
lead to corporate tax revenue increases only in countries with very strong corporate governance. As
protection of outside shareholders weakens, we find that the rate increases are associated with lower
revenue – consistent with the model implication that rate increases encourage diversion that hides
revenue from the tax authorities. This result is robust to a potential endogeneity of the tax rate, since
we instrument for it with the ideology of the party in power. Hoping to isolate the impact of the
governance environment from other factors that vary across countries, we also include control variables
associated with the institutional environment – such as rule of law and measures of tax compliance – and
find that these factors do not alter this result.
This corporate governance view of taxes has important implications for the design of tax
systems. It suggests that the fiscal effects of any corporate tax reform cannot be assessed without
looking at the pre-existing corporate governance situation. This view also suggests a clear direction for
reforms in emerging markets. By lowering the tax rate, governments can improve their governance
outcomes, with particular gains where governance is weak to begin with. An increase in tax
enforcement can provide payoffs to both governments and outside shareholders, as it generates greater
revenue and higher outside share values.
Our paper explores only one dimension of the interaction between corporate governance and
taxation. Other papers suggest additional costs and benefits of taxes on governance outcomes. Arlen
and Weiss (1995) emphasize how taxes, by favoring income retention, can exacerbate the agency
problem between managers and shareholders. Roe (1991) claims that in the United States, taxes penalize
ownership structures that facilitate monitoring. Morck (2003), in contrast, suggests a possible benefit of
the double taxation of dividends in reducing the use of pyramidal ownership structures and Desai and
Dharmapala (2004) consider how ownership by managers influences tax sheltering decisions in the U.S.
setting.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a model of the relationship between
the tax system and corporate governance that generates several predictions on how corporate taxation
affects corporate governance and how corporate governance affects corporate taxation. Section 3
analyzes the normative predictions of this approach and Section 4 elaborates on this new rationale for
the existence of a separate corporate tax. Section 5 tests the corporate governance implications of tax
4

enforcement changes using recent changes in Russia, while Section 6 tests the effects of corporate
governance on the impact of corporate tax changes in a panel of countries. Section 7 concludes.
2.

A Simple Model of Tax Evasion and Managerial Diversion2
To examine the relationship between tax systems and corporate governance we start with a

relatively standard model of governance to identify a core level of diversion. We then introduce a
corporate income tax and explore the influence of the tax on governance outcomes, as well as the impact
of the governance environment on tax outcomes. Finally, we explore the robustness of these results to
alternative assumptions.
2.1.

The optimal level of diversion
Let d ∈ [0,1] be the proportion of income that insiders divert. If insiders own a fraction λ of the

company, then, in the absence of any corporate income tax, the payoff to insiders is

λ (1 − d ) + d
Diverting, however, is costly because insiders can be caught and pay a penalty. We model this cost with
the following quadratic function:
C (d ) =

γ
2

d2

where γ is a parameter that captures the quality of the corporate governance system with a higher γ
indicating a better governance system. Hence, in the absence of taxes, the optimal amount of diversion
is
(1)

1− λ
d * = min(
,1) .

γ

2

For models of tax sheltering that emphasize dynamics within firms but not diversion, see Chen and Chu (2003) and
Crocker and Slemrod (2003).
5

2.2.

The effect of a corporate income tax
We now introduce a third player, the government, and analyze how its actions affect the level of

diversion. We characterize the tax system through two parameters – the tax rate and the level of
enforcement of its tax claim. The tax system affects the choice of the optimal level of diversion in two
ways. First, the presence of tax rates makes diversion more likely, as it increases the costs of not
diverting income (if the income is left with the company, the owner will not receive his per share benefit
but a lower amount as a result of taxes). Second, both the government and minority shareholders share
an interest in detecting diversion. Hence, the corporate tax introduces an additional monitor (the tax
authority), which increases the probability diversion will be detected and, hence, increases the expected
cost of diversion.
We model this cost insiders consider when diverting and hiding income from the tax authorities
in an analogous way to the cost associated with shareholder oversight. The parameter that captures the
quality of enforcement in this case is α .3 Thus, in the presence of corporate taxation, the total payoff to
insiders becomes

λ (1 − d )(1 − t ) + d −

α +γ
2

d2.

Hence, the optimal amount of diversion is
(2)

1 − λ (1 − t )
d ** = min(
,1) .
α +γ

Comparing the optimal amount of diversion with and without taxation yields the following:
Result 1: Ceteris paribus, countries with a higher tax rate will have higher levels of diversion. This
effect is stronger where tax enforcement is weaker.
Proof:

∂d
λ
∂ 2d
λ
=
> 0;
=−
< 0.
(α + γ ) 2
∂t α + γ
∂t ∂α

3

In the interests of simplicity we focus on the personal cost insiders’ face if they are caught and exposed as having
engaged in tax avoidance, as opposed to focusing on the possible financial penalties that might be imposed upon the
firm.
6

In our framework this is an obvious point, but it suggests an important channel through which the tax
system can worsen governance outcomes. Ceteris paribus, higher tax rate will lead to worse corporate
governance outcomes, because they increase the return from diverting.
Result 1 looks at the effect of a higher tax rate, keeping all the other dimensions constant. But
this is not the right comparative static if we want to study the effects of the introduction of a corporate
income tax. A corporate income tax not only introduces a positive t, but also a positive α . Hence, we
have
Corollary 1: The introduction of a corporate tax improves corporate governance (i.e., reduces the
amount of diversion) if and only if the level of tax enforcement exceeds a critical level defined as
follows

α>

λγ t
.
(1 − λ )

Proof: It follows by comparing (2) with (1).
The effect of the introduction of a corporate tax system on diversion is twofold. The fact that the
government takes a fraction of profits increases the incentive to divert, while the additional monitoring
provided by the tax authorities reduces it. The overall effect depends on the relative strength of the two
forces.
Corollary 2: For a given monitoring ability of the tax authorities ( α ), the introduction of a corporate
tax is more likely to reduce diversion (and improve corporate governance) when
i)
ii)
iii)

The corporate governance system is weaker (lower γ );
Ownership is less concentrated (lower λ );
The tax rate is lower.

While obvious, this Corollary has important implications. Countries with a poor record of tax
enforcement cannot introduce steep corporate tax rates without causing a worsening of the amount of
diversion, with the well-know effect on the functioning of capital markets (e.g., La Porta et al, (1997)
and Dyck and Zingales (2004)).

7

2.3.

The effect of taxes on the value of outside shares and on the value of control
Having analyzed how different characteristics of the tax system affect the optimal amount of

diversion, we can derive how taxes influence the market value of a company.
Result 2: The market value of a company increases with tax enforcement and decreases with the tax rate.
Proof: The market value is driven by the value minority shareholders can capture, which in turn is given
by V m = (1 − d )(1 − t ) . Since

∂V m
∂d **
1 − λ (1 − t )
dV m
∂V m
<
0
0
and
=
−
<
,
then
>
0
.
Since
< 0 and
∂d **
(α + γ ) 2
dα
∂α
∂t

∂V m
∂d **
λ
dV m
< 0 and
=
> 0 , then
< 0.
∂d
∂t
dt
(α + γ )

An increase in the tax rate has two negative effects on minority shareholders. The direct effect is that the
state takes a larger fraction of profits, reducing the value left to minority shareholders. This is the cost
associated with the traditional view of taxes. The indirect effect is that a higher tax rate induces more
diversion, reducing the value of claims held by minority shareholders. This is an additional cost we
introduce by adopting a corporate governance view of taxes. Since both effects go in the same direction,
the result is unambiguous.
The governance view of taxes also requires us to consider the effect of enforcement on diversion
and the price of equity. The effect of enforcement is ambiguous: greater enforcement leads to more
taxes paid but also less diversion. Which effect dominates? In the model presented here, the effect is
unambiguously positive, because the state gets only a fraction of the income, while insiders, when they
divert, get 100%.4 More generally, the result holds as long as, on the margin, the fraction of pretax
income appropriated by the state is less than the fraction appropriated by insiders.
For our empirical analysis, it is also useful to derive the following two corollaries:
Corollary 3: Following an increase in enforcement, companies that were previously diverting more
will experience a larger increase in price.
4
Another way to view this problem, elaborated in a previous version of this paper, is to consider sheltering and diversion
decision decisions separately, with income sheltered from tax authorities split between insiders and outside shareholders. This
modification leads to similar results so long as the fraction of income diverted by insiders exceeds the tax rate. Our results on
company value impact of tax reforms differs when the diversion of returns by the tax authorities exceeds that by the controlling
shareholder out of sheltered income.

8

Proof:
1 − λ (1 − t )
dV m
(1 − t )
(α + γ ) 2
dα =
> 0.
1 − λ (1 − t )
Vm
(1 − t )(1 −
)
α +γ

Following Dyck and Zingales (2004), let us define the control premium (CP) as the difference between
the per share payoff controlling shareholders receive and that outside shareholders receive, normalized
by the total value of the company computed at the price of non-controlling shares:

CP =

λ[

Vi

Vm
]
i
λ 1 − λ = (1 − λ ) V − λ .
Vm
Vm
1− λ
−

Accordingly, we have
Corollary 4: The value of control decreases with tax enforcement.
Proof:

∂CP (1 − λ ) dV i m
dV m
= m 2[
V −V i
] . By using the envelope theorem
∂α
(V ) dα
dα

Result 2

dV i ∂V i ∂d
=
= 0 . Since by
∂d ∂α
dα

dV m ∂V m ∂d
=
> 0 , the result follows.
∂d ∂α
dα

Since tax enforcement reduces the amount of income diverted, this reduces the value of control and
increase the value of minority shareholders. Hence, the control premium should decline. Below we
focus on this empirical prediction associated with changes in enforcement because this prediction is
unique to the governance view of taxes. We do not focus on the prediction of the relationship between
tax rates and the value of claims held by minority shareholder since both the traditional view of taxes
and the governance view of taxes generate the same implication.
2.4.

The effect of the corporate governance environment on the tax system
The corporate governance view of taxes also has implications for public finance. In particular,

this model provides a framework to analyze how the response of corporate tax revenues to changes in

9

corporate tax rates is influenced by the institutional environment, particularly the quality of the
corporate governance system.
First, our simple model produces a hump-shaped relation between corporate tax revenues and
corporate tax rates.
Result 3: If 0 <

α + γ + λ −1
< 1 , then corporate tax revenues as a function of corporate tax rates are
2λ

hump-shaped.
1 − λ (1 − t )
] . Differentiating this with
α +γ

Proof: Corporate tax revenues (CTR) are given by t (1 − d ) = t − t[
respect to t we obtain

∂CTR
1 − λ + 2λ t
=1−
, which reaches an interior optimum for t ∈ [0,1] if
∂t
α +γ

α + γ + λ −1
<1.
2λ
The intuition for this result is straightforward. An increase in corporate tax rates increases the amount of
diversion, which in turn reduces taxable income. The net effect can be a decline in tax revenues. The
intensity of this behavioral response is driven by the size of the expected cost of diversion ( α + γ ). It is
also driven by the extent of ownership concentration ( λ ), which makes insiders internalize the benefits
of diversion more. If the expected cost of diversion or the level of insider ownership is not sufficiently
high, then the behavioral response to increases in the tax rates is sufficiently strong that these increases
in rates will not yield additional revenue.
The most interesting aspect of the corporate governance view of taxes, however, is not the
existence of a range where corporate tax revenues decline with tax rate increases per se, but the link
between the shape of this relationship and two keys indicators of a corporate governance system: the
quality of the corporate governance system γ and the level of ownership concentration λ .
Corollary 5: The sensitivity of tax revenues to tax rate changes increases with the quality of the
corporate governance system γ .

10

Proof:

d 2CTR 1 − λ + 2λt
=
> 0.
dtd γ
(α + γ ) 2

Corollary 5 simply states that better corporate governance increases the sensitivity of tax revenues to tax
changes. In fact, better corporate governance reduces both the equilibrium amount of diversion and the
sensitivity of diversion to changes in the tax rate. If the behavioral response to tax changes is more
limited, then, ceteris paribus, an increase in tax rates will lead to greater revenues.
A similar effect holds for ownership concentration.
Corollary 6: The sensitivity of tax revenues to tax rate changes increases with ownership for tax rates
below 50%. For tax rates above that, it decreases with ownership.
Proof:

2.5.

d 2CTR
2t − 1
=−
> 0 if t < 0.5.
dtd λ
α +γ

Robustness and Limitations of the Model
One limitation of the model is the assumption that outsiders have no negotiating power in the

setting of the level of diversion. This is clearly an extreme: outsiders may have some ability to restrain
insiders even if they face significant costs of coordinating their actions. Introducing this possibility,
however, does not substantially change the model. In fact, the power of outside shareholders can be
subsumed in the framework introduced earlier in a company-specific γ . Where outsiders have more
power, γ will be higher, and insiders will divert less.
A second limitation is the narrow focus on tax policy as this is not the only interaction between
the State and insiders that affects outside shareholders. Another worry of insiders is the threat of
nationalization (or renationalization, as in the Russian case). This concern can also be seen in the context
of our model for threats of nationalization are analogous to a higher expected tax rate and have similar
effects on insiders who are tempted to divert more. This factor may help explain the egregious examples
of diversion that occurred in Russia during the Yeltsin presidency.
A third potential limitation is that we have considered a game involving three parties – the state,
the insiders, and the outside shareholders – and have only explored how bilateral interactions have

11

spillovers for the third party without allowing for side deals. For example, we have not allowed insiders
and outsider to coordinate their actions to reduce the corporate tax liability. And we have not allowed
for insiders and the state to coordinate their actions at the expense of outside shareholders.
There is an easy rationale for not allowing insiders and outsiders to coordinate to evade taxes:
there are significant transaction costs for outside shareholders to arrive at any decision, and even greater
costs to coordinate with insiders. In fact, these added transaction costs are a primary difference between
publicly traded companies and privately held ones. In privately held companies shareholders often reach
an agreement to minimize their collective tax liability through mechanisms such as charging fictitious
expenses. They, then, redistribute their tax savings among themselves with side contracts. This is
considerably more complicated when there are outside dispersed shareholders.
Collusion is more likely between the state and insiders. The state, for instance, can demand
higher payments from insiders (e.g. bribes) in exchange for overlooking diversion from outside
shareholders. While this might seem a remote possibility in the United States, it is not inconceivable in a
variety of countries, including Russia. Such a strategy, however, does encounter two problems. First,
nothing guarantees that insiders who bribe will not be subject to additional requests for bribes. The
advantage of taxes is that the state can commit not to harass a company repeatedly. Second, the state
faces an agency problem in its collection of taxes. If it accepts bribes instead of official tax payments, it
may find it difficult to limit the skimming of proceeds by its delegated agents. Hence, collusion between
the state and insiders at the expenses of outsiders has its own disadvantages and our model is more
relevant where these disadvantages are sizable.
3.

Optimal Tax Rates

Within this corporate governance view of taxes, what is the optimal tax rate? First, we address
this question by considering a benevolent social planner who sets either just the tax rate or jointly the tax
rate and the level of enforcement. Then, we consider the optimal tax rate when corporate insiders
dominate the political agenda as in Rajan and Zingales (2003).
3.1

The Benevolent Social Planner Case

12

The optimal tax rate in this framework obviously depends upon the government’s objective
function. In general, we can assume that the government cares about both revenues and diversion. While
diversion has no efficiency costs in this model (because it is mere redistribution from the shareholders to
insiders), there are at least two reasons why the government may want to limit diversion. First, as shown
both theoretically (e.g., Zingales 1995a) and empirically (Dyck and Zingales, 2004), higher diversion
hampers the ability to raise external funds and, thus, the development of the equity market. A
government that cares about this objective will put some negative weight on diversion. Second, in reality
many of the tactics used to divert generate large deadweight costs.
Hence, it is reasonable to assume that the government’s objective function should weight both
tax revenues and diversion and we model this as
t (1 − d ) −ψ d ,
where ψ is the weight attributed to the goal of reducing diversion relative to the goal of raising
revenues.
Result 4: If 0 <

α + γ + λ −1
α + γ + λ −1 ψ
< 1 , then the optimal tax rate is t = max(
− , 0) , which is
2λ
2λ
2

increasing in
i)
ii)
iii)

the quality of the corporate governance system ( γ ),
the quality of the additional monitoring provided by the tax authorities ( α ), and
the level of insiders’ ownership ( λ ) if α + γ < 1 .

By contrast, the optimal tax rate is decreasing in
i)
ii)

the social weight puts on diversion (ψ ), and
the level of insiders’ ownership ( λ ) if α + γ > 1 .

Proof: Differentiating with respect to t we obtain the optimal tax rate. From this the comparative statics
with respect to the various parameters follows directly.
The message contained in result 4 is important. It implies that countries should pay attention to their
corporate governance environment and the prevailing level of insider ownership in setting tax rates.
Countries with better corporate governance can afford to have a higher corporate tax rates, as the
negative effects of corporate taxes on diversion is reduced. The same is true for insider ownership if
13

α + γ < 1 . When α + γ < 1 , the expected cost of being caught alone cannot refrain insiders from
diverting. In this case if insider ownership is zero, the optimal amount of diversion is 1. Hence, higher
levels of insider ownership decrease the level of diversion and allow for a higher tax rate.
Under many circumstances it is reasonable to consider, as we have just done, that the
government sets only the level of the corporate tax rate. Other times, however, the government might
consider a more systemic tax reform, which involves a simultaneous decision to set tax rates and choose
the level of enforcement. Interestingly, this does not change the relation between optimal tax rate and
quality of corporate governance (and tax enforcement).
Suppose the government simultaneously sets the tax rate and the quality of the tax enforcement
(or, analogously, the tax rate and the quality of the corporate governance system).5 Of course, we have
to introduce a cost of the government of improving tax (or corporate governance) enforcement. For
simplicity, we assume this cost to be quadratic
C (α ) =

µ
2

α2,

where µ is a parameter affecting the cost of better enforcement. For example, in the La Porta et al (1999)
framework, civil law countries have higher costs of better enforcement, i.e., higher µ . Then, the
Government objective function becomes
Maxt ,α t (1 − d ** ) −ψ d ** −

µ
2

α 2,

where d ** is the optimal level of diversion set by insiders as in equation (2).
Result 5: Both the optimal level of monitoring and the optimal tax rate decreases with the costs of better
enforcement µ .
Proof: See Appendix.
Since the quality of the corporate governance system ( γ ) and the intensity of the additional monitoring provided
by the tax authorities ( α ) enter in the same way, the comparative statics with respect to one is identical to the
comparative static with respect to the other. For space consideration, we report only the one with respect to α .

5

14

The first part of the result is obvious: in countries where increasing enforcement is more costly to the
government budget, the government will do less of it. The second part is also quite intuitive: when it is
more costly to increase enforcement, the negative effects of a higher tax rate will be stronger and the
government will choose a lower tax rate.
Thus, when we endogenize the choice of the level of monitoring provided by the tax authority
(or the level of corporate governance), we obtain the same prediction as before: when a benevolent
social planner will set higher tax rate in countries with better tax enforcement (and/or better corporate
governance).
3.2

The optimal tax rate when insiders dominate the state
The results presented above are derived under the assumption that governments are run by

benevolent dictators that maximize social welfare. In reality, government actions are driven by political
goals and shaped by influential constituencies. To explore the setting of the optimal tax rate when – as it
is likely - corporate insiders have a disproportionate power in setting tax rates, we assume that they will
set t to maximize the value of their stake, subject to satisfying a revenue constraint. Formally, they will
maximize

λ (1 − d ** )(1 − t ) + d ** −

α +γ
2

d **2

with respect to t, subject to a minimum tax revenue constraint (K):
t (1 − d ** ) ≥ K ,
where d ** is the optimal level of diversion set by insiders as in equation (2).
Since the corporate insiders objective function is decreasing in t and convex, it will be
maximized at the minimum level of t that satisfies the tax revenue constraint. Hence, we can obtain the
relation between optimal tax rates and corporate governance by using the implicit function theorem on
the budget constraint. Hence, we have
Result 6: If t <

α + γ + λ −1
, then the optimal tax rate is decreasing in the level of corporate governance.
2λ
15

dt
t (1 − λ (1 − t )) /(α + γ ) 2
=−
Proof:
, which is negative if the denominator is negative. This condition
1 − λ (1 − t )
λ
dγ
1−
−t
α +γ
α +γ

is satisfied for t <

α + γ + λ −1
.
2λ

When the goal is only to produce a minimum level of tax revenues, a decrease in the quality of the
corporate governance has to be matched by an increase in the tax rate to meet the revenue target. Hence,
the model predicts that when insiders dominate the state countries where corporate governance and tax
enforcement are weak, like many civil law countries, should have higher tax rates.
4.

A Rationale for Corporate Taxes?

Thus far, we have assumed the existence of a tax on corporate income and studied how the way it is
designed affects corporate governance. A more fundamental question, however, is whether the impact
that corporate taxes have on corporate governance can justify the very existence of a separate tax on
corporate income.
At the very least, the governance effects can help explain the introduction of corporate taxation
in the United States. In 1909, when a corporate tax was first introduced in the United States, President
Taft supported its introduction by saying:
Another merit of this tax [the federal corporate excise tax] is the federal supervision which must
be exercised in order to make the law effective over the annual accounts and business
transactions of all corporations. While the faculty of assuming a corporate form has been of the
utmost utility in the business world, it is also true that substantially all of the abuses and all of
the evils which have aroused the public to the necessity of reform were made possible by the use
of this very faculty. If now, by a perfectly legitimate and effective system of taxation, we are
incidentally able to possess the Government and the stockholders and the public of the
knowledge of the real business transactions and the gains and profits of every corporation in the
country, we have made a long step toward that supervisory control of corporations which may
prevent a further abuse of power.6
This was not just wishful thinking. The introduction of this tax increased the publicly available
information on corporate profitability (back then corporate tax filings were public records) and increased
6

William H. Taft, President of the United States, June 16, 1909, “Defense of introduction of the first US federal corporate excise
tax”.
16

the reliability of all the information provided, since tax returns were audited. In fact, the tax generated a
need for a standard definition of income and other accounting variables, prompting the development of
uniform accounting standards, introduced in 1914. Hence, the introduction of a corporate income tax
improved corporate governance.7
4.1 What Is the Comparative Advantage of Tax Enforcers?
That corporate governance considerations might have driven the introduction of a corporate taxation
system does not necessarily imply that governance considerations justify the existence of corporate
taxation today. Why should tax enforcers, such as the IRS, be better (i.e., more effective) at monitoring
corporate insiders than other Government agencies specifically designed for this purpose, such as the
Security and Exchange Commission?
One reason, which applies mostly to developing countries, is economies of scope. Every country
has a Government agency specialized in collecting revenues. It is much easier, faster, and more effective
to extend the tasks of these experts, than to create another ad hoc agency. For example, in Russia when
the local securities and exchange commission wanted to improve enforcement, they asked the tax police
for assistance as they were the only ones with the appropriate expertise.8
This explanation may be less compelling for a country like the United States, where an agency
solely dedicated to security law enforcement has been in place for the last seventy years. In such cases,
the more compelling argument in favor of the comparative advantage of tax authorities is the distinctive
revenue implications of actions by the IRS versus the SEC. The IRS enjoys more political clout (and a
better budget) because it generates more revenues for the Government, while the SEC heavily relies on
annual appropriations unrelated to its enforcement actions.9 And even if the SEC generates revenues
through its enforcement actions, there is a fundamental difference between the two. By increasing
7

All of this took place against the backdrop of a lack of national securities regulation and weak and unreliable enforcement of
listing standards in the nation’s stock exchanges.
8 “For a long time, FSC [Federal Securities Commission] has been planning to apply to the law enforcement structures for more
efficient control over the stock market: this idea was in the plans of the first chair of FSC, Dmitri Vasilyev. This wish is quite
understandable: until recently, FSC could do nothing but lodged complains to the prosecutor's office and imposed symbolic fines
on violators”. Banking and Exchanges Weekly, Oct 25, 2000.
9
The lack of relation between SEC-related revenues and budget was seen dramatically in 1995 where despite being a strong
revenue generator - collecting $588 million in fees, and driving defendants to make payments of $730 million to the treasury,
with costs of just $266 million – the SEC was under severe pressure to have its budget frozen or reduced. See Roger Lowenstein,
“House Aims to Fix Securities Laws, But, Indeed, Is the System Broke?” Wall Street Journal, August 10, 1995, C1.
17

enforcement, the IRS increases revenues not only from the company investigated, but also from all other
companies, which are not investigated but improve their compliance out of fear. By contrast, by
increasing enforcement, the SEC raises revenues only from the company investigated, while losing them
from other companies, which would be more compliant and hence pay fewer fines.
Finally, the existence of two independent sources of enforcement increases the probability
diversion is caught. Revealed preference suggests that even in the United States this additional
monitoring has some bite. For example, Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2003) show that managers
were willing to pay taxes on false earnings in order to ensure that the IRS did not detect their fraudulent
activities.
4.2 Optimal tax rate with endogenous enforcement
If the tax enforcement agency has a comparative advantage in monitoring corporate insiders, can
we justify the existence of a corporate tax solely on corporate governance considerations? On the one
hand, this seems the ultimate Pigouvian tax. While shareholders face a free rider problem in monitoring,
the tax authority does not. In fact, by aggressively prosecuting a company the government sets an
example that induces other firms to behave. Because of the spillover effect enforcement has on the
behavior of all the other companies, the tax authority has an incentive to certify income and enforce its
rights even in individual cases where the cost of doing so is higher than the payoff it can derive. Hence,
the corporate income tax can be constructed as a certification tax.
On the other hand, we have seen that the existence of a corporate tax may exacerbate diversion,
rather than reducing it. So, if we want to justify the existence of a corporate tax solely on corporate
governance considerations we need to show that in order to minimize diversion it is optimal to have a
positive tax rate, in spite of the negative direct effect tax rates have on diversion.
To prove this result we drop any revenue consideration from the Government objective function
and we formally introduce a link, as per our discussion above, between quality of enforcement and
revenue considerations, i.e., we assume α (t ) = α 0 +

δ
2

t 2 , where α 0 (possibly zero) is the expected cost of

the IRS monitoring in the absence of any revenue consideration, and δ , which is positive, is the
sensitivity of the enforcement to the tax revenues considerations.
18

Then, the optimal tax rate will be the one that minimizes diversion, i.e. the solution of
min t d ** =

1 − λ (1 − t )

δ
γ + α0 + t 2
2

It follows that:
Result 7: If −1 < −

1

λ

1
1
+ ( − 1) 2 + (γ + α 0 ) < 0 , the optimal tax rate from a governance point of view

λ

δ

is positive and equal to
t* = 1 −

Proof: It follows from differentiating

1

λ

1
1
+ ( − 1) 2 + (γ + α 0 ) .

λ

δ

1 − λ (1 − t )

δ

γ + α0 + t

with respect to t.
2

2

Result 7 states that there exists a range of parameter values such that the optimal tax rate is positive even
in the absence of any revenue goals.
For example, if the expected cost of diversion ( γ ) is 30 cents on the dollar, and the parameters for tax
enforcement α e δ are equal respectively to 0 and 0.5 (which corresponds to an extra two cents of
expected cost for every dollar of revenue diverted), and insiders’ ownership equal 50%, then the optimal
tax rate is positive and equals 26%. Thus, in spite of the direct negative effects of tax rate on diversion, a
positive tax rate reduces diversion because of the additional monitoring it generates. This example is
only meant to illustrate that the existence result obtained in Result 7 is not empty. We make no claim
(neither can we make any) that the level of the corporate tax rate justifiable using a governance
perspective is close to the prevailing level today.
From this result we can easily derive the following comparative static:
Corollary 7: The optimal tax rate increases with
i)

corporate governance ( γ );
19

ii)
iii)

the quality of monitoring independent of revenues ( α 0 );
insider ownership ( λ );

and decreases with
i)

the sensitivity of enforcement to tax revenues ( δ ).

Proof: See Appendix.
The most important result of Corollary 7 is that the optimal tax rate is a complement to, not a substitute
for, other corporate governance mechanisms. Thus, higher corporate governance ( γ ) and higher insider
ownership ( λ ) increases the level of the optimal tax rate. The reason is that when other corporate
governance mechanisms function better, the direct effect of taxes on diversion is reduced, and hence the
indirect effect (through its incentives on higher monitoring) becomes more important. It also suggests
that it is not true that the tax system is an effective mechanism to reduce diversion only in developing
countries. In fact, in countries with better governance we expect a more aggressive use of it. Consistent
with this prediction, when corporate taxation was introduced in the United States in 1909 (and the
quality of the corporate governance system was poor), the tax rate was only 1 percent.
4.3.

Is this rationale consistent with the standard features of the corporate tax code?
The above discussion suggests that corporate governance considerations alone can explain the

existence of a separate tax on corporate income. But can they explain the peculiar way in which the
corporate taxation is usually designed? By and large, the answer is positive.
First, our approach is able to explain why interest expenses are deductible, and thus not subject
to double taxation. The income paid in interest is certified by the fact it is paid out in cash to a third
party. Hence, it does not require external certification and thus should not be subject to a “certification
tax.”10
Second, our new rationale can explain why other legal entities, such as the limited liability
corporation and the subchapter S corporation, are not subject to double taxation of earnings: they are
less prone to managerial agency problems. In fact, these entities are exempted from entity level taxation
10

Of course, the same argument would imply the exemptions of dividends. In fact, in many countries dividends are
partially or totally exempted from corporate taxes.
20

only if they meet conditions (such as a limited number of investors), which ensure the free-rider problem
in monitoring is reduced. Hence, the features of the tax are directly linked to the need for outside
monitoring.
Finally, our new rationale can explain why corporate taxes are based on income rather than cash
flow, sales, assets or other bases (as Meade (1978) and many others have proposed). If the raison d’etre
of the corporate tax is to certify the value of minority shareholders’ claims, it makes sense to use the
value of their claim, i.e. profits, as a base.
5.

Tests - Corporate Governance Implications

Looking jointly at taxation and corporate governance, an approach we have called a corporate
governance view of taxes (CGVT), carries implications both for corporate governance and for corporate
taxation.
Testing the corporate governance implications of the CGVT is more difficult. The prediction that
is easiest to test (i.e., that an increase in tax rates reduces stock prices) is not unique to this approach as
the same implication also follows from a traditional view of taxes. By contrast, the predictions that are
unique to this approach (the effect of enforcement on stock prices and control premia) require us to
measure variables that are difficult to quantify (tax enforcement) or even to observe in a systematic way
(control premia). Dyck and Zingales (2004) exploit cross-country variation in tax enforcement and
control premia to show that -- consistent with Corollary 4 -- higher levels of tax enforcement lead to
lower control premia, even controlling for national differences in legal protections for investors.
In this context, however, we want to provide more disaggregated, within country, evidence. For
this reason, we focus on Russia, a country where both tax avoidance and managerial diversion are
extreme. The substantial increase in tax enforcement following Putin’s election in 2000, which occurred
without an immediate change in tax rates, provides a natural experiment to test these predictions.
5.1.

A Case Study
To understand how tax evasion and diversion can interact, we begin with a case study of an oil

company in Russia. We choose Sibneft, the 5th largest Russian integrated oil company, as it was one of
the first companies to be indicted for tax evasion.
21

Under President Yeltsin, high tax rates and low levels of tax enforcement encouraged Russian
firms to shelter income aggressively. Multiple taxes from different levels of government meant that tax
obligations could exceed profits.11 Company executives were not shy about how this tax burden
affected their behavior. As Yukos Oil CEO Khodorkovsky argued, "As long as the tax regime is unjust,
I will try to find a way around it."12
A popular scheme to evade taxes and expropriate minority shareholders was to sell oil at belowmarket prices to outside trading companies. To get a sense of the magnitude of the manipulation in
transfer pricing, analyst reports indicate that Sibneft’s production subsidiary was selling oil at just $2.20/
barrel, considerably below the average export price (net of export costs and excise taxes) of $13.50, and
the average domestic price (net of taxes) of $7.20/ barrel.13 Unsurprisingly, company financial reports
revealed an effective corporate tax rate of just 2.6%, far below the statutory rate of 30%.14
The use of ‘third party intermediaries’ to shelter income also provided controlling shareholders
with sizable opportunities for self-enrichment at the expense of outside shareholders. To shelter income
from tax authorities, most if not all the profits have to be shifted to an intermediary located in an
offshore or onshore tax haven. In the case of Sibneft, the primary intermediary was the export trading
company Runicom, which accounted for the vast majority of Sibneft’s foreign sales through 2000.15
Shifting profits to Runicom benefits Runicom shareholders at the expense of the shareholders of Sibneft
and its separately listed production and refining subsidiaries. Since the controlling management of
Sibneft can choose the intermediary to trade with, there are obvious opportunities for them to take
advantage of the situation and channel the profits toward a company they personally own. This
opportunity is enhanced by the opacity in the ownership structure of Russian companies, which makes it
difficult to establish whether this is indeed the case. In this particular case, for example, Runicom was
associated with Roman Abramovich, who was reported to control Sibneft.16 Runicom was also a
11

In the oil industry, taxes included not only the traditional value-added and corporate profit taxes, but also excise taxes, export
duties and specific geology and royalty taxes on net income at production subsidiaries.
12
Quoted in Simon Pirani, “Oligarch? No, I'm just an oil magnate,” Observer, Sunday June 4, 2000.
13
“Oil Production Subsidiaries," Troika Dialog Research Report, February 2000.
14
Sibneft acknowledges in public filings, for example, that for “tax and cash flow optimization purposes, the Company uses third
party intermediaries in its refining and distribution process.” Sibneft Bond OfferingProspectus, March 1, 2002, pg. F-8 “These
arrangements have primarily comprised of using certain trading companies in certain Russian regions and, taken together, have
reduced the amount of taxable income Sibneft reports” Sibneft Bond Offering Prospectus, December 3, 2002, pp. 16-17.
15
For example, company financials identify 38 (40) percent of all sales in 1999 (2000) being conducted through Runicom. Prior
to 1998, the primary company was Runicom SA registered in the tax haven of Switzerland and in 1999 and 2000, Runicom ltd,
registered in the tax haven of Gibraltar.
16
The controlling stake of top management exceeded 80 percent, with a personal stake rumored to exceed 40 percent, “Sibneft's
Owners Nation's Worst-Kept Secret”. By Valeria Korchagina. 11 April 2000, The Moscow Times.
22

significant Sibneft shareholder17, but not vice versa, as would have made sense if the goal was to
equitably share the benefits of tax sheltering.
Following Putin’s election in 2000, tax enforcement in Russia increased without any immediate
change in tax rates. One of the first actions that signaled Putin’s intention was the release of a
memorandum with a list of the worst corporate tax offenders (July 28, 2000). Sibneft was singled out as
paying the lowest tax rate in the oil industry. In August, the tax police raided the offices of Sibneft and
of its export trading arm, leading to criminal charges against the company. In November, the tax police
announced proposals aimed at closing channels for tax avoidance by oil companies, including a threat to
reduce oil company revenues by auctioning space on government-owned pipelines (rather than
allocating them at a price that covered costs). On January 25, 2001, President Vladimir Putin met with
oligarchs to discuss ending tax avoidance schemes and the passage of new tax laws designed to shut off
such schemes. Sibneft remained a target of government action, with the filing of additional criminal and
civil actions in the spring and summer of 2001.18
Not surprisingly, this increase in enforcement targeted at the oil industry in general, and Sibneft
in particular, coincided with a dramatic increase in tax payments by Sibneft. Production-based taxes
increased ten fold and the reported effective corporate tax rate for Sibneft as a whole jumped from 2.6%
to 10.4%. More interestingly, following the pressure from government officials, Sibneft announced that
it would no longer be trading with Runicom but would trade with a newly created subsidiary, SibOil,
whose results would be reported in the holdings consolidated income statements.19 Furthermore, in July
of 2001 the company announced that it would acquire two previously undisclosed intermediaries located
in Russian domestic tax havens, Vester and Olivesta, that reported profits of $300 million in 2000, for a
mere $1,800 in Sibneft stock.20 Shortly thereafter, Sibneft announced the closing of yet more
subsidiaries and a commitment to market oil through fully owned subsidiaries not located in these tax
havens.21
17

Runicom bought a 12.22% stake in Sibneft in 1996, and held 27 % of Sibneft’s shares at the end of 2000, “EBRD Slams
Russian Courts In Loan Dispute With Oil Firm --- Lender Says Case Will Test Putin's Pledge to Strengthen Legal System --The Rule of Law vs. the Rule of `Oligarchs' “By Andrew Higgins, 11 February 2000, Wall Street Journal Europe, p. 2.
18
We focus on these enforcement actions that appeared to be targeted on increasing government revenue rather than some other
events that involved tax police that commentary at the time suggested was more politically than economically motivated.
19
Lukoil, Tyumen Oil Co and Yukos made similar announcements in December of plans to increase transparency by shifting
exports from trading companies controlled by controlling shareholders to major trading companies. See, for example, NEFTE
Compass, December 21, 2000” Umbrella – Yukos Blends Offshore Trading Arms into One”
20
“CorporateGovernance Actions,” Troika Dialog, Weekly Bulletin #113, July 13, 2001, pg. 6.
21
For example, Sibneft later purchased Terra in a deal reported to have roughly the same effect of increasing reported income by
$300 million NEFTE Compass, October 11, 2001, “Terra Firma – Sibneft Brings its Profits Back Home.”
23

Most importantly – from our point of view — these enforcement actions coincided with an
improved return for outside shareholders. Reported company income soared and, for the first time,
Sibneft paid dividends: $53 million in November 2000 and close to $1 billion in 2001, an amount equal
to 67 percent of the total market capitalization of Sibneft before the increase in enforcement.
Consequently, Sibneft’s share price rose well in excess of industry trends. Although such returns cannot
be interpreted as causal, since many other factors may be driving returns aside from changes in tax
policy, they do suggest that tax changes have not impeded returns for minority investors.
By narrowing the time period, and focusing specifically on a few notable tax enforcement events,
we can control for some of these other factors. Table 1 reports Sibneft excess returns in the days
surrounding the most crucial enforcement events. In all cases but one, Sibneft stock outperformed the
Russian Index and, in spite of the very high volatility of Russian excess returns, in a few instances these
excess returns are more than two standard deviations away from zero. The more astute local observers
were quick to draw a causal link between increased tax enforcement and greater shareholder returns. As
the Financial Times reported, companies like Sibneft “have begun closing offshore subsidiaries and
consolidating their operations within Russia. To comply with the law, they have to declare higher profits
and pay higher taxes. They must also show the true extent of their financial operations to outside
shareholders, who are just as keen to have a share of the proceeds as the tax inspector.”22
5.2.

Cross industry test
Sibneft’s experience is not altogether unique. As Figure 1 shows, the increase in enforcement

under Putin is followed by an increase in stock prices, especially in the most affected industry (i.e., Oil
and Gas). Of course, this evidence alone is unconvincing. Many changes were taking place in Russia at
the same time making it hard to pinpoint a single cause for these changes. For this reason, we rely on
two subtler tests. First, we look at the difference in voting premia across industries. Since tax
enforcement affected the oil and gas industry disproportionately, during this period control premia
should drop more in the oil and gas industry than in the other industries. We can infer control premia
from the difference in voting and nonvoting stock (see Zingales 1994, 1995b). This approach has the
advantage of controlling for any variation in the fundamental value of these companies. Second, we look

22

Andrew Jack, Financial Times, September 17, 2001.
24

within the oil and gas industry and test whether oil and gas companies that avoided taxes the most
exhibited higher returns around the major enforcement dates – as predicted by Corollary 3.
The ideal method to measure the value of control relies on control block sales.23 Unfortunately,
in Russia there is not a sufficient number of such transactions surrounding the enforcement change to
use this method. Alternatively, one can use the price differential between voting and nonvoting shares
(i.e., the value of a vote). The value of a vote is related to the value of control through the probability a
vote will be pivotal (see Zingales (1994, 1995b)). If this probability, which is a function of the existing
ownership structure, remains relatively constant over time, we can infer changes in the value of control
from changes in the voting premia.24
To conduct this test, we collect a sample of all the companies in Russia having two classes of
stocks with differential voting rights from the Datastream sample of Russian securities (124 firms). To
obtain meaningful voting premia, we restrict our attention to companies having some trading in both
classes in event windows prior to and following what we view to be the most important indicators of
increased tax enforcement (59 firms).
Consistent with Corollary 4, Panel A of Table 2 shows a decline in voting premium during the
period of increased tax enforcement, from 57 percent to 46 percent. The composition of the sample,
however, changes. Thus, a more appropriate comparison, limited to companies that were traded both at
the beginning and at the end of the sample period, is provided in Panel B, column 1. It shows a decline
in the voting premium of 7.8 percentage points, which is significant at the 5 percent level.
Why did it decline? If, as we think, this decline is associated with increased tax enforcement,
then it should be more pronounced in the companies that were targeted the most by this enforcement.
Since Putin’s actions were targeted at the oil & gas industry and mineral extraction industry, we
examine how much of this decline is concentrated in these industries. As column 2 of panel B shows,
the entire decline is concentrated in these extractive industries. There is no significant decline in other
industries. The observed decline, thus, cannot be explained by a general improvement in the Russian
23

For a discussion of the different methods see Dyck and Zingales (2003).
Goetzman et al. (2002) claim that in Russia this voting premium is too high to be justifiable solely on the value of control.
They attribute it more broadly to the risk that nonvoting stock could be discriminated against in future corporate transactions (a
corporate governance discount). Even if we accept this interpretation, changes in the voting premium over short time periods are
a pretty reliable indicator of changes in the degree majority shareholders take advantage of their position at the expense of outside
ones.

24

25

corporate governance situation, which would have affected all companies similarly. Only something that
differentially affected extractive industries, such as tax enforcement, could have caused it.
5.3.

Within -industry comparisons
The increase in tax enforcement would not have affected all oil & gas companies in the same

way. Specifically, if some companies were sheltering more previously, then they should be more
affected by the increased enforcement. In the oil industry, a common indicator of tax sheltering activity
is revenue per barrel of oil.
Table 3 presents evidence on the enormous variation in revenue per barrel of oil, as reported by
investment analysts based on filings of firms during 1999. Komineft, a subsidiary of KomiTEK, sold its
oil at an average price of $7.6 a barrel, while Tomskneft (a subsidiary of Yukos) at only $1.1 a barrel!
These reports of aggressive tax avoidance correlate strongly with government evaluations of levels of
tax avoidance across the integrated oil companies in Russia.
If Corollary 4 is correct, companies that were selling their oil at very low prices (i.e., were
engaging in massive diversion) should experience a greater price appreciation during this period of
increased tax enforcement than companies that were selling their oil closer to market prices. We focus
on a panel of four notable enforcement actions taken between July 2000 and January 2001, which
affected the whole industry as discussed above.25 For announcement returns, we use excess returns
(defined as the cumulative excess return) over a ten day window (t-1, to t+9) surrounding the announced
enforcement action. In our excess return calculations, we use the RTS index (the ruble index when
security quoted in rubles and the dollar index when the share price quoted in dollars). These
announcement returns are regressed on indicators of tax avoidance. As an indicator of tax avoidance, we
use the average selling price per barrel of oil in 1999, a period prior to the increased enforcement
actions.
As Table 3 shows, we have two such measures: the average 1999 selling price and the average
price during the month of August 1999. In the first column of Table 4, we use the first datum as an
indicator of tax cheating. Unfortunately, the overlap between companies with average 1999 selling

26

prices and companies with market prices reduces the sample to only 9 observations. Nevertheless, as
column 1 of Table 4 shows, we find companies that were avoiding taxes the least (and hence had higher
selling prices) had lower market returns around the announcement of higher tax enforcement, and the
difference is significant at the 5 percent level. This evidence contradicts the traditional view of taxes
(companies that pay more taxes to begin with should be less affected by tax enforcement and hence
should have higher returns) but is consistent with the corporate governance view of taxes.
To expand the sample, we pool together estimates of the selling price based on the entire year
and estimates based on the month of August (first and second columns of Table 3). As column 2 of
Table 4 shows, the previous results are confirmed in this larger sample. Not surprisingly, the magnitude
of the coefficient has dropped, since this is a more noisy measure of tax avoidance due to monthly
fluctuations of oil prices. Nevertheless, the average selling price has a negative and statistically
significant effect on the stock market reaction to the announcements of greater tax enforcements.
These results, although limited by the underlying availability of data, are consistent with the
corporate governance view of taxes. Private benefits of control, as measured using dual class voting
shares, not only decline when tax enforcement increases, but they decline by a greater amount in
extractive industries relative to other Russian industries. Similarly, the oil companies that were more
aggressive tax shelterers experience greater returns when tax enforcement increases.
6.

Tests - Corporate Tax Implications

The CGVT also has implications for the responsiveness of tax revenues to changes in the tax
rate. To test these implications, we need changes in tax rates in countries with both strong and weak
corporate governance. A natural setting is a cross-country panel dataset.
6.1.

The Data
We construct a panel data set that combines information on corporate tax revenues, top corporate

marginal rates, ownership concentration, and a measure of corporate governance. For corporate tax rate
information, we utilize the data recently assembled by the Office of Tax Policy Research (OTPR) at the
25

To emphasize, we are focusing on those enforcement actions focused on the industry as a whole, rather than more
recent enforcement actions targeted at a specific company, such as Yukos, where political factors are important in
singling out this firm for action.
27

University of Michigan.26 From the IMF, we obtain data on corporate tax revenues, total tax revenues
(available from the Government Finance Statistics yearbook) and nominal GDP (from the International
Finance Statistics yearbook).27 The data on tax rates are available for a large cross section of countries
only after 1979. Thus, our sample starts in 1979 and ends in 1997, the last year for which this
information was available. From the original set of countries in our sample, we exclude major oilproducing countries given the distinctive dynamics of corporate tax revenues in these settings.28
As a measure of corporate governance, we use the control premium in negotiated control block
sales, as computed by Dyck and Zingales (2003). Consistent with the spirit of our model, the Dyck and
Zingales measure captures the amount of private benefits extracted by insiders. When we examine
ownership concentration we use the average percentage of common shares owned by the three largest
shareholders in the 10 largest nonfinancial, privately owned, domestic firms as computed by La Porta et
al. (1998).
To explore whether we have identified the governance impact on the relationship between tax
rates and revenues rather than some other institutional factor that might covary with governance across
countries and also drive tax revenues, we employ a variety of institutional measures as control variables:
“rule of law” (an index from 0 to 10 that measures the strength of a country’s law and order tradition as
developed by International Country Risk, a country risk rating agency); tax compliance (an index from 0
to 6 developed by the World Competitiveness Report, which assesses the level of tax compliance), and
log of gdp per capita.29
The top panel of Table 5 summarizes the data from the entire panel. The average ratio of
corporate tax revenues to total tax revenues is 10.3% and the average top marginal rate over the sample

26

This data is available at www.otpr.org.
Specifically, data on corporate tax revenues are provided as variable g8h1aa in the GFS database and total tax revenues as
variable g8h1y in the GFS database. Several countries that have variables from the Dyck and Zingales (2003) and LLSV (1998)
databases do not provide corporate tax revenues collection statistics further narrowing the relevant sample. These countries
include Chile, Hong Kong, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Venezuela. For countries with
data on tax rates but no data on corporate tax revenues we conducted additional data searches of country sources (including the
finance ministry, tax authorities, IMF Article IV statistical appendices and other sources) and these searches produced additional
data for Hong Kong and Taiwan. The electronic version of the GFS variables currently available are not yet updated past 1997.
28
The countries excluded are the major oil exporting countries defined as (a) OPEC members, (b) affiliated non-members Oman
and Angola and (c) non-OPEC members in the list of the top 10 oil exporting countries. This last requirement, which excludes
Norway, Mexico and Russia, actually only eliminates Norway, as corporate tax revenues for Mexico and Russia are not in our
ownership or private benefit samples. In these oil-rich countries, corporate tax revenues are typically not income taxes and
corporate tax revenues fluctuate with the world price of oil conflating the analysis.
29
These measures of the rule of law and tax evasion are taken from La Porta et al. (1998, 1999).
27

28

is 38.1%. The governance and ownership variables vary considerably by country: ownership
concentration averages 44.8% with a standard deviation of 13.9%. Similarly, the measure of private
benefits averages 13.5% with a standard deviation of 16.0%. The bottom panel summarizes the data
collapsed by country. In addition to the raw data, we also report country-specific curve slopes. As
described below, these slopes have been obtained by regressing the logarithm of corporate tax revenues
on the logarithm of the GDP and the level of the corporate tax rate.
The panel structure of the sample is useful because we can use within-country variability over
time to estimate the slope of the relation between corporate tax revenues and corporate tax rates and the
cross-country variation to identify how corporate governance influence the slope of this relation. Since
the slope of the curve is estimated using within-country variation, it is important to have a sense of the
magnitude and the direction of these variations. Figure 2 plots the changes in corporate tax rates during
our sample period. In this period, most of the changes, but not all, are tax rate reductions. Furthermore,
most, if not all, of these reductions have been accompanied by a broadening of the tax base.
Unfortunately, in the regressions we will be unable to control for base broadening. Thus, our sample is
biased toward finding a negative-sloped curve. Our interest, however, is not on the average slope of this
curve, but on how this slope changes with the quality of the corporate governance system. Since the
coupling of base broadening and tax rate reductions appears to be widespread and not unique to
countries with high ownership concentration or large private benefits, our cross-country results should
not be affected by the inability to measure base broadening in a systematic way.30
6.2.

Results
In our base specification we regress a measure of tax revenues on the corporate tax rate

employing a number of other variables to capture factors that might influence revenues. Specifically,
our primary specification is as follows:
Log ( Corporate Tax Revenuesit ) = αi + βi ( Log GDPit ) + ητit + εit

30

For surveys of the nature of tax reform during this period, see Cummins, Hassett and Hubbard (1996) for the OECD and Thirsk
(1997) for developing countries. There is no evidence, from such sources, that the likelihood of base broadenings being coupled
with tax rate changes is correlated with income or ownerships concentration or corporate governance. In fact, from a political
economy point of view, we believe the link is more likely to bias against finding results consistent with the corporate governance
view of taxes. In countries with higher ownership concentration, owners should be more effective in lobbying against a base
broadening that accompanies a tax rate reduction.
29

where i indexes countries, t is a time subscript and τ is the top marginal corporate tax rate. η provides
the average slope of the corporate tax revenues curve. We include log gdp to capture the fact that tax
revenues are influenced by profitability which is highly correlated with the business cycle. We also
include country fixed effects and interact fixed effects with the business cycle to capture both that
countries differ in the size of the corporate sector and that the sensitivity to business cycle factors likely
varies across country. We cluster standard errors at the country level.
To examine the effect of governance on the relationship between rates and revenues we include
an additional interaction term that is the product of a measure of corporate governance, (the Dyck and
Zingales (2004) estimates of control premia in different countries) and the corporate tax rate. Since this
is a measure of how much controlling shareholders appropriate for themselves, it is directly related to γ .
Column 1 of Table 6 reports our results. In this specification, the coefficient on the tax rate can
be interpreted as the effect of tax rates on revenues in the absence of any private benefits of control. On
average a tax increase raises corporate tax revenues, but by a minimal amount: a 10 percentage point
increase in the tax rates (from 15% to 25%, for example) increases corporate revenues by 1%. The
average effect, however, is not statistically different from zero. As we warned, this average effect is
likely to be downward biased, because in this period most of the changes have been tax reductions
associated with base broadening. Since Corollary 5 predicts a positive relationship between the
sensitivity of tax revenues to changes in the tax rate and quality of corporate governance, we expect the
coefficient of the interaction between tax rates and corporate measure of private benefits to be negative
(because higher private benefits are an indicator of worse corporate governance). As expected, the
interaction term is negative and statistically significant, i.e., countries with worse corporate governance
have a lower sensitivity of tax revenues to tax increases. The threshold level of the control premium for
a revenue-neutral relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate tax revenues is approximately
20%. Stated differently, corporate tax rate increases in countries where the private benefits of control
are above 20% generate a sufficient behavioral response to negate, and overcome, any additional
revenue generated by the higher rate.
The coefficient of the interaction between corporate governance and tax rates might reflect other
attributes of the institutional environment that would dictate the responsiveness of tax revenues to rate
changes. In a country where there is no enforcement of taxes, for instance, changes in the tax rates
30

might have very little effect on tax revenues, reducing the slope of the tax revenue curve. If countries
with low tax enforcement are also countries with worse corporate governance, the results might reflect
this spurious effect. To examine this possibility, we include in columns 2 through 4 interactions between
the tax rate and other measures of the institutional environment. In column 2, we use the law and order
tradition of a country. Countries with a stronger law and order tradition have a more sloped curve, but
this effect is not statistically significant. More importantly, the effect of corporate governance, while
slightly reduced in magnitude remains statistically significant. Similarly, in column 3 we insert the
interaction between the tax rate and our measure of tax compliance. This interaction is insignificant and,
by contrast, our main effect remains highly statistically significant.31 Finally, in column 4, we
incorporate an interaction with log GNP per capita as the broadest measure of institutional weakness.
Again, the results on the interaction of corporate governance and tax rates remains highly significant.
In columns 5 through 8 of Table 6, we simply split the sample by the measure of governance to
provide a clearer sense of where these effects are more pronounced. In columns 5 and 6, we divide the
sample on the basis of the median level of control premium and in columns 7 and 8 we divide the
sample based on a control premia of 10%, to highlight the differences in countries with more extreme
governance difficulties. As predicted by the model, in countries where the control premium is below the
median the coefficient of the tax rate is positive, while in countries where the control premium is above
the median, the coefficient of the tax rate is less and in fact negative. This effect is more pronounced the
more severe are the governance difficulties, as seen in comparing column 6 and 8.
In columns 9 and 10 we repeat this analysis using alternative measures of tax revenues. In
column 9 we normalize tax revenues by taking the ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP, and in
column 10 we normalize tax revenues by taking the ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP. These
alternative specifications produce qualitatively similar results.
A potential concern with the approach we have taken so far is that we have treated these changes
in tax rates as exogenous. This, in a sense, runs counter to the approach we took in the theoretical
section where we consider governments optimally choosing the level of their tax rates. To address this
problem we instrument the tax rate with the ideological orientation of the chief executive. Ideology may
push government to suboptimal tax rates. Hence, ideology provides the exogenous variation that allows
31

As another test we used the log GDP per capita and find identical results.
31

us to identify the true sensitivity of tax revenues to tax rates. We draw our data on the ideological
orientation of the chief executive from the Database of Political Institutions (Beck et. al. (2001)). They
classify this orientation in four categories: left, right, center, and other. In our sample we have 32% of
country-years with left-wing chief executives, 43% of country-years with right-wing governments and
25% of country-years with other types of executives. As instruments for the tax rate we use two
dummies: a dummy for left-wing chief executives and a dummy for right-wing chief executives. The Ftest of the joint significance of the coefficients is significant at the 1% level.
In column 11 of Table 6 we report the results of our regressions where we have use these
instruments. Our main result does not change: the interaction of private benefits with tax rates comes in
negative and highly significant.
Finally, the predictions on the effects of ownership on the tax revenue sensitivity to tax rate
changes are more nuanced (Corollary 6). The sign of the coefficient depends upon the level of the tax
rate. Furthermore, at an aggregate level, ownership concentration is highly correlated with private
benefits, so when we put them both in the regression (not reported) it is impossible to distinguish the
effect of one from the effect of the other.
The preceding analysis constrains the tax revenue curve to be identical across all the countries
(with the exception of the effect of corporate governance). In order to confirm the strength of our
findings, we estimate country-specific slopes by employing the same specification country-by-country.
Such a procedure, of course, comes at considerable cost since we estimate many more parameters with
the same number of observations. Table 7 analyzes the relation between country-specific tax revenue
slopes and governance levels weighting each observation by the precision of each estimate (the inverse
of the variance of the estimated slope). As predicted by the model, the value of control premia is
negatively related to the sensitivity of tax revenues to tax rates estimated using the logarithm of
corporate tax revenues as a dependent variable (columns 1) and this finding is robust to the inclusion of
ownership concentration as another variable.
7.

Conclusion

32

This paper begins with the simple observation that tax authorities and outside shareholders have
a common goal: reducing managerial diversion. By focusing on this natural alignment of interests, we
provide a new way of looking at corporate taxation. This approach delivers three main insights.
First, the characteristics of the corporate tax system affect the amount of diversion that takes
place in a country and the valuation of firms: higher tax rates worsen corporate governance, while a
strong enforcement of tax claims can strengthen it. We provide evidence consistent with these
predictions: increased tax enforcement in Russia enhanced the value of targeted companies and reduced
their control premia. As predicted by the model, the magnitude of these changes in value and control
premia is a function of prior levels of diversion.
Second, as corporate taxation influences corporate governance, the quality of corporate
governance plays an important role in determining the sensitivity of tax revenues changes to tax rate
changes. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the relationship between tax rates and revenues
depends upon the underlying governance environment, with a greater responsiveness to rate changes in
good governance environments, and a lower (in fact, negative) relationship in bad governance countries.
Third, this approach is also able to provide a new rationale for the existence of a separate tax rate
on corporate income. The function of this tax is to certify the income to minority shareholders and to
provide the incentives for the enforcement of this certification. This rationale is consistent with the
supporting arguments used when the corporate tax was first introduced in the United States in 1909 and
is able to explain a number of the features of the current tax system. This certification role of corporate
taxes has not necessarily disappeared with the development of other mechanisms to monitor corporate
insiders (external auditors, SEC, etc). In fact, the model suggests that that the level of the tax rate is
complementary to the quality of the corporate governance. Hence, countries with better governance can
use taxes more aggressively to further improve corporate governance, while countries with poor
governance to begin with should be leery of using taxes to improve governance, because this might
backfire.

33

Appendix

Proof of Result 5:
Substituting in the optimal level of diversion under a corporate income tax yields the two following FOCs:

α + γ + λ − ψλ − 1 − 2t λ = 0
1 − λ (1 − t )  [t + ψ ] − µα (α + γ ) = 0
2

To check the SOCs, note that the matrix is negative semi-definite

1
−2 λ




2
1
2t
2
2
−
λ
+
λ
+
ψλ
−
µ
α
+
γ
−
µα
α
+
γ
(
)
(
)


Applying Cramer’s Rule, the relationship between optimal tax rates, levels of enforcement and costs of enforcement are
given by the signs:

sign

0
dt
=
2
dµ α ( α + γ )

1

sign

−2 λ
0
dα
=
2 < 0.
dµ 1 − λ + 2tλ + ψλ α ( α + γ )

− µ ( α + γ ) − µα ( 2α + 2γ )
2

<0

Proof of Corollary 7: Differentiating t * with respect to γ we have
−

dt * λ 2δ [δ 2 (1 − λ ) 2 + λ 2δ (γ + α 0 )]
=
dγ
δλ

1
2

−

λ δ [δ (1 − λ ) + λ δ (γ + α 0 )]
dt
=
δλ
dα 0
*

2

2

2

2

> 0 ; differentiating t * with respect to α 0 we have
1
2

> 0 ; differentiating t * with respect to λ we have

dt * 1 1 1 2
1
2
2
= 2 + [ 2 − + 1 + (γ + α 0 )]−1/ 2 (− 3 + 2 ) > 0, differentiating t * with respect to δ we have
dλ λ
2 λ
λ
δ
λ λ
dt * 1 1 2
1
1
= [ 2 − + 1 + (γ + α 0 )]−1/ 2 (− 2 (γ + α 0 )) < 0.
dδ 2 λ
λ
δ
δ
34

References

Arlen, Jennifer and Deborah M. Weiss, (1995) “A Political Theory of Corporate Taxation,” 105 Yale
Law Journal 325.
Auerbach, Alan (2002) “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein
(eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3, North-Holland.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh, “New Tools in
Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions,” World Bank Economic
Review, vol. 15, no. 1 (January, 2001), 165-76.
Bushman, Robert M. and Abbie Smith “Financial Accounting and Corporate Governance,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 32: 237-333.
Chen, Kong-Ping and C. Y. Cyrus Chu, (2003) “Internal Control vs. External Manipulation: A Model of
Corporate Income Tax Evasion,” Academia Sinica Working Paper.
Crocker, Keith and Joel Slemrod (2003) “Optimal Policy Regard Corporate Fraud: Tax Evasion”
University of Michigan Working Paper.
Cummins, Jason G., Kevin A. Hassett, R. Glenn Hubbard (1996) “Tax Reforms and Investment: A
Cross-Country Comparison” Journal of Public Economics, 62:1-2, pp. 237-273.
Desai, Mihir A. and Dhammika Dharmapala (2004) “Corporate Tax Avoidance and High-Powered
Incentives,” NBER Working Paper No. 10471.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales (2004) “Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison"
Journal of Finance.
Ebrill, Liam (1987) “Evidence on the Laffer Curve: The Cases of Jamaica and India” in Ved Gandhi
(ed.) Supply Side Tax Policy: Its Relevance to Developing Countries, International Monetary Fund:
Washington D.C.
Erickson, Merle, Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew (2003) “How Much Will Firms Pay for
Earnings That Do Not Exist? Evidence of Taxes Paid on Allegedly Fraudulent Earnings,”
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Working Paper.
Feldstein, Martin S. (1995) “The Effects of Marginal Tax Rates on Individual Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the Tax Reform Act of 1986,” Journal of Political Economy, 103: 551-572.
Gandhi, Ved (1987) (ed.) Supply Side Tax Policy: Its Relevance to Developing Countries, International
Monetary Fund: Washington D.C.
Goolsbee, Austan (1999) “Evidence on the High Income Laffer Curve from Six Decades of Tax
Reform” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1-47.

35

Graham, John R., (2003), “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review,” Review of Financial Studies 16,
1074-1128.
Hassett, Kevin and Glenn Hubbard, (1998) “Tax Policy and Investment,” NBER Working Paper 5683,
February.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach (1998) “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors
and Their Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, 88: 98-116.
Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice (1994), “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
Business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109:149-182.
International Monetary Fund (2002) “Russian Federation: Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix”
IMF Country Report 02/75.
Irwin, Douglas (1998) “Higher Tariffs, Lower Revenues? Analyzing the Fiscal Aspects of the ‘Great
Tariff Debate of 1888’” Journal of Economic History, 58:59-72.t
Joint Committee on Taxation (2003) “Report of Investigation of Enron Corporation and Related Entities
Regarding Federal Tax and Compensation Issues, and Policy Recommendations” (JCS-3-03).
Kanda, Hideki and Saul Levmore, (1991) “Taxes, Agency Costs and the Price of Incorporation,” 77
Virginia Law Review 211.
Kornhauser, Marjorie "Corporate Regulation and the Origins of the Corporate Income Tax," 66 Indiana
Law Journal 53 (1990).
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1998), “Law and
Finance, Journal of Political Economy, 106:6, 1113-1155.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1999) “Corporate
Ownership Around the World, Journal of Finance, 54:2, 471-517.
Lenter, David, Doug Shackelford and Joel Slemrod, (2003) “Public Disclosure of Corporate Tax Return
Information: Accounting, Economic, and Legal perspectives,” University of Michigan Working
Paper.
Lindsey, Laurence B. (1987) “Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts: 1982-1984,” Journal of
Public Economics 33:173-206.
Meade, James E. (1978) The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation: Report of a Committee Chaired
by Professor J. E. Meade, Boston: Allen and Unwin.
Mintz, Jack (1995) “The Corporation Tax: A Survey” Fiscal Studies 16:23-68.
Morck, Randall (2003) “Why Some Double Taxation Might Make Sense: The Special Case of InterCorporate Dividends,” NBER Working Paper No. 9651.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales (2003) Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists Random House.
36

Shaviro, Daniel (2000) “Economic Substance, Corporate Tax Shelters, and the Compaq Case,” Tax
Notes International, October 9, 2000, pp. 1693-1717.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1997) “A Survey of Corporate Governance” Journal of Finance
52:2, pp. 737-783.
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon (2002) “Investor Protections and Equity Markets,” Journal of
Financial Economics 66, pp 3-27.
Slemrod, Joel (2001) “Are Corporate Tax Rates, or Countries, Converging?” Working Paper, University
of Michigan.
Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki (2002) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administration,” in A.
Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3, North-Holland.
Thirsk, Wayne (1997) (ed.) Tax Reform in Developing Countries, International Monetary Fund:
Washington D.C.
Vickrey, William (1991) "The Corporate Income Tax and How to Get Rid of It," in L. Eden, (ed.)
Retrospectives on Public Finance, Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 118-132.
Weisbach, David (2002) “Ten Truths About Tax Shelters," 55 Tax Law Review 201
Zingales, Luigi (1994) "The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
Experience." Review of Financial Studies 7: 125-148.

Zingales, Luigi (1995a) "Insider Ownership and the Decision to Go Public." Review of Economic
Studies 62: 425-448.
Zingales, Luigi (1995b) "What Determines the Value of Corporate Votes?" Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110: 1047-1073

37

Figure 1: Returns for the World Oil & Gas Index, the Russian Oil& Gas Index, and the Russian Market (Excluding the Oil & Gas Industry),
April 2000 - September 2001
160

Index (=100 on April 3, 2000)

140

120

100

80

60

40
36619 36637 36657 36677 36697 36717 36735 36755 36775 36795 36815 36833 36853 36873 36893 36913 36931 36951 36971 36991 37011 37029 37049 37069 37089 37109 37127

Date
Russian Oil & Gas

WorldOil Index

Russian Market Exc. Oil&Gas

Note: The graph plots the index returns for the World Oil & Gas Index (sourced from….), the Russian Oil & Gas Index and the Russian Market Index Excluding Oil & Gas Firms (sourced from….) from April 1,
2000 to September 30, 2001.

38

39

40

Table 2: Changes in Russian Voting Premia during Increased Enforcement Period

Panel A - Summary Statistics of the Voting Premia Prior to and After Tax Enforcement Actions

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Number of
companies

Average level of the voting premia prior to enforcement
actions (average over March - June, 2000)

0.57

0.6

0.19

45

Average level of the voting premia after enforcement
actions (averaged over February - May 2001)

0.46

0.47

0.23

44

Panel B - Differences Across Industries in Change in Voting Premia
Dependent Variable: Change in Voting
Premia

Constant

(1)

(2)

-0.078
(0.029)

-0.026
(0.035)

Extractive industry dummy
Number of companies in extractive industries
Total Number of companies
Adjusted r-squared

-0.111
(0.051)
7
15

7
15
0.207

Note: Panel A reports the average level of control premia for the unbalanced sample prior to the period of increased
enforcement and after the enforcement period (in both instances reporting the company average over a four month period to
capture the largest number of securities).The sample includes all russian equities in Datastream with two classes of stock
(124 companies) where there is movement in the price of both voting and non-voting shares within five days (59
companies). The voting premia, expressed as a percentage of the equity value of the company, is defined as the difference in
price between the voting and non-voting shares multiplied by the number of voting shares divided by the total equity value
of the company. Panel B reports a regression of the change in the voting premia on a constant and a dummy variable for
firms in extractive industries (oil and minerals) that were the focus of enforcement actions. This regression restricts attention
to the more liquid securities that had trading volume both prior and after enforcement, using the average of the immediate
month preceding and following the enforcement action.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

41

Table 3: Russian Oil Companies and Tax Optimisation
Investment Bank produced indicators of tax optimization 1999
Holding
Company
(1)

Primary Production
subsidiaries (a)
(2)

Average 1999 crude
net selling price
($/bbl) (a,b)
(3)

August 1999 internal
net selling price 1999 production bpd
($/bbl) (b,c)
(a,d)
(4)
(5)

Sibneft
Noyabrskneftegaz

2.2

2.2

326,500
325,562

Megionneftegaz

3.5

2.1

238,600
237,350

Slavneft (e)
TNK
Tyummeneftegaz
Nizhnevartovskneftegaz

2.5
2.5

na
2.2

513,600
36,981
363,125

Tomskneft
Samaraneftegaz
Yuganskneftegaz

1.1
1.8
1.8

~1.0
~1.0
~1.0

894,300
205,421
153,418
522,788

various subsidiaries
Permneft

na
na

2.8
2.0

1,443,700
na

Krasnodarneftegaz
Purneftegaz
Sakhalinmorneftegaz
Stavropolneftegaz

na
3.9
11.0
na

na
3.0
6.8
4.2

251,000
21,940
163,743
28,995
na

Yukos

LUKoil
Rosneft (e)

Onaco (e)
Orenburgneft

8.6

3.0

159,100
148,900

Chernogorneft
Saratovneftegaz
Udmurtneft
Varioganneftegaz

5.8
6.7
6.7
4.3

3.9
3.8
3.8
3.8

250,300
126,136
27,265
106,708
49,690

Surgutneftegaz

Surgutneftegaz

na

7.0

751,500

Bashneft

Bashneft

na

2.6

245,200

Tatneft (e)

Tatneft

na

na

481,300

KomiTEK

Komineft

7.6

na

72,378

Sidanco

Others
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

1,916,000

"Oil Production Subsidiaries," Troika Dialog Research , February 2000.
Average export price, net of export costs and excise in 1999 was $13.50. Average domestic price net of taxes was
$7.20
Estimated from graph, "Oil Sector Report," Troika Dialog Research, March 2000, p. 29.
"Oil Sector Report," Troika Dialog Research, March 2000.
Owned and/or controlled by government.

42

Table 4: Tax Enforcement Actions and Short-Window Excess Returns Within the Oil Industry

Dependent Variable:

Tax avoidance indicator (average $/barrel selling price 1999)

10 day excess returns around
enforcement actions
-0.0795
(0.028)

Tax avoidance indicator (average $/barrel selling price for 1999 if
available August 1999 otherwise)
Event dummies for four events noted in panel A
Number of firms
Adjusted r-squared

Y
9
0.62

-0.0235
(0.012)
Y
18
0.18

Note: This table examines whether the market response to announced enforcement actions depends upon how aggressive
firms have been in avoiding tax payments. We focus on the four notable enforcement actions taken July 2000- January
2001 introduced in Table 1 (excluding Sibneft specific enforcement action). The table reports the results of a regression
of short window excess returns (defined as the cumulative excess return in the ten day window (t-1, to t+9) surrounding
the announced enforcement action) on indicators of tax avoidance. In our excess return calculations we use the RTS
index, using the rouble index when the security is quoted in roubles and the $ index when the share price quoted in
dollars. For indicators of tax avoidance, we use the selling price for oil by company in 1999 reported by investment
the average $1999 selling price is missing. Data are from the RTS daily archive, using the last price reported.
Companies are excluded if there is no trading volume and no reported change in last price over the relevant event
window. Standard errors are in parentheses.

43

Table 5: Descriptive Statistics for Corporate Laffer Curve Specifications
No of
Obs.

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Panel Variables
Log Corporate Tax Revenues
Corporate Tax Revenues/Total Tax
Revenues
Corporate Tax Revenues/GDP
Marginal Tax Rates
Ownership Concentration
Measure of Private Benefits
Rule of Law
Tax Evasion

545

3.6965

3.0782

2.8979

-5.2983

14.4093

540
545
545
545
458
545
521

0.1141
0.0241
0.3781
0.4370
0.1137
7.7174
3.3043

0.0879
0.0205
0.3800
0.4700
0.0629
8.5700
3.4100

0.0897
0.0150
0.0972
0.1386
0.1403
2.3818
0.9020

0.0093
0.0030
0.0980
0.1800
-0.0430
1.9000
1.7700

0.4357
0.0910
0.6000
0.6700
0.6495
10.0000
4.6700

545

0.1615

0.1670

0.0740

0.0200

0.3100

32

0.9731

-0.1183

5.6650

-7.2815

23.2709

32

0.0510

-0.0025

0.4961

-1.0454

1.7917

Country-Specific Laffer Slopes Using
Corporate Tax Revenue to GDP Shares

32

0.0244

0.0003

0.1716

-0.3528

0.7774

Measure of Private Benefits

28

0.1504

0.0731

0.1809

-0.0430

0.6495

Maximum Within-Country Difference in
Marginal Tax Rates
Cross-Sectional Variables
Country-Specific Laffer Slopes Using
Log Corporate Tax Revenues
Country-Specific Laffer Slopes Using
Corporate Tax Revenue to Total
Revenue Shares

Correlation matrix for institutional variables
Control
premia

Ownership
concentration

Rule of law

Measure of
tax
compliance

Control premia

1.000

Ownership concentration

0.537

1.000

Rule of law

-0.348

-0.518

1.000

Measure of tax compliance

-0.562

-0.486

0.547

1.000

Log GNP/capita

-0.323

-0.530

0.868

0.475

Log GNP
per capita

1.000

Notes: The table provides descriptive statistics for variables employed in Tables 6 to 8. The top panel provides descriptive statistics for variables form
the unbalanced panel while the bottom panel provides variables from the cross-section of country when the Laffer equations are run country-by-country.
"Log Corporate Tax Revenues" is the natural log of corporate tax revenues as measured in local currency and as provided in the Government Finance
Statistics (GFS) electronic database. "Corporate Tax Revenues/Total Tax Revenues" is the ratio of corporate tax revenues to total tax revenues as
provided in GFS and as described in text. "Corporate Tax Revenues/GDP" is the ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP as provided in GFS and IFS
and as described in text. "Marginal Tax Rates" are the top corporate statutory rates as provided in the OTPR database and as described in the text.
"Ownership Concentration" is the average percentage of common shares owned by the three largest shareholders in the 10 largest nonfinancial, privately
owned domestic firms in a given country as computed by La Porta et al. (1998). The "Measure of Private Benefits" is the control premium in negotiated
control block sales, as computed by Dyck and Zingales (2003). "Rule of Law" is a measure of the law and order tradition as reported in the
International Country Risk Guide and reported in La Porta et al. (1998). "Tax Evasion" is a measure of tax compliance reported in the Global
Competitiveness Report for 1995 as reported in La Porta et al. (1999). "Maximum Within-Country Difference in Marginal Tax Rates" is the maximum
difference between tax rates for a given country during the panel. Log GNP per capita is the average of 1970-1995, from the World Bank.

44

Table 6: Corporate Laffer Curves For Corporate Governance

Log of Corporate Tax Revenues

Dependent Variable:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All Countries All Countries All Countries All Countries

Marginal Tax Rates

1.2627
(0.5756)

-1.0706
(1.1913)

1.3285
(1.9587)

-4.9446
(3.7902)

Marginal Tax Rates
Interacted with
Measure of Private
Benefits

-6.0502
(2.2017)

-5.4275
(1.9341)

-6.0930
(1.7814)

-4.7807
(1.9633)

Marginal Tax Rates
Interacted with Rule of
Law

Corporate
Tax Revenues/
GDP

Corporate
Tax Revenues/
Total Tax
Revenues

Log of
Corporate
Tax
Revenues
(IV)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Low Private
Benefit
Countries
(<7.5%)

High Private
Benefit
Countries
(>7.5%)

Lower Private
Benefit
Countries
(<10.0%)

Higher
Private
Benefit
Countries
(>10.0%)

All Countries

All Countries

All Countries

-0.4072
(0.5539)

1.0444
(0.4798)

1.2438
(0.5249)

-0.9598
(0.5281)

0.0137
(0.0098)

0.0182
(0.0569)

6.8097
(1.4333)

-0.0698
(0.0386)

-0.2866
(0.2492)

(13.9816)

-36.5611

0.2586
(0.1339)

Marginal Tax Rates
Interacted with Tax
Evasion

-0.0184
(0.5607)

Marginal Tax Rates
Interacted with Log
GNP per capita

0.6669

Country Fixed Effects?

Y

Y

(0.4165)
Y

Log GDP Interactions
with Fixed Effects?

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

31
458
0.9588

31
458
0.9593

31
458
0.9588

16
270
0.8810

15
188
0.9796

18
309
0.8687

13
149
0.9861

31
458
0.5599

31
453
0.6929

29
422

Number of Countries
No Obs.
R-Squared

31
458
0.9590

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.9926

Note: The dependent variables are: the log of corporate tax revenues (columns 1-8,11), the ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP (column 9), the ratio of corporate tax revenues to total tax revenues (column 10). "Marginal Tax Rates" are the
top corporate statutory rate as provided in the OTPR database and as described in the text. The "Marginal Tax Rate Interacted with Measure of Private Benefits" is the product of the tax rate and the control premium in negotiated control block
sales, as computed by Dyck and Zingales (2003). The "Marginal Tax Rate Interacted with Rule of Law" is the product of the tax rate and a measure of the law and order tradition as reported in the International Country Risk Guide and reported
in La Porta et al. (1998). The "Marginal Tax Rate Interacted with Tax Evasion" is the product of the tax rate and a measure of tax compliance reported in the Global Competitiveness Report for 1995 as reported in La Porta et al. (1999). The
"Marginal Tax Rate Interacted with Log GNP Per Capita" is the product of the tax rate and log GNP per capita (average 1970-1995) from the World Bank as reported in La Porta et al. (1999).All specifications employ country fixed effects and
the interactions of those country fixed effects with log GDP. In column 11, we instrument for marginal tax rates and for the interaction of tax

rates with private benefits with ideological orientation of the chief executive, and the ideological orientation interacted with private benefits. Standard errors are presented in parentheses and correct for clustering of residuals at the country level.

45

Table 7: The Importance of Corporate Governance and Ownership Concentration for Country-Specific Laffer Curve Slopes

Country Specific Laffer Curve
Slopes using Log of Corporate
Tax Revenues

Country Specific Laffer Curve
Slopes using Corporate Tax
Revenues/GDP

Country Specific Laffer Curve
Slopes using Corporate Tax
Revenues/Total Tax Revenues

(1)

(2)

(3)

Constant

0.6958
(0.4673)

0.0108
(0.0065)

0.0139
(0.0180)

Measure of Private Benefits

-3.4626
(1.4096)

-0.0479
(0.0174)

-0.1020
(0.0488)

No Obs.
Weighted by the Inverse of
the Variance of the
Measured Slope?
R-Squared

28

28

28

Y
0.1332

Y
0.1370

Y
0.0507

Dependent Variable:

Note: The dependent variable in column 1 is the country-specific Laffer-curve slope generated by regressing the log of corporate tax revenues on log GDP and the corporate statutory
rates. The dependent variable in column 2 is the country-specific Laffer-curve slope generated by regressing the ratio of corporate tax revenues in GDP on log GDP and the corporate
statutory rates. The dependent variable in column 3 is the country-specific Laffer-curve slope generated by regressing the rateio of corporate tax revenues to total tax revenues on log
GDP and the corporate statutory rates. The "Measure of Private Benefits" is control premium in negotiated control block sales, as computed by Dyck and Zingales (2003). All
specifications are weighted least squares regressions where observations are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the measured slopes from country-specific regressions.

46

