                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                LARGE DEVALUATIONS AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE

                                             Ariel Burstein
                                           Martin Eichenbaum
                                             Sergio Rebelo

                                          Working Paper 10986
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10986


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We thank Kei-Mu Yi for sharing data and information on input-output tables with us, Federico Ganduglia
and Martin Cortes for assistance in collecting prices in Argentina, and Herman Kamil and Yossi Yakhin for
research assistance. We also thank Pierpaolo Benigno, Mario Crucini, Beverly Lapham, and Andy Neumeyer
for their comments. Finally, we benefited from detailed comments from Fernando Alvarez and four
anonymous referees. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Ariel Burstein, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange Rate
Ariel Burstein, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 10986
December 2004
JEL No. F31

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we argue that the primary force behind the large drop in real exchange rates that occurs
after large devaluations is the slow adjustment in the price of nontradable goods and services. Our
empirical analysis uses data from five large devaluation episodes: Argentina (2001), Brazil (1999),
Korea (1997), Mexico (1994), and Thailand (1997). We conduct a detailed analysis of the Argentina
case using disaggregated CPI data, data from our own survey of prices in Buenos Aires, and scanner
data from supermarkets. We assess the robustness of our findings by studying large real-exchange-
rate appreciations, medium devaluations, and small exchange-rate movements.

Ariel Burstein
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu

Sergio Rebelo
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Large devaluations are generally associated with large declines in the real exchange rate
(RER) and concomitant low rates of inflation. In this paper, we argue that the primary
force that induces these low rates of inflation is slow adjustment in the price of nontradable
goods and services, not slow adjustment in the price of goods that are imported or exported.
At both short and long horizons, the rate of passthrough from exchange rates to prices is
much lower for nontradable goods than it is for goods that are actually traded.
    Our findings are consistent with the implications of a large theoretical literature that
emphasizes the importance of nontradable-goods prices in explaining RER movements in
developing countries.1 At the same time, our findings cast doubt on the view that large de-
valuations are associated with large deviations from relative purchasing power parity (PPP)
for imported and exported goods.
    To study the sources of movements in the RER we decompose the consumer price index
(CPI) into tradable and nontradable goods. Traditional decompositions classify goods as
tradables and services as nontradables. The prices of tradable goods are generally mea-
sured at the retail level. This approach leads us to conclude that the primary source of
RER movements after large devaluations are changes in the prices of tradable goods across
countries.
    We argue that this inference is misleading. The basic problem is that the retail price
of tradable goods comprises two important nontradable components, distribution costs and
local goods. We define distribution costs as wholesale and retail services, marketing and
advertising, and local transportation services. We define local goods as goods that are
produced solely for the domestic market. Thus, the retail price of tradable goods does not
accurately reflect the price of pure-traded goods at the dock, i.e., the price of goods that are
actually traded, exclusive of distribution costs.
    To deal with this problem, we adopt an alternative decomposition that distinguishes
between nontraded goods and pure-traded goods. We base our primary measure of the price
of pure-traded goods on import and export prices at the dock. We argue that the main
source of RER movements after large devaluations are changes in the price of nontradable
goods relative to the price of pure-traded goods.
   1
     Early theoretical work in this literature includes Meade (1956), Salter (1959), Swan (1960), and Corden
(1960). For more recent discussions see Calvo and Vegh (1999) and the references therein.



                                                     2
   The core of our empirical analysis is based on data from five large devaluation episodes:
Argentina (2001), Brazil (1999), Mexico (1994), Korea (1997), and Thailand (1997). Briefly,
our findings are as follows. The rate of inflation for nontradable goods and services is very
low in the wake of these devaluations, so the dollar price of nontradable goods and services
falls dramatically. The dollar price of tradable goods also falls during these episodes, but the
extent of this decline depends critically on whether we measure prices at the retail level or by
using the price of imports and exports at the dock. The dollar retail price of tradable goods
falls substantially. In sharp contrast, the dollar price of imports and exports at the dock falls
by relatively little. So, although relative PPP is a poor description of the behavior of retail-
tradable goods prices, it is a reasonable description of the behavior of import and export
prices. We corroborate this last finding by using data from four other large devaluation
episodes: Indonesia (1997), Malaysia (1997), the Philippines (1997), and Uruguay (2002).
   Given these facts, we go on to quantify the main sources of RER movements in our
large devaluation episodes. We begin with a series of “price accounting” exercises aimed at
understanding why CPI inflation rates are so low after large devaluations, and what accounts
for the wedges we observe between import and export prices and retail prices of tradable
goods.
   In these exercises we take the price of nontradable goods from the data. We consider
two alternative assumptions about the prices of pure-traded goods. First, we assume that
relative PPP holds for these goods at the dock. Second, we measure the price of pure-traded
goods using at-the-dock import and export price indices. We then compute the CPI and ask
whether the implied rate of inflation is consistent with the data.
   For both measures of pure-traded-goods prices, we find that the answer is yes. Two key
assumptions are necessary to reach this conclusion: that the retail sales of tradable goods
require nontradable distribution services, and that some of the goods traditionally classified
as tradable are actually “local goods.” We defend both assumptions on empirical grounds
and argue that their combined eﬀect is to substantially raise our estimate of the importance
of nontradable goods in the CPI relative to conventional estimates.
   Although the rates of inflation implied by our price-accounting exercise are similar to
actual rates of inflation, they are not identical. There are two factors that might eliminate
the remaining discrepancies. The first factor is a specification error associated with our
simplifying assumption that the distribution sector is perfectly competitive. To assess the



                                               3
impact of this assumption, we deduce the time series of markup rates in the distribution
sector that are required to reconcile actual and implied rates of inflation. As it turns out,
movements in the markup rate are observationally equivalent to measurement error in prices.
Under either interpretation, the required movements in the markup are small. In contrast, if
we abstract from distribution services and local goods then the required mark-up movements
are implausibly large.
   The second factor is the measurement error in the CPI that stems from a “flight from
quality,” which we define as the substitution by households to lower-quality goods in the
aftermath of large contractionary devaluations. In practice, CPI price inspectors replace
individual goods in the CPI basket to reflect changes in demand and product turnover.
Unless these inspectors make appropriate corrections for quality changes, the flight from
quality can induce a downward bias in CPI inflation rates. In general, it is diﬃcult to obtain
direct evidence of this bias. However, we provide indirect evidence on the importance of this
bias by using price data from the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).
   After discussing our price-accounting exercises, we use a strategy proposed by Engel
(1999) to understand the sources of RER movements. We decompose RER movements into
fluctuations in the price of pure-traded goods across countries and movements in the price of
nontradables relative to pure-traded goods. We corroborate our basic finding that the most
important sources of RER movements in the aftermath of large devaluations are movements
in the price of nontradables relative to pure-traded goods.
   We complement our analysis of the five large devaluation episodes with an in-depth
analysis of the Argentinian case. Here, we use four diﬀerent data sets: disaggregated CPI
data, data from our own survey of prices in Buenos Aires, scanner data from Buenos Aires
supermarkets, compiled by CCR, an Argentine marketing research firm; and our own survey
of product origin which classifies goods in the CCR data set into imported, exported, or
local. The general pattern that emerges from these data supports our findings from the
aggregate data.
   We use the scanner and survey data to provide some direct evidence of flight from quality
in Argentina. This evidence complements our results based on the EIU data.
   Finally, we use our survey data to study the frequency of price adjustment for individual
goods and services. Our main finding is that goods prices change much more frequently
than services prices. The median monthly frequency of price changes is 63 percent for goods



                                              4
and zero percent for services. We view this result as significant, because services are the
quintessential nontradable product.
   We ask if our findings are peculiar to large devaluation episodes. There are two di-
mensions to be investigated here: RER appreciations compared to depreciations and large
devaluations compared to small movements in exchange rates. To investigate the first dimen-
sion, we consider two large real-appreciations episodes associated with exchange-rate-based
stabilization programs: Argentina (1991) and Mexico (1987). Consistent with our results for
large devaluations, we find that in both these episodes, the key source of RER fluctuations
is a change in the price of nontradables relative to pure-traded goods.
   To investigate the second dimension, we study four medium-sized devaluations: the 1992
devaluations in Finland, Italy, Sweden, and the UK. In addition, we examine small exchange-
rate fluctuations that occur at business-cycle frequencies over the period 1971-2001 in ten
OECD countries. For medium-size devaluations, we find that movements in the price of
nontradable goods relative to pure-traded goods are an important source of RER movements,
but less so than in large devaluation episodes. For small exchange-rate fluctuations, we find
that changes in the price of nontradable goods relative to pure-traded goods account for a
significant fraction of movements in the RER. However, in contrast to large devaluations,
the fluctuations in the price of pure-traded goods across countries account for the majority
of small movements in the RER. In this sense, our findings are consistent with the results in
Engel (1999) and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002).
   The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide empirical evidence on the
behavior of nominal and real exchange rates, and on the response of diﬀerent prices to large
devaluations. Section 3 presents the results of our price-accounting exercises. Section 4
describes the results of our Engel decompositions. Section 5 provides a detailed analysis
of the 2001 Argentinian devaluation. Section 6 discusses large RER appreciation episodes.
Section 7 summarizes our results for the medium-size devaluations and small exchange-rate
fluctuations. Section 8 concludes.

2. Large Devaluations

In this section we summarize the behavior of various prices and exchange rates in our five
large devaluation episodes. Throughout, we define the CPI-based real exchange rate as:



                                             5
                                                          Pt
                                             RERt =             .                                      (2.1)
                                                         St Pt∗
In equation (2.1) St denotes the trade-weighted nominal exchange rate of the home country
which we define as units of local currency per unit of trade-weighted foreign currency. The
variable Pt denotes the level of the CPI in the home country. Pt∗ represents the trade-weighted
CPI of foreign countries.
       Table 1 presents data on cumulative logarithmic changes in trade-weighted nominal and
real exchange rates, and price levels for five large devaluation episodes: Argentina (2001),
Brazil (1999), Korea (1997), Mexico (1994), and Thailand (1997).2 We focus on these large
devaluation countries because of data availability issues. In every episode there is a consid-
erable drop in the RER, reflecting the fact that the home-country inflation is much lower
than the rate of devaluation.
       Since export and import price indices play a significant role in our analysis, we briefly
digress to discuss how these indices are constructed.3 The two most common methods are to
build indices based on price data collected by surveying importers and exporters, and unit
value indices (UVIs) computed from trade statistics as the ratio of the local currency value of
exports or imports to volume (weight or quantity). UVIs are computed for individual good
categories and then aggregated.4 Countries that construct survey-based indices include Ar-
gentina (import prices), Korea (both import and export prices), and Mexico (export prices).
Countries that use UVI-based import and export indices include Brazil (see Guimarães et
al. (1997) and Markwald et al. (1998)) and Thailand.5 Mexico diﬀers from other countries
in that the government constructs its import price index using information on producer and
export prices in the U.S. Consequently, we should treat the Mexican import price index with
   2
     We compute trade-weighted nominal and real exchange rates using a set of trading partners that repre-
sent, on average, 80 percent of exports and imports for each country. For each country, we choose the largest
trading partners for which we have price data.
   3
     Some studies use the Producer Price Index (PPI) or the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) as a measure
of the price of pure-traded goods. We think that these are poor measure of pure traded goods prices for
two reasons. First, since the PPI targets prices charged by domestic producers, import prices are generally
excluded. Second, the composition, coverage and availability of the PPI and WPI varies widely across
countries (see Maitland-Smith (2000)).
   4
     UVI-based import price indices have been used by various authors to study exchange rate passthrough.
See, for example, Campa and Goldberg (2004).
   5
     We thank Lucia Vera (Indec, Argentina), Henry Pourchet (Funcex, Brazil), Jaehoon Youn (Bank of
Korea), and Luis Manuel Perea (Banco de Mexico) for providing us with information about the method used
to construct import and export price indices. We obtained information on Thailand from documents issued
by the Ministry of Commerce and translated by Krongkaeo Kritayakirana.



                                                     6
caution, because it may be biased towards finding relative PPP by construction. To assess
the robustness of inference, we compare our export and import price indices with annual
export and import price deflators from the National Income Accounts of each country.
       There is a potential bias with UVIs that results from the fact that product composition
can shift over time. However, this bias actually works against our inference that relative
PPP is a good approximation for pure-traded-goods prices. After large devaluations, the
quality of imports is likely to go down, not up. Consequently, the rate of inflation implied by
UVI-based import indices should be biased downward, making it appear that relative PPP
is a worse approximation.
       Table 1 shows that there is substantial comovement between the price of imports and
exports and the nominal exchange rate. In Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico this comovement
is present at all the horizons we consider. For example, according to Table 1 in the first
three months, import (export) prices in Brazil increase by 44 (37) percent, while the trade-
weighted nominal exchange rate depreciates by 45 percent. For Korea and Thailand, the
comovement is stronger in the first few months after the devaluation.6
       Figure 1 plots the time series for the logarithm of the trade-weighted nominal exchange
rate and the equally weighted average of imports and exports prices. Figure 1 makes clear
that relative PPP is a reasonable description of the behavior of prices of pure-traded goods.
There is certainly no indication that import or export prices, measured in units of local
currency, are sticky.
       One limitation of Table 1 is that it reports evidence only for the five countries for which
we have monthly data. To assess the robustness of inference, to our measure of import
and export prices and the selection of countries, Table 2 considers results based on annual
import and export price deflators. Using these deflators allows us to include four other large
devaluation episodes into our analysis: Indonesia (1997), Malaysia (1997), the Philippines
(1997), and Uruguay (2002). For each of these countries, we report data pertaining to
exchange rates, the CPI, and import and export deflators. Consistent with the evidence in
Table 1, Table 2 shows that for all countries there is strong comovement between import and
export price deflators and the exchange rate.
   6
     The nominal exchange rate in Korea and Thailand depreciated in the first three months after the currency
crisis. It then began to appreciate. During the appreciation period, import and export prices fell by more
than the nominal exchange rate. Two possible reasons for this price behavior are that there was a general
decline in dollar prices of tradable goods in the region, and that there was a shift in import composition
toward lower-quality imports.


                                                     7
       An important issue is whether movements in the import and export price indices are
driven by the non-consumption-good components, i.e. capital goods, intermediate goods,
and raw materials. Figure 2 displays the overall import indices and the consumption-goods
import price indices for the four countries for which this data is available, Argentina, Brazil,
Korea, and Thailand. It is evident that these indices move together very closely.
       Next, we note that Table 1 indicates that the retail price of tradable goods moves by
much less than the price of imports and exports (see also Figure 1).7 For example, in the
first three months after the Brazilian devaluation, the change in the retail price of tradable
goods is only 4 percent.
       Table 1 shows that the price of nontradable goods and services moves by much less than
the rate of devaluation. For example, three months after the devaluation in Brazil the price
of nontradables moves by only 1 percent, even though the trade-weighted nominal exchange
rate depreciates by 45 percent. Although the retail prices of tradable goods move more
than prices of nontradable goods and services, the diﬀerences are small relative to overall
movements in the nominal exchange rate.
       In principle, the slow response of nontradable-goods prices could reflect the importance
of government-controlled prices. Table 1 indicates that with the exception of Argentina, the
rate of inflation for public goods is roughly the same as the overall rate of inflation for non-
tradables. Even in Argentina, the diﬀerence between public-goods inflation and nontradables
inflation is small relative to the overall rate of devaluation.
       We conclude that there is a stark diﬀerence in the behavior of the two alternative measures
of tradable prices, import and export prices, and retail prices. Relative PPP is a reasonable
description of the behavior of pure-traded-goods prices. However, it is a very poor description
of the behavior of tradable-goods retail prices.

3. Price Accounting

In principle, there are many possible explanations for the declines in the RER after large
devaluations. Suppose that most goods in the CPI bundle are tradable and relative PPP is a
poor description of the price of pure-traded goods. Then, the fall in the RER would primarily
   7
    This is consistent with Frankel, Parsley, and Wei’s (2004) finding that exchange-rate passthrough is
higher for import prices at the dock than for retail prices.They find weaker evidence than we do that relative
PPP holds at the dock. This diﬀerence may refect the fact that, unlike them, we focus on large devaluation
episodes.



                                                      8
reflect a big change in the relative price of pure-traded goods across countries. Alternatively,
suppose that most goods in the CPI are nontradable and relative PPP is a good description
of pure-traded good prices. Then, the fall in the RER primarily reflects a large change in
the price of nontradable goods relative to pure-traded goods. Of course, there are many
intermediate possibilities. To assess the empirical relevance of the diﬀerent possibilities, this
section discusses our estimate of the weight of nontradables in the CPI. We then describe
a series of price-accounting exercises that are helpful in isolating the determinants of CPI
inflation and RER movements.

3.1. The Composition of the CPI Basket

As noted earlier in the paper, traditional decompositions of the CPI classify goods as trad-
ables and services as nontradables. Table 3 reports the results of implementing this decompo-
sition for our five large devaluation countries (see the data appendix for details). According
to Table 3 on average, nontradable goods account for roughly 50 percent of the CPI basket.
In our view, this decomposition substantially understates the percentage of the CPI basket
that is composed of nontradables because it ignores distribution costs for tradable goods and
local goods.
       We now provide an overview of the potential impact of distribution costs and local goods
on the composition of the CPI basket. Recall that we compute the CPI using retail prices.
These prices are necessarily diﬀerent from producer prices, because they reflect distribution
costs associated with wholesale and retail services, marketing and advertising, and local
transportation services. Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003) show that these costs are large.
According to their estimates, the average distribution margin for consumption goods, defined
as:
                                               Retail Price - Producer Price
                      Distribution Margin =                                  ,
                                                        Retail Price
is roughly 50 percent.8      Distribution services are nontradable in nature, since they are in-
tensive in local land and labor. So Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo’s findings imply that half
of the retail price of a tradable good reflects nontradable goods and services. Consequently,
distribution costs account for approximately 25 percent of the CPI bundle raising the total
share of nontradables in the CPI to 75 percent.
   8
    In practice Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003) compute distribution margins as the ratio of gross margin
to sales. An alternative measure is the ratio of value added to sales. Value added is equal to the gross margin
minus the cost of supplies, materials, fuel, and other energy, and the cost of contract work on materials of
the wholesaler. In practice, the diﬀerence between these two measures of the distribution margin is small.

                                                      9
       Consider the remaining 25 percent of the CPI basket classified as tradable goods. Many of
these goods are actually local goods that are produced solely for domestic consumption. For
example, yogurt is traditionally classified as a tradable good. However, almost all the yogurt
produced in Argentina is sold locally (see Table 8, which provides additional examples). It is
diﬃcult to precisely estimate the share of local goods in the CPI. However, the calculations
below suggest that local goods could represent as much as 22 percent of tradable goods or 11
percent of consumption. In this case, taking distribution costs and local goods into account
reduces the share of pure-traded goods in the CPI basket to 14 percent.
       To illustrate the importance of pure-traded goods in consumption we calculate the import
content of consumption for our five large devaluation countries.9 Our calculations use input-
output tables, except for Brazil and Thailand for which we use data from the National
Income and Products Accounts (see the data appendix for details).
       Table 3 reports two measures of the importance of pure-traded goods in consumption.
The first measure is the fraction of imported final goods in total consumption exclusive of dis-
tribution services. We refer to this measure as the “direct” import content of consumption.
The second measure is the direct import content plus the value of imported intermediate
inputs used to produce final consumption goods as a fraction of total consumption expendi-
tures. We refer to this measure as the “total” import content of consumption.
       Table 3 shows that, for all of our large devaluation countries, the importance of pure-
traded goods in consumption is small.10 The average direct import content of consumption
in these countries is 5 percent, while the average total import content of consumption is 14
percent.11
       We would like to estimate the fraction of exportable goods in consumption. Unfortu-
nately,we cannot use input-output matrices to construct these estimates, because they do
not contain information on the fraction of exportable goods that is consumed domestically.
In light of this, we use two bounds for the importance of pure tradable goods in consumption.
The lower bound, which abstracts from exportables, is equal to the total import content of
consumption. The upper bound, which abstracts from local goods, is equal to the conven-
tional estimate of nontradable goods plus distribution services.
   9
     Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain data for the other four countries included in Table 3.
  10
     For Brazil we measure the direct and total import content in final demand.
  11
     Investment goods generally have a higher import content than consumption goods. See Burstein, Neves,
and Rebelo (2004).




                                                   10
3.2. Price-Accounting Results

We think of the CPI as a geometric average of the retail price of tradable goods (PtT ) and
the price of nontradable goods and services (PtN ):

                                     Pt = (PtT )1−ω (PtN )ω .                              (3.1)

In equation (3.1), ω is the weight of tradable goods in the CPI, as traditionally defined.
We take the view that tradable goods include both goods that are actually traded (im-
ports/exports) and local goods. We assume that the price of tradable goods is given by:

                                     PtT = (PtI )1−θ (PtL )θ ,                             (3.2)

where PtI is the retail price of traded goods, PtL the retail price of local goods, and θ denotes
the share of local goods in tradable goods.
   As in Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003), we assume that selling one unit of traded
or local goods requires nontradable distribution services, and that the price of distribution
services is the same as the price of nontradable goods. We assume that the technology used
to transform traded goods and local goods into retail tradable goods is Cobb-Douglas. We
denote the weight of distribution services in this production technology by φ. For simplicity,
we suppose that this weight is the same for traded and local goods. Perfect competition in
the distribution sector implies that the retail price of traded and local goods is given by:

                                    PtI = (P̄tI )1−φ (PtN )φ ,                             (3.3)
                                    PtL = (P̄tL )1−φ (PtN )φ ,                             (3.4)

respectively.
   In equation (3.3) P̄tI denotes the price of pure-traded goods. In equation (3.4) P̄tL is the
price of a local good exclusive of its distribution component.
   Finally, we assume that the price of local goods is the same as the price of nontradables:

                                           P̄tL = PtN .                                    (3.5)

Equations (3.1)-(3.5) imply that Pt is given by:


                                     Pt = (P̄tI )1−α (PtN )α ,                             (3.6)


                                                11
where
                                     α = 1 − (1 − θ)(1 − φ)(1 − ω),                          (3.7)

is the total weight of nontradable goods in the CPI basket.
       In our price-accounting exercises we take the rate of change in PtN directly from the data.
We consider two measures of P̄tI . In case 1, we assume that relative PPP holds for the price
of pure-traded goods (P̄tI ):
                                               P̄tI = kSt P̄tI∗ ,

where k > 0 is an arbitrary constant. In this case, we measure the foreign price of pure-
traded goods (P̄tI∗ ) using the trade-weighted average of foreign import and export prices. In
case 2 we do not impose relative PPP. Instead, we measure P̄tI using an equally weighted
average of the import and export price indices for the country in question.
       We consider four alternative assumptions about α: that all goods are traded, that some
goods are nontradable, but there are no distribution costs or local goods; that there are
nontradable goods and distribution costs but no local goods; and that there are nontradable
goods, distribution costs, and local goods. For each set of assumptions we use equation (3.6)
to compute the implied rate of CPI inflation. We then compare the implied rate with the
actual inflation rate one year after the devaluation.12


Assumption A: All Goods Are Traded Suppose that all goods are traded so that ω =
α = φ = 0. Table 4 shows that for both measures of P̄tI , the implied rate of inflation is much
higher than the actual rate of inflation. For example, in Brazil, the actual inflation rate in
the first year after the devaluation is roughly 9 percent, while the rate of inflation implied
by cases 1 and 2 of our price-accounting exercise is approximately 40 percent.


Assumption B: Nontradable Goods but No Distribution Costs or Local Goods
Suppose that there are nontradable goods but no distribution costs (φ = 0), and no local
goods (θ = 0) so that α = ω. We set ω to the conventional measure of the weight of
nontradable goods in the CPI basket reported in Table 3. We note that the assumption of
local goods is isomorphic to the assumption that there are no local goods, but their price
moves one-to-one with the price of pure-traded goods (P̄tI ). Table 4 indicates that for all
countries and both measures of P̄tI , the rate of inflation implied by the price-accounting
  12
       We do not include Thailand in our analysis because we do not have data on PtN .


                                                      12
exercises is much larger than the actual rate of inflation. For example, in Brazil, the rate of
inflation implied by cases 1 and 2 is roughly 27 percent and 25 percent, respectively. This
implied rate of inflation is much larger than the actual rate of inflation, although lower than
the implied rate of inflation when α = 0.


Assumption C: Nontradable Goods and Distribution Costs but no Local Goods
We introduce distribution costs and assume a 50 percent distribution margin (φ = 0.5). We
continue to set ω to the values reported in Table 3. The resulting value of 1 − α provides
an upper bound on the importance of pure-traded goods, since it completely abstracts from
local goods (θ = 0). Table 4 indicates that, for all countries and both measures of P̄tI , the
rates of inflation implied by the price-accounting exercises fall substantially, relative to the
case of φ = 0. For example, the implied rate of inflation in Brazil falls from 25 percent to 15
percent. Nevertheless, the implied inflation rates are still somewhat higher than the actual
rates of inflation (e.g., 9 percent in the case of Brazil).


Assumption D: Nontradable Goods, Distribution Costs, and Local Goods We
set 1 − α to the total import weight of consumption obtained from the input-output tables
(see Table 3). This case provides a lower bound on the importance of pure-traded goods,
because it abstracts from exportables and assumes that the price of local goods moves like
the price of nontradables.
   Table 4 indicates that the rates of inflation implied by the price-accounting exercise are
similar to the actual rates of inflation. In Brazil these two rates coincide, but in Argentina
the implied rate of inflation is actually lower than the actual inflation rate.
   Assumption D overstates the extent to which we can replicate actual rates of inflation,
because it corresponds to a lower bound value for the importance of traded goods. At the
same time, assumption C understates the extent to which we can replicate actual rates of
inflation. Recall that under this assumption there are no local goods, or, equivalently, the
price of these goods rises at the same rate as the retail price of imported goods. Presumably,
the truth lies somewhere between assumptions C and D.
   One piece of evidence on this point comes from Argentina, the only country for which
we have data on the retail prices of local goods. We will see in section 5 that the rate of
inflation in the retail price of local goods is lower than the rate of change in the retail price
of imported goods, but higher than the rate of change in the price of nontradables. So a

                                                13
conservative assessment of our results is that the implied rates of inflation emerging from
the price-accounting exercises are still somewhat higher than actual rates of inflation.


Markups and Measurement Error One factor that might reduce the discrepancy be-
tween actual and implied rates of inflation is specification error in the model of the retail
tradable sector summarized by equation (3.3). There, we assume that retail tradable goods
are produced by perfectly competitive producers who combine distribution services with pure
tradable goods. Equation (3.3) is an identity that does not perfectly describe the behavior
of the retail prices of traded goods. This limitation raises the question: how large is the
diﬀerence between actual and predicted retail prices of traded goods?
      To answer this questions we modify equation (3.3) so that the actual and predicted retail
prices of tradables are, by construction, the same. Suppose that retail prices are given by:

                                         PtI = µt (P̄tI )1−φ (PtN )φ ,
                                         PtL = µt PtN .

Then the retail price of tradable goods is given by:

                                PtT = µt [(P̄tI )(1−φ)(1−θ) (PtN )1−(1−φ)(1−θ) ].                     (3.8)

One interpretation of µt is that it represents measurement error in the diﬀerent price indices.
A more interesting possibility is that retail firms are not perfectly competitive. In this
case, µt corresponds to the time t markup. For expositional purposes we adopt the latter
interpretation.
      To quantify the diﬀerence between actual and predicted retail prices, we compute the
values of µt required for equation (3.8) to perfectly fit the time series on PtT .13 Since we take
PtN from the data, these values of µt also imply that the predicted rates of inflation coincide
at each point in time with actual rates of inflation.
      Figure 3 shows the time series for µt under assumptions B, C, and D. We look first at
our results under assumption D (nontradables, local goods, and distribution costs). Here,
the variations in µt are relatively small. They are always lower than 10 percent in Brazil
and Mexico and lower than 20 percent in Argentina and Korea. To put these numbers in
perspective, suppose that the pre-devaluation gross markup is µ = 1.25. This assumption
 13
      Since our price series are indices, we only have information on the percentage change in µt .


                                                       14
implies that in Brazil and Mexico µt never falls below 1.13. In Korea µt never falls below
1.02, but in the Argentinian case the implied markup rises somewhat.
       Next, we consider our results under assumption C (nontradables and distribution costs,
but no local goods). Movements in µt are smaller than 20 percent for all countries. We note
that in this case, the markup in Argentina no longer rises but declines by a modest amount.
       When we examine our results under assumption B (nontradables but no distribution costs
or local goods) we see that movements in µt are much larger. For example, the maximal
deviation exceeds 60 percent for Argentina and is over 40 percent for the other three countries.
So, if the pre-devaluation markup is 1.25, then the gross markup falls below 0.69 in Argentina
and 0.84 for the other countries. This big fall in µt means that retailers would have been
selling products at a loss for long periods of time. To avoid this implication while maintaining
the assumption that there are no distribution costs or local goods, we would have to assume
that pre-devaluation markups were extremely high: higher than 1.85 in Argentina and 1.5
in the other countries.

3.3. Flight From Quality

Another factor that might reduce the discrepancy between actual and implied rates of in-
flation is measurement error that stems from a flight from quality. By a flight from quality
we mean that households substitute towards lower-quality goods in the aftermath of large
contractionary devaluations.14 In fact, all the large devaluations in our sample are contrac-
tionary: in the first year after the devaluation real GDP contracts by 12, 1, 7, 6, and 11
percent in Argentina, Brazil, Korea, Mexico, and Thailand, respectively.
       Flight from quality can lead to a downward bias in the oﬃcial inflation rate. In principle,
the CPI measures the price of a fixed basket of goods, so it should not be aﬀected by a flight
from quality. But in practice, the individual goods in the CPI basket are periodically replaced
to reflect changes in demand and product turnover. When an item is replaced CPI price
inspectors must decompose the price diﬀerence between incoming and outgoing goods into
a pure-price eﬀect and a quality-diﬀerence eﬀect. This decomposition can impart significant
biases in the CPI.15 These biases are likely to be become worse after large devaluations,
because there are sizable shifts in consumption patterns. In addition, there are marked rises
  14
      There is substantial anectodal evidence that large contractionary devaluations are accompanied by flight
from quality. See, for example, Cho and Advincula (1998) for a discussion of how Korean department stores
accommodated the switch in demand from imported goods to cheaper local substitutes after the 1997 crisis.
   15
      See Armknecht and Weyback (1989), Bils (2004), Klenow (2003), and Moulton and Moses (1997).


                                                     15
in product destruction rates that increase the number of products that must be replaced in
the CPI basket.
       It is generally diﬃcult to quantify the bias induced by flight from quality. Here, we
provide indirect evidence on this bias using data from the EIU.
       By surveying prices in diﬀerent countries the EIU computes cost-of-living indices that
firms use to calculate compensation for workers who are relocated to a diﬀerent country. Two
virtues of this data set are that the EIU tries to keep constant the quality of the products
surveyed and tends to exclude local goods.16
       Using EIU data, we study the behavior of prices in our five devaluation countries, focusing
on the largest city in each country (Buenos Aires, São Paulo, Mexico City, Seoul, and
Bangkok). The EIU collects prices in September of each year, in both low- and high-price
outlets.
       We group EIU items into four categories: clothing, durables, food, and other miscella-
neous goods. We then compute a price index for each category in each country. The weight
we give to an individual item (e.g., yogurt, natural, 150 grams) in a category (e.g., food)
is equal to the weight the item receives in the U.S. CPI.17 To calculate an overall rate of
inflation, we assign to each category the weight that it receives in the U.S. CPI basket. We
also use these weights to compute a partial CPI inflation rate as an average of the oﬃcial
inflation rates for the four categories used in computing the EIU inflation rate. We then
compare the two inflation rates to assess the importance of the flight from quality. Although
the EIU inflation rate is an imperfect measure, it provides some useful information about
the magnitude of measurement error associated with the flight from quality.
       For each country, Table 5 reports the partial CPI inflation rate and two EIU inflation
rates. We compute these two EIU inflation measures using data collected in low- and high-
price outlets, respectively. For Mexico we have institutional information that there were very
few unplanned substitutions of items in the CPI basket.18 This information suggests that
the flight from quality does not have a big impact on the Mexican CPI. Interestingly, the
EIU inflation rate tracks the oﬃcial CPI inflation quite closely for Mexico. This fact gives
  16
     Other papers that use the EIU data set include Parsley and Wei (2001) and Engel and Rogers (2004).
  17
     We use these weights because of data limitations. See the appendix for details.
  18
     Banco de Mexico updated the list of goods used to compute the Mexican CPI in February 1995. This
update had been planned for months and was unrelated to the devaluation. Using several issues of the Diario
Oficial de la Federacion for 1995, we concluded that between February and July only 233 goods out of 5494
were added to the CPI basket for Mexico City. Only a fraction of the 233 new goods were introduced to
reflect changes in consumption patterns.


                                                    16
us some confidence that the EIU inflation rates, as we compute them, are useful.
       For all other countries in our sample, the partial CPI inflation rate is lower than both
EIU inflation rates. The diﬀerences are particularly notable for Brazil, Korea, and Thailand.
For example, in Brazil, at the one-year horizon the partial CPI inflation rate is 7 percent,
while the EIU inflation rates are roughly 15 percent.
       Our results suggest that flight from quality probably induced a systematic downward
bias in inflation rates after large devaluations. But it is diﬃcult to be precise about the
quantitative importance of this bias.

4. Engel Decompositions

In this section we use an approach proposed by Engel (1999) to study the source of RER
movements. We assume that equation (3.1) defines the domestic CPI and that the foreign
CPI (Pt∗ ) is given by:
                                        Pt∗ = (PtT ∗ )1−ω (PtN∗ )ω .

For exposition purposes only we assume that ω, which represents the share of tradable goods
in the CPI basket, is the same in both countries. We can decompose the RER, which we
defined in equation (2.1) as:


                             log(RERt ) = log(RERtT ) + log(RERtN ).                                 (4.1)

The first component, log(RERT ), measures the extent to which the price of tradable goods
is diﬀerent across countries:


                                   log(RERtT ) = log[PtT /(St PtT ∗ )].

The second component, log(RERtN ), measures movements in the price of nontradables, rel-
ative to tradables, across countries:
                                       £                                  ¤
                        log(RERtN ) = ω log(PtN /PtT ) − log(PtN∗ /PtT ∗ ) .

       Table 6 and Figure 4 report for our five episodes changes in diﬀerent measures of the
RER.19 When we measure PtT using retail prices changes in log(RERtT ) account for most
  19
    We do not have data on P T ∗ for the trading partners of each country. We proxy for P T ∗ using the CPI
of the relevant countries.



                                                    17
of the movement in log(RERt ). For example, for Korea case, the change in log(RERtT )
represents between 88 and 99 percent of the movement in log(RERt ) over various horizons.
       Earlier we argued that retail prices are not good measures of the price of pure-traded
goods, because they embody a large nontradable component in the form of distribution costs
and local goods.20 We now incorporate these factors into our analysis. Using equation (3.6)
and (2.1) the RER can be expressed as:
                                                           T                N
                                log(RERt ) = log(RERt ) + log(RERt ).                                     (4.2)
                  T
Here, log(RERt ), is the diﬀerence across countries in the price of pure-traded goods:
                                                T
                                     log(RERt ) = log[P̄tI /(St P̄tI∗ )].
                  N
Also, log(RERt ) is the diﬀerence across countries in the price of nontradables, relative to
traded prices measured at the dock:21
                                   N      £                                   ¤
                            log(RERt ) = α log(PtN /P̄tI ) − log(PtN∗ /P̄tI∗ ) .
                                                           T
Table 6 and Figure 4 report changes in log(RERt ) in the aftermath of our five large deval-
uation episodes. We measure P̄tI using an equally weighted geometric average of import and
export price indices. We also report results for the case in which we measure P̄tI using just
the import price index.
                                                T
       We note that movements in log(RERt ) account for a much smaller fraction of the changes
in log(RERt ) than movements in log(RERtT ). For example, at a six-month horizon, the
                        T
change in log(RERt ) represents only 20, 9, 7, 2, and 3 percent of the movement in the
log(RERt ) for Argentina, Brazil, Korea, Mexico, and Thailand, respectively. We conclude
that when RERs are constructed using at-the-dock prices of pure-traded goods they do not
fall by a substantial amount after large devaluations .
       Once we allow for time-varying markups, equation (3.8) implies that the Engel decom-
position takes the form:22

                                                T                                      N
                      log(RERt ) = log(RERt ) + (1 − ω) log(µt ) + log(RERt ).
  20
     Betts and Kehoe (2004) find that diﬀerent measures of tradable good prices have diﬀerent implications
for decompositions of movements in the RER. Their preferred measure of the RER is based on gross output
deflators. Unfortunately, these are available only for a small set of countries and only at an annual frequency.
  21
     For expositional purposes only we assume that α (as defined in equation (3.7)) is the same across
countries.
  22
     For simplicity we abstract from markups in foreign countries.

                                                      18
We note that this equation implies that our previous calculations about the importance of
        T
RERt in the Engel decomposition are unaﬀected by the presence of time-varying markups.
       Viewed as a whole, and consistent with our price-accounting exercises, the results in this
section provide strong evidence in favor of the view that, in our large devaluation episodes,
movements in the relative price of pure-traded goods across countries is not an important
source of RER movements after large devaluations.

5. A Closer Look at the Data: Argentina’s 2001 Devaluation

We complement the evidence presented above with an in-depth look at an episode for which
we have more detailed data, Argentina’s 2001 devaluation.23 Our information comes from
four diﬀerent data sets: disaggregated CPI data from INDEC (Instituto Nacional de Es-
tadística y Censos, the Argentinian National Statistical Agency); data from our own survey
of prices in Buenos Aires; scanner data compiled by CCR, an Argentine marketing research
firm; and our own survey of product origin that classifies goods in the CCR data set into
imported, exported, or local.

5.1. Disaggregated CPI and Scanner Data

Our data show that the rate of increase in retail prices is higher for goods that have a higher
market share of imported and exportable goods. Table 7, obtained from INDEC, describes
the behavior of various price indices for the period December 2001 to December 2002. The
same patterns of price behavior emphasized in the previous section emerge clearly here.
During the period under consideration, the U.S. dollar/peso exchange rate falls by roughly
124 percent.24 Consistent with the notion that relative PPP is a reasonable description of
the price of pure-traded goods, the price of imports rises by 111 percent. Consistent with
the importance of distribution costs, the retail price of imported goods rises by far less (83
percent). The retail price of tradable goods, which includes both imported and local goods,
rises by only 52 percent.
       The table also shows that the retail price of tradable goods with the lowest market share
of importables and exportables rises the least. For example, the retail price of local goods
  23
     Argentina devalued its oﬃcial exchange rate in January 2002, but banks were closed in the last few days
of December 2001.
  24
     The Peso/U.S. dollar exchange rate was 1 in December 2001 and roughly 3.45 in December 2002. Working
with logarithmic percentage chages, this corresponds to a 124 percent devaluation.



                                                    19
rises by only 42 percent.25
       Table 7 is consistent with the notion that the price of nontradable goods and services is
not substantially aﬀected by the devaluation. Indeed, the price of these goods rises by only
13 percent. We conclude that the higher is the pure-traded content of the good, the better
does relative PPP describe the behavior of a good’s price .
       We now examine our second source of evidence on the relation between inflation and
the market share of imported and exportable goods across diﬀerent good categories. This
evidence comes from two sources. First, we obtained scanner data on prices and market
shares of individual products at the SKU (stock keeping unit) level from CCR. The data
covers 24 supermarket product categories for the period January 1999 to June 2002. For
each product category, we have information on a very large number of individual products
(e.g. 1,042 diﬀerent types of breakfast cereal).
       Second, we conducted our own survey of product origin for a subset of individual items
in 21 product categories in the CCR data set. This subset represents approximately 70
percent of the total market share for each of the 21 product categories. The survey took
place in October 2002 in several Buenos Aires supermarkets. Product labels of the goods
that we surveyed indicate whether the good was imported, exported, or neither. Using
this information, we classified each product as being imported, exportable, or local. Using
CCR data on market shares of individual products, we computed the shares of imported
and exportables for each product category (e.g. beer, bread, etc.). We obtained the rate of
inflation for each product category from INDEC for the period December 2001 to June 2002.
       Table 8 reports the shares of imported and exportables for each product category and the
corresponding rate of inflation. Our key finding is that there is a strong positive correlation
(0.69) between the rate of inflation of a product category and the market share of imported
and exportable goods in that product category.

5.2. Our Survey of Prices in Buenos Aires

We now turn to a data set that allows us to assess how often the retail prices of tradable
and nontradable goods are adjusted. This data set is based on a survey of prices in Buenos
Aires that we conducted between March 27 and December 24, 2002.
       We collected prices for 53 goods in eight supermarkets at weekly frequency. For each
  25
    Local goods are typically not branded. Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis (2001) find, using European
data, that PPP is a better approximation for branded goods than for non-branded goods.


                                                  20
good we gathered information on diﬀerent items. An item is a type of brand and size of a
good collected in a given supermarket (e.g. cooking oil, Cocinero brand, 1.5 liter bottle, in
Disco supermarket). We have prices on 516 items.
       We also collected data on ten services in one or two diﬀerent outlets. In total, we have
prices on 17 service items. All of the goods that we consider would be classified as tradable
under a standard classification. The services in our survey are all clearly nontradable in
nature.
       The goods in our survey are apples, aspirin, bananas, adhesive bandages, batteries, bed-
sheets, Big MacTM , Bic pens, bleach, blue jeans, bottled beer, bread, cereal, chicken, choco-
late, chocolate biscuits, cigarettes, coﬀee, color film, computer mouse, cooking oil, two types
of deodorant, diapers, diesel, diskettes, dulce de leche (a local desert), eggs, filet mignon,
flour, gasoline, hake (an ocean fish), herbal tea (yerba mate), leather shoes, light bulbs,
mayonnaise, milk, microwaves, mineral water, music CDs, osso bucco, polenta, potatoes,
printers, printer paper, printer toner, recordable CDs, rice, shampoo, razor blades, soft
drinks, spaghetti, sugar, televisions, toothpaste, veal scallops, wine, and writing paper. The
services in our survey are bus fares, haircuts, movie theater tickets, newspapers, parking,
payphone calls, stamps, taxi fares, train fares, and video rentals.
       We compute the frequency of price changes for each individual item. Frequency is defined
as the number of periods in which a price change occurs as a fraction of the total number of
periods in which the item is available.26 For example, suppose that we have weekly data on
the price of an item for an eight-month period. If the price of the item changes in only two
weeks during that period, then the frequency of price change is 2/(8x4) = 1/16. If the item
changes price every week, then the frequency of price adjustment is one.
       Figure 5 presents a histogram showing the frequency of price changes for the goods and
services in our sample. We note that 70 percent of the services surveyed never change prices
during the sample period. In contrast, fewer than one percent of the goods surveyed keep
their prices constant throughout the sample.27
       Table 9 reports the median frequency of price changes and the median time between
  26
      In practice, for a given good or service, we compute the frequency of price changes as an average of the
frequency of price changes in diﬀerent supermarkets or locations.
   27
      When we use a daily-frequency version of our survey data, we find that most price adjustments occur
after a stock-out. The probability of a price change, conditional on the good not being on the shelf on the
previous day, is 33 percent. This evidence is consistent with Rotemberg’s (2003) argument that retailers
worry about customer anger associated with price changes.



                                                     21
price changes. We compute the latter as the median of the inverse of the frequency of price
changes for individual items.28 Our main finding is that goods prices are adjusted much
more frequently than are services prices. The median weekly frequency of price changes
is 31 percent for goods and zero percent for services.29 These frequencies imply that the
median time between price changes is 4.8 weeks for goods and infinity for services.30 The
low frequency of price adjustments for nontradable services is not driven by the fact that
the government controls some of these prices: the median weekly frequency of price changes
for services whose price is not administered by the government is still very low—1.8 percent.
       We compare our results with those reported by Bils and Klenow (2004) for the U.S.
and by Lach and Tsiddon (1992) and Baharada and Eden (2004) for Israel. To make this
comparison we aggregate our weekly data to a monthly frequency and then compute the
frequency of price changes.
       Bils and Klenow (2004) estimate that the median monthly frequency of price changes for
the period 1995 to 1997 is 30 percent for goods and 21 percent for services. Lach and Tsiddon
(1992) estimate that the average frequency of price changes during the period 1978—1979 and
1981—1982 is 41 percent. The average monthly rate of inflation in Israel is 4.3 percent in
1978-1979 and 6.3 percent in 1981—1982. Baharada and Eden (2004) consider the 1991-92
period when inflation is lower (0.8 percent per month). They find that the average frequency
of price changes is 24 percent. In our data set the median monthly frequency of price changes
is 66 percent for goods and zero percent for services. Our finding that service prices change
less frequently than goods prices is consistent with Bils and Klenow’s results (2004). Our
results indicate that goods prices adjusted much more rapidly in Argentina than in the U.S.
and Israel. In contrast, service prices adjusted much more slowly in Argentina than in the
U.S.

5.3. Flight from Quality in Argentina

We use our scanner data to provide evidence of the flight from quality in Argentina. We
calculate the fraction of individual products at the SKU level that were “destroyed,” i.e.,
  28
     Our results understate the frequency of price adjustment for goods because they only take into account
changes in prices that were reflected in price labels. This excludes price changes associated with supermarket-
wide discounts.
  29
     Our data starts in March and the devaluation occurred in the beginning of the year. Oﬃcial CPI inflation
between December 2001 and March 2002 was 9.6 percent for the overall CPI and 2.8 percent for services.
  30
     For services, all the price changes are positive. In contrast, for goods, 61 percent of the price changes
are positive.


                                                      22
disappeared from supermarket shelves. For each of 24 product categories, the first five
columns of Table 10 report the fraction of SKUs that were destroyed in the six months prior
to June 2000, December 2000, June 2001, December 2001, and June 2002. The median
fraction of SKUs across all product categories that disappeared rose from 16 percent in June
2001 to 26 percent in June 2002.
      Next, we calculate the weighted average price of SKUs whose markets share fall by more
than 2 percent in any given period. We also compute the average price of SKUs whose
market share rises by more than 2 percent. The last three columns of Table 10 report the
ratio of these two average prices for each of the 24 goods categories in our sample. The
median of this ratio across product categories rose from 1.1 in the year preceding June 2000
to 1.3 in the year preceding June 2002. To the extent that price is correlated with quality
this change in the median is clear evidence of a flight from quality: the products that lose
market share have significantly higher prices than do those products that gain market share.
      Additional evidence on flight from quality in Argentina comes from CCR, which classifies
brands into diﬀerent categories ordered by decreasing quality: premium, first brands, new
first brands, supermarket brands, and low-price brands. Table 11 reports the price of goods
in each category relative to the price of goods in all categories for the year 2001. The table
also contains the market shares of each category for 2001, 2002, and 2003.
      Two key facts are worth noting. First, the average price of premium and first brands
is roughly 43 percent higher than is the average price of lower-quality brands. This fact is
consistent with the notion that price is correlated with quality. Second, after the devaluation
there is a clear decline in the market share of premium and first brands, from 71 percent in
2001 to 63 percent in 2003. This decline is consistent with an ongoing flight from quality.
Using consumption data collected by LatinPanel, which includes 3,000 Argentine households,
McKenzie and Schargrodsky (2004) find results similar to those in our Table 12.
      Further evidence of flight from quality is provided by an AC Nielsen survey of Argentinian
consumers conducted in April 2002.31 According to this survey, 88 percent of consumers
reported that they changed the types of products that they purchased. Of those consumers,
85 percent switched to cheaper brands, 69 percent stopped buying certain products, and 45
percent were buying smaller packages.
      Viewed overall, our results strongly support the view that there was flight from quality
 31
      See Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2002.



                                                23
in the aftermath of the Argentinian devaluation. To the extent that CPI inspectors do not
perfectly account for changes in the quality of products being purchased, a flight from quality
will impart a negative bias to reported inflation rates. Presumably, the high rate of SKU
destruction observed after the devaluation makes it much more diﬃcult to correct for quality
changes.
   In summary, the findings of our Argentina case study are consistent with the results in
section 2. In addition, we show that at-the-dock prices of imported goods rise by more than
the analogue retail prices; the rate of increase in retail prices is higher for goods that have a
higher market share of imported and exportable goods; the frequency of price adjustment is
much larger for tradables than for nontradables. Our case study also provides direct evidence
of flight from quality.

6. Large RER Appreciations

To assess the robustness of our results on the sources of RER fluctuations, we analyze large
RER appreciations. We examine two episodes in which exchange-rate-based stabilization
programs lead to economic expansions that are associated with large appreciations in the
RER. We select these episodes because of data availability considerations.
   In the first episode, Argentina maintained a fixed exchange rate with the U.S. dollar
from April 1991 to December 2001 as part of the Convertibility Plan. The real exchange
rate peaked in January 1995. Real GDP grew at an average annual rate of roughly 6.5
percent between 1991 and 1995.
   The second episode is Mexico’s exchange-rate-based stabilization, which began in late
1987. The U.S. dollar-peso exchange rate was initially fixed, then devalued according to a
crawling peg, and was finally allowed to float within a narrow band. Between March 1988
and November 1994, Mexico successfully stabilized its nominal exchange rate. The peso
devalued by roughly 5 percent per year. During this period there was a cumulative RER
appreciation of 31 percent. In Mexico, the real exchange rate peaked in January 1994. Real
GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent between 1988 and 1994.
   Table 12 summarizes the behavior of prices and exchange rates in our two large apprecia-
tion episodes. We note that the CPI-based RER appreciated by 28 percent in Argentina and
46 percent in Mexico. This appreciation was accompanied by a rise in the dollar retail price
of tradables (31 and 76 percent in Argentina and Mexico, respectively). These facts imply


                                               24
that, when we measure the price of tradable goods using retail prices, most of the movement
in the RER is accounted for by changes in the prices of tradable goods (see decomposition
(4.1)). In particular, the percentages of movements in the RER accounted for by changes in
the prices of tradable goods are 89 and 58 percent in Argentina and Mexico, respectively.
       In contrast, movements in pure-traded goods, which we measure using an equally weighted
geometric average of import and export price indices, account for a relatively small fraction
of movements in the RER: 21 percent in Argentina and -4 percent in Mexico.32 This result
reflects the fact that consistent with our previous evidence, relative PPP is a reasonable
description of the behavior of import and export prices. The change in the dollar price of
pure-traded goods was only -2 percent in Mexico and 6 percent in Argentina.

7. Medium-Size Devaluations and Small Exchange-Rate Fluctua-
   tions

Here, we examine the behavior of the RER in medium-size devaluations and small exchange-
rate fluctuations. Unfortunately, for data availability reasons, we cannot hold constant the
set of countries that we study. The set of medium-size devaluation episodes for which we
have reliable data are the 1992 devaluations in Finland, Italy, Sweden, and the UK.33 The
average rate of devaluation in the first half year after the onset of these episodes is 20 percent.
The corresponding figure for our large devaluation episodes is 62 percent.
       Consistent with Engel (1999), we also study exchange-rate fluctuations by using quarterly
data from ten OECD countries: Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Sweden, UK, and the U.S. over the period 1971-2001.

7.1. Medium-Size Devaluations

Table 13 presents data on cumulative logarithmic changes in trade-weighted nominal and
real exchange rates and price levels for four medium-size devaluation episodes.34 There are
several notable features of Table 13. First, in all cases, the rate of inflation is much lower than
the rate of depreciation. Second, the retail prices of tradable goods move by significantly less
  32
     These results are consistent with Mendoza (2000), who finds that movements in the relative price of
nontradable goods, especially housing, accounted for a large fraction of movements in the CPI-based RER
during the Mexican exchange-rate-based stabilization episode.
  33
     During 1993, real GDP fell by -1.2 percent, -2 percent, and 0.9 percent in Finland and Sweden and Italy,
respectively. The UK experienced a mild expansion, with real GDP growing by 2.3 percent in 1993.
  34
     For details on data construction see the appendix.



                                                     25
than do import and export prices. Third, there is a substantial rise in import and export
prices. Although there is substantial passthrough from exchange rates to import and export
prices, relative PPP is a worse approximation than it is in our large devaluation episodes.
This finding is consistent with findings in Campa and Goldberg (2004). Using diﬀerent
methods, these authors conclude that on average across OECD countries, import prices in
local currencies reflect 46 percent of exchange-rate fluctuations in the short run, and nearly
64 percent over the long run.35
       Table 14 summarizes the results of the Engel decomposition for our four medium-size
devaluation episodes. Consistent with our large devaluation results, we find that when we
use retail prices to measure P T , changes in log(RERtT ) account for most of the movements
                                                          T
in log(RERt ). In contrast, changes in log(RERt ) account for a much smaller fraction of
the change in log(RERt ). For example, at a 12 month horizon, this fraction is 49 percent in
Italy and −5 percent in the UK. For Finland and Sweden, this fraction is 60 and 62 percent,
respectively.
       We conclude that using retail tradable goods prices leads one to overstate the fraction
of the decline in the RER that is due to changes in the price of pure-traded goods across
countries. While this overstatement is substantial, it is not as severe as it is in our large
devaluation episodes.

7.2. Small Exchange-Rate Fluctuations

Authors such as Engel (1999) and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) conclude that, for
small exchange-rate fluctuations, changes in log(RERtT ) dominate movements in log(RERt ).
We assess the sensitivity of these authors’ findings to the use of at-the-dock prices in the
analysis. For all ten countries in our sample we proceed as follows. We begin by HP filtering
                          T
log(RERt ), log(RERt ) and the nominal exchange rate. This filter isolates relatively small
exchange-rate movements that occur at business-cycle frequencies. Using the HP-filtered
                                                                                                         T
data, we construct two statistics: the correlation between both log(RERt ) and log(RERt )
with the nominal exchange rate; and the ratio of the standard deviation of our RER measures
to the standard deviation of the nominal exchange rate.
       Table 15 reports results for both trade-weighted exchange rates and bilateral exchange
rates with the U.S. dollar. However, we focus on our results for trade-weighted exchange
  35
    See Gordon (2000) and Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000) for additional evidence that in industrialized countries
there is significant, albeit incomplete, passthrough from exchange rates to import prices.


                                                    26
rates. As emphasized by Mussa (1986), there is a very high correlation between the nominal
exchange rate and log(RERt ): the average correlation between these two series across our
ten countries is 93 percent. The volatility of these two series is roughly the same. Authors
such as Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) argue that they can obtain similar results if
they replace log(RERt ) with log(RERtT ). These observations lie at the heart of the view
that sticky tradable goods prices are an important source of RER movements.
                                                                              T
       Next, we examine our results when we work with log(RERt ). Table 15 shows that
            T
log(RERt ) is much less volatile than log(RERt ). We note that there is substantial hetero-
                                                                                       T
geneity across countries in the ratio of the standard deviation of log(RERt ) to the standard
deviation of log(RERt ). To relate this statistic to the Engel decomposition (4.2), we com-
pute the variance on both sides of that equation by abstracting from the covariance between
            T                 N                                                   T
log(RERt ) and log(RERt ).36 We find that movements in log(RERt ) account for 63 per-
                                                                                                T
cent of the standard deviation in log(RERt ). Table 15 also shows that log(RERt ) is much
less correlated with the nominal exchange rate than log(RERt ). The average correlation
                                                                                                    T
with the nominal exchange is 93 percent for log(RERt ) and 66 percent for log(RERt ).
       We conclude that changes in the price of nontradable goods relative to pure-traded goods
account for a significant fraction of movements in the RER. But fluctuations in the price
of pure-traded goods across countries account for the majority of small movements in the
RER.

8. Conclusion

In this paper we argue that the primary force behind the large fall in real exchange rates
that occurs after large devaluations is the slow adjustment in the price of nontradable goods
and services. It is not the failure of relative PPP for goods that are actually traded.
       We do not address the question of why the rate of inflation for nontradable goods is so
much lower than the rate of devaluation. An important task for future research is to develop
quantitative general equilibrium models that can account for this phenomenon.




  36
     We cannot compute this covariance term because, for most of the countries in our sample, the time series
for the price of nontradable goods is too short.

                                                     27
References

 [1] Armknecht, Paul, Walter Lane and Kenneth Stewart, “New Products and the U.S.
    Consumer Price Index,” in Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon (eds.) Economics
    of New Goods, University of Chicago Press, 375-391, 1997.

 [2] Baharada, Eyal and Benjamin Eden “Price Rigidity and Price Dispersion: Evidence
    from Micro Data,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7: 613-641, July 2004.

 [3] Betts, Caroline and Timothy Kehoe, “U.S. Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Rela-
    tive Price Fluctuations,” Research Department Staﬀ Report 334, Federal Reserve Bank
    of Minneapolis, March 2004.

 [4] Bils, Mark, “Measuring Growth from Better and Better Goods,” manuscript, 2004.

 [5] Bils, Mark and Pete Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Price Stickiness,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 112: 947-985, 2004.

 [6] Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange-
    Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 50: 1189—1214, 2003.

 [7] Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, “Investment Prices and Exchange Rates:
    Some Basic Facts,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2: 302-309, April-
    May 2004.

 [8] Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Vegh “Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in Developing
    Countries,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol 1C,
    North-Holland, 1999.

 [9] Campa, Jose Manuel and Linda Goldberg, “Exchange Rate Pass Through into Import
    Prices,”mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September 2004.

[10] Chari, V. V., Patrick Kehoe and Ellen McGrattan, “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
    Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of Economic Studies, 69: 533-
    563, 2002.

[11] Cho, Woo-Kyong and Ross Advincula “Retail Development Growth, South Korea,” U.S.
    Foreign and Commercial Service and U.S. State Department, 1998.

                                            28
[12] Corden, W. Max “The Geometric Representation of Policies to Attain Internal and
    External Balance,” Review of Economic Studies, 28: 1-22, 1960.

[13] Crucini, Mario, Chris Telmer, and Marios Zachariadis “Understanding European Real
    Exchange Rates,” mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University, 2001.

[14] Engel, Charles, “Accounting for U.S. Real exchange-rate Changes,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 107, 507-538, 1999.

[15] Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers “European Market Integration After the Euro,”
    Economic Policy 19: 347-384, July 2004.

[16] Frankel, Jeﬀrey, David Parsley, and Shang-Jin Wei “Slow Passthrough Around the
    World: A New Import for Developing Countries?,” mimeo, International Monetary
    Fund, January 2004.

[17] Gordon, Robert, “The Aftermath of the 1992 ERM Breakup: Was There a Macroeco-
    nomic Free Lunch?” in Paul Krugman (ed.) Currency Crises, University of Chicago
    Press, 241-82, 2000.

[18] Guimarães, Eduardo, Armando Pinheiro, Carmen Falcão, Henry Pourchet, and Ricard
    Markwald “Índice de Preço e Quantum das Exportações Brazileiras,” Fundação Centro
    de Estudos do Comércio Exterior, 1997.

[19] Klenow, Pete “Measuring Consumption Growth: The Impact of New and Better Prod-
    ucts,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 10-23, Winter 2003.

[20] Lach, Saul, and Daniel Tsiddon, “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical
    Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 100: 349-389,
    1992.

[21] Maitland-Smith, Fenella “Producer Price Indices,” Division for Non-Members Statistics
    Directorate, OECD, 2000.

[22] Markwald, Ricard, Armando Pinheiro, Carmem Falcão, Henry Pourchet, “Índice de
    Preço e Quantum das Importações Brazileiras,” Fundação Centro de Estudos do Comér-
    cio Exterior, 1998.



                                            29
[23] McKenzie, David and Ernesto Schargrodsky “Buying Less, But Shopping More and
    Shopping Down: Changes in Consumption Patterns During a Crisis,” mimeo, Univer-
    sidad Torcuato Di Tella, 2004.

[24] Meade, James “The Price Adjustment and the Australian Balance of Payments,” Eco-
    nomic Record, 1956.

[25] Mendoza, Enrique, “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real Exchange
    Rate across Exchange-Rate-Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,”
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7768, 2000.

[26] Moulton, Brent and Karin Moses, “Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the Con-
    sumer Price Index,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 305-349, 1997.

[27] Mussa, Michael, “Nominal Exchange-rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
    Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, 25:
    117-214, 1986.

[28] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy
    Models,” Journal of International Economics, 50: 117-153, 2000.

[29] Parsley, David and Shang-Jin Wei “Explaining the Border Eﬀect: The Role of Exchange-
    rate Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography,” National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search Working Paper 7836, 2001.

[30] Rotemberg, Julio, “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Time Variation in the Frequency
    of Price Changes and Monetary Policy,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper 9320, 2002.

[31] Salter, W. E. “Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and Expenditure
    Eﬀects,” Economic Record, 35: 226-38, 1959.

[32] Swan, Trevor “Economic Control in a Dependent Economy,” Economic Record, 36: 51-
    66, 1960.




                                           30
                                                                         Table 1
                                                       Prices and Exchange Rates in Large Devaluations
                                                                  Cumulative Logarithmic Change

                                                                   Argentina - December 2001                            Brazil - January 1999
                                                       3 months    6 months 12 months 24 months              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months
US$ nominal exchange rate                                86.9        128.2      123.5     107.4                45.3        38.2        42.4   48.7
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                     86.6        124.7      110.6     108.3                43.2        34.6        39.6   41.0
Import prices (at the dock)                              68.1        111.4      111.3      99.3                44.3        36.7        43.1   49.5
Export prices (at the dock)                               n.a.        n.a.       n.a.      n.a.                37.4        26.7        32.7   43.3

Consumer price index                                      9.2         26.6         34.3        37.9             2.8        3.9      8.6       14.4
         Nontradable prices                               2.8         8.3          13.0        18.3             1.4        2.2      5.1       9.7
         Retail price of tradables                        15.2        41.6         51.5        53.8             4.4        5.7      11.4      16.8

Public goods prices                                                                4.7                                              8.1

CPI-based real exchange rate (trade weighted)             -78.5      -100.2       -82.2        -81.7           -40.5      -31.5     -32.7    -30.7


                                                                   Korea - September 1997                               Mexico - December 1994
                                                       3 months    6 months 12 months 24 months              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months
US$ nominal exchange rate                                49.0        49.3       41.2      27.6                 50.2       54.9       80.0      83.3
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                     46.3        46.6       37.3      30.8                 50.2       56.1       80.4      82.9
Import prices (at the dock)                              28.7        38.8       21.5      19.7                 51.6       57.9       79.6      87.1
Export prices (at the dock)                              32.4        44.8       22.5      11.0                 52.5       59.1       84.0      86.9

Consumer price index                                       2.6         6.5         6.6         7.4             8.7        26.2      39.5      64.0
         Nontradable prices                                2.1         5.0         5.1         4.8             6.7        21.6      31.6      53.6
         Retail price of tradables                         3.0         8.0         8.2         10.2            10.0       29.6      45.6      72.1

Public goods prices                                                                7.5                                              29.1

CPI-based real exchange rate (trade weighted)             -43.3       -39.4       -30.4        -24.6           -42.0      -31.5     -42.7    -24.3


                                                                   Thailand - June 1997
                                                       3 months     6 months 12 months 24 months
US$ nominal exchange rate                                34.2         56.3       49.7     35.8
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                     30.5         46.2       35.9     28.6
Import prices (at the dock)                              30.1         50.3       40.4     20.4
Export prices (at the dock)                              31.4         47.5       32.3     17.6

Consumer price index                                       3.7         5.3         10.1        8.9
         Nontradable prices                                n.a.        n.a.        n.a.        n.a.
         Retail price of tradables                         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.        n.a.

Public goods prices                                                                n.a.

CPI-based real exchange rate (trade weighted)             -27.4       -41.1       -26.2        -20.7

Source: National Statistic Agencies, and International Financial Statistics (IFS). For details see data appendix.
                                                                 Table 2
                                       Prices, Deflators, and Exchange Rates in Large Devaluations
                                                       Cumulative Logarithmic Change

                                                                   Argentina                                     Brazil
                                                          2001       2002         2003                   1998    1999       2000

US$ nominal exchange rate                                  0.0        112.0       106.5                  0.0     44.7       45.6
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                       n.a.        n.a.        n.a.                  n.a.    n.a.       n.a.

Consumer price index                                       0.0         23.0       35.6                   0.0      4.7       11.6

Deflators
            Imports                                        0.0        107.4       104.3                  0.0     48.8       51.0
            Exports                                        0.0        103.6       102.5                  0.0     34.7       41.2

                                                                       Korea                                     Mexico
                                                          1996        1997        1998        1999       1994    1995       1996

US$ nominal exchange rate                                  0.0         16.8       55.5        39.1       0.0     64.3       81.2
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                       n.a.        n.a.       n.a.        n.a.       n.a.    n.a.       n.a.

Consumer price index                                       0.0         4.3        11.6        12.4       0.0     30.0       59.6

Deflators
            Imports                                        0.0         11.0       35.4        16.2       0.0     66.9       86.1
            Exports                                        0.0         4.9        25.6        3.1        0.0     58.6       79.1

                                                                      Thailand
                                                          1996        1997        1998        1999

US$ nominal exchange rate                                  0.0         21.3       49.0        40.0
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                       n.a.        n.a.       n.a.        n.a.

Consumer price index                                       0.0         5.4        13.2        13.5

Deflators
            Imports                                        0.0         16.9       31.0        27.4
            Exports                                        0.0         15.8       26.0        16.6

                                                                     Indonesia                                   Malaysia
                                                          1996        1997     1998           1999       1996    1997       1998    1999

US$ nominal exchange rate                                  0.0         21.7       145.3       121.0      0.0     11.2        44.5    41.2
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                       n.a.        n.a.        n.a.        n.a.      0.0     -2.8       -29.1   -28.0

Consumer price index                                       0.0         6.5        52.0        70.5       0.0      2.6       7.8     10.5

Deflators
            Imports                                        0.0         8.8        99.3        120.0      0.0      7.2       30.0    28.6
            Exports                                        0.0         16.5       112.2       124.5      0.0      7.0       28.6    26.9

                                                                     Philippines                                Uruguay
                                                          1996        1997       1998         1999       2001    2002       2003

US$ nominal exchange rate                                  0.0         11.7       44.5        39.9       0.0      46.7       75.0
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                       0.0         3.6        31.1        28.5       0.0     -31.1      -72.3

Consumer price index                                       0.0         5.7        15.0        21.5       0.0     13.1       30.8

Deflators
            Imports                                        0.0         16.9       41.3        41.6       0.0     38.0       70.6
            Exports                                        0.0         14.2       53.5        59.7       0.0     34.3       65.0


Source: Statistical Division of United Nations, and International Financial Statistics (IFS) from IMF.
        Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate is NEER from INS reported in IFS.
        We compute import and export price deflators using UN Statistical Division NIPA data.
        We compute Brazil's import and export price deflators using NIPA data from IBGE.
                                                                Table 3
                                        Share of Tradables in CPI, and Import Content of Consumption


                                               Argentina            Brazil             Korea             Mexico            Thailand

Share of Tradables in CPI                         53.0               59.3               48.0               53.5               43.3

Import Content in Consumption
  Direct Import content                           4.3                2.3 *              6.6                4.7               7.8 *
  Total Import content                            10.5               8.9 **             20.6               10.9              20.7 *


                                                Finland              Italy            Sweden               UK                 US

Share of Tradables in CPI                         58.7               65.8               48.0               69.0               42.9

Import Content in Consumption
  Direct Import content                           13.1               6.6                13.6               12.0               4.7
  Total Import content                            24.0               16.2               25.3               20.9               9.1


* Imported final consumption goods / private consumption, from National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA).
** Total imports / final demand, from NIPA.
*** Imports of final consumption and of intermediate inputs for consumption / private consumption, from NIPA and trade accounts.

Source: National Statistic Agencies, OECD Input-Output Tables.
                                                       Table 4
                                        Price Accounting for Large Devaluations
                                          Inflation One Year after Devaluation

                                                                     Argentina    Brazil   Korea   Mexico

Case I:    ̄ I = Exchange Rate x Foreign Import/Export Prices
           P
Assumption A: All goods traded                                         128.4      41.9     34.4     83.3
Assumption B: Nontradables, no distribution, no local goods            74.2       26.9     19.1     59.3
Assumption C: Nontradables, distribution, no local goods               43.6       16.0     12.1     45.4
Assumption D: Nontradables, distribution, local goods                  25.1        8.4     11.1     37.2

Actual CPI inflation                                                    34.3       8.6      6.6     39.5


Case II:   ̄ I = Import/Export Prices
           P
Assumption A: All goods traded                                         111.3      37.9     22.0     81.8
Assumption B: Nontradables, no distribution, no local goods            65.1       24.5     13.2     58.4
Assumption C: Nontradables, distribution, no local goods               39.0       14.8     9.2      45.0
Assumption D: Nontradables, distribution, local goods                  23.3        8.0     8.6      37.0

Actual CPI inflation                                                    34.3       8.6      6.6     39.5
                                          Table 5
                      CPI and Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) Inflation Rates

                                  Partial CPI             EIU Inflation             EIU Inflation
                                   Inflation             Low price outlet         High price outlet

One-year inflation rate, starting in September

Argentina, 2001                      54.1                      68.4                     68.8
Brazil, 1998                         7.2                       15.2                     14.6
Korea, 1997                          5.1                       23.4                     14.4
Mexico, 1994                         44.0                      49.0                     44.0

Two-year inflation rate, starting in September

Argentina, 2001                      53.4                      75.1                     71.9
Brazil, 1998                         14.1                      19.4                     16.1
Korea, 1997                          5.4                       30.8                     20.9
Mexico, 1994                         70.8                      72.0                     69.3


Partial CPI inflation is a weighted average of clothing, durables, food, and housing non-durables.

Source: Economist Intelligence Unit and National Statistical Agencies.
                                                             Table 6
                         How Much of the Decline in the RER Is Due to the Decline in the Price of Tradable Goods ?
                                             (Percent as a Fraction of Change in CPI-based-RER)

                                                         Argentina - January 2001                        Brazil - January 1999
                                              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months         3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months

Retail prices                                    92.4       85.0       79.1       80.5           96.1      94.4      91.4     92.0

Export / import prices                           22.4       19.6       20.8       n.a.            4.6       9.5      12.1      -1.9
Import prices                                    22.0       19.2       22.9       n.a.           -3.9      -4.2      2.6       -1.7

                                                         Korea - September 1997                          Mexico - December 1994
                                              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months         3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months

Retail prices                                    99.0       96.1       94.8       88.7           96.9      89.2      85.7     66.8

Export / import prices                           38.4       7.0        40.7       35.9           -0.9       1.7      3.6       -3.1
Import prices                                    42.5       11.3       36.9       18.6           -0.9       2.6      6.5       -1.6

                                                         Thailand - June 1997
                                              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months

Retail prices                                    n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.

Export / import prices                            2.8        3.3        6.5       26.6
Import prices                                     3.7       -1.5       -16.9      12.7
                                      Table 7
                    Prices and Exchange Rates in Argentina
                          Cumulative Logarithmic Change
                         December 2001 - December 2002

                                            Price change     Share in CPI
                                               percent         percent

US$ nominal exchange rate                       123.5
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate            110.6
Import prices (at the dock)                     111.4
Producer prices                                 78.0
Consumer price index                            34.3            100.0
  Nontradables                                  13.0            47.0
  Tradables                                      51.5           53.0

Disaggregated Tradables in CPI
 Imported                                        83.2            3.0
 Exportables                                     62.6            8.5
 Mixed origin                                    71.7            5.8
 With imported inputs                            49.6           10.0
 With exportable inputs                          44.8            9.6
 Local goods                                     41.8           16.0

Disaggregated Nontradables in CPI
 Public services                                  4.7
 Private services                                14.7

Source: INDEC.
                             Table 8
  Inflation and Market Share of Imports and Exportables in Argentina

Product Category                     Inflation          Market Share
                                  (log percent)     Imported + Exportables
                                 Dec 01 - June 02           Oct-02

Beer                                  32.4                  12.7
Bread                                 33.4                  52.7
Cereals                               40.3                  55.7
Cleaning liquids                      50.4                  86.2
Coffee                                45.1                  55.8
Deodorant                             50.0                  86.4
Detergents for clothes                67.1                  66.0
Diapers                               83.3                  72.4
Dish detergents                       50.1                  32.1
Female protection                     67.0                  85.7
Hamburgers                            17.9                  0.7
Insect killer                         53.3                  77.7
Juice                                 50.0                  11.5
Mayonnaise                            64.5                  95.4
Milk                                  41.9                  0.2
Paper towels                          52.4                  50.8
Shampoo                               47.3                  71.4
Soap                                  46.0                  70.1
Soda                                  31.5                  3.9
Toothpaste                            67.0                  68.3
Yogurt                                27.7                  4.1

Correlation coefficient: 0.69.

Source: CCR, INDEC, and our own survey.

                                    Table 9
                  Frequency of Price Adjustment in Buenos Aires
                               March 27 - December 24, 2002

                                                           Goods             Services
Weekly

Number of products                                           58                10

Median frequency of price adjustment (%)                    31.1               0.0
Median time between price change                            4.8                
Monthly

Number of products                                           58                10

Median frequency of price adjustment (%)                    63.2               0.0
Median time between price change                            1.8                
Source: Our own price survey.
                                               Table 10: Prices, Market Shares, and Product Destruction in Argentina

                                                                Product destruction                              Average price of SKUs whose market share
                                                    Percentage of SKUs destroyed in previous 6 months            fell by > 2% between June t , t+1 /
                                                                                                                 Average price of SKUs whose market share
                                                                                                                 increased by > 2% between June t , t+1

Product Category                                                                                                       June 2000   June 2001    June 2002
                                                June 2000    Dec. 2000     June 2001   Dec. 2001    June 2002          June 1999   June 2000    June 2001

Beer                                                19           15               26        17          32                  0.91         0.86        1.24
Bread                                               13           11               13        15          20                  1.01         1.34        1.08
Cereals                                             12           11               14        14          17                  1.27         0.96        1.78
Cleaning products                                   15           11               15        15          26                  1.08         0.78        1.30
Clothes detergents                                  22           18               19        18          25                  1.00         1.00        1.31
Coffee                                              11           11               10        16          17                  1.10         1.08        0.99
Cooking oil                                         13           7                10        17          25                  0.97         0.91        1.04
Deodorants                                          11           9                10        11          28                  0.92         0.91        1.27
Diapers                                             15           13               20        27          44                  1.09         1.08        1.76
Dish detergents                                     19           10               16        16          28                  0.74         1.57        1.59
Feminine protection                                 14           9                9         11          21                  0.87         1.21        1.28
Hamburgers                                          15           12               20        13          17                  1.24         1.11        1.16
Ice cream                                           18           14               21        14          22                  1.25         0.96        1.48
Insects killers                                     16           5                15        7           23                  0.89         1.01        1.14
Juice                                               13           16               17        16          37                  0.68         1.64        2.15
Mayonnaise                                          13           14               15        15          32                  1.11         0.89        1.06
Milk                                                12           10               18        18          24                  1.05         1.11        0.98
Paper towels                                        25           22               16        15          31                  0.95         1.07        1.28
Shampoo                                             18           15               19        17          37                  1.05         1.10        2.16
Soap                                                19           11               18        14          27                  1.22         1.00        1.39
Soft drinks                                         21           16               25        26          38                  1.06         1.10        0.88
Toothpaste                                          12           10               9         10          25                  1.03         1.14        1.35
Wine                                                12           9                11        14          15                  1.21         0.72        1.13
Yogurt                                              16           11               19        16          28                  1.26         1.45        1.31

Average                                             16           12               16        16          27                  1.04         1.08        1.34
Median                                              15           11               16        15          26                  1.05         1.08        1.28

Source: CCR.

                                               Table 11: Flight From Quality in Argentina

                                               Price of category/ Average price                    Market Share
                                               across categories, in 2001                2001         2002      2003

Premium brands                                     1.5                                   13.7           10.7    10.4
First brands                                       1.1                                   57.3           53.2    52.7
New first brands                                   0.8                                    6.4           10.0     9.6
Supermarket brands                                 0.8                                    6.5            7.8     9.5
Low price brands                                   0.8                                   16.0           18.3    17.8

Premium and first brands                           1.2                                   71.0           63.9    63.1
New first, supermarket, and low price brands       0.8                                   28.9           36.1    36.9
Source: CCR.
                                                               Table 12
                                Real Exchange Rate Appreciations in Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations
                                                    (cumulative logarithmic change)

Mexico , March 1988 - January 1994                                       Argentina , April 1991 - January 1995

US$ nominal exchange rate                                   30.9         US$ nominal exchange rate               0.0
Import prices (at the dock)                                 43.0         Import prices (at the dock)             10.9
Export prices (at the dock)                                 32.8         Export prices (at the dock)             n.a.

Consumer price index                                       100.1         Consumer price index                    38.1
         Retail price of tradables                          76.2                  Retail price of tradables      31.1
         Nontradable prices excluding housing              103.4                  Nontradable prices             56.7
         Housing                                           183.6

CPI-based RER                                               46.3         CPI-based RER                           27.6
CPI (excluding housing) - based RER                         32.8         CPI (excluding housing) - based RER     n.a.
Retail price of tradables - based RER                       26.9         Retail price of tradables - based RER   24.5
Import/export price - based RER                             -1.7         Import/export price - based RER          5.8

Source: National statistical agencies. For details see data appendix.
                                                                  Table 13
                                          Prices and Exchange Rates in Medium-Sized Devaluations
                                                          Cumulative Logarithmic Change

                                                                  Finland - August 1992                                Italy - August 1992
                                                       3 months    6 months 12 months 24 months             3 months    6 months 12 months 24 months
US$ nominal exchange rate                                23.8        38.2       38.2     25.6                 21.3         34.0       37.6    36.1
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                     12.3        20.0       18.0     10.8                 11.4         20.7       21.1    26.4
Import prices (at the dock)                               9.3        10.9       12.9     12.4                  9.4         14.3       12.6    17.4
Export prices (at the dock)                               4.8         6.6        7.9     11.0                  5.8         12.2       13.3    16.0

Consumer price index                                      0.9         2.0          2.0         3.9             1.3        2.4       4.4       8.1
         Nontradable prices                               0.5         0.9          1.0         3.0             1.7        2.8       5.2       9.3
         Retail price of tradables                        1.6         3.7          4.8         7.1             1.2        2.3       4.3       7.8

CPI-based real exchange rate (trade weighted)            -12.0       -20.1        -19.0       -12.3           -10.6      -20.0     -19.5     -23.4


                                                                  Sweden - September 1992                              UK - August 1992
                                                       3 months   6 months 12 months 15 months              3 months   6 months 12 months 15 months
US$ nominal exchange rate                                24.9       36.6       40.2     34.0                  23.9       29.9       26.2     22.9
Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate                     15.2       22.1       27.9     26.5                  15.6       17.8       11.3     13.4
Import prices (at the dock)                               6.3       14.2       16.3     20.7                   7.2       12.3       12.9     18.5
Export prices (at the dock)                               4.2       10.3       11.1     17.1                   1.8       11.2       12.6     15.5

Consumer price index                                       0.1        3.5          4.1         6.7             0.6        -0.1      1.7       4.1
         Nontradable prices                               -0.2        4.1          4.3         7.4             0.9         1.8      4.8       8.0
         Retail price of tradables                         1.2        4.9          6.2         8.5             0.6         0.3      1.8       3.1

CPI-based real exchange rate (trade weighted)            -15.4       -20.3        -26.3       -24.5           -15.7      -19.6     -12.3     -14.3

Source: National Statistic Agencies, and International Financial Statistics (IFS). For details see data appendix.
                                                            Table 14
                         How Much of the Decline in the RER Is Due to the Decline in the Price of Tradable Goods ?
                                             (Percent as a Fraction of Change in CPI-based-RER)


                                                         Finland - August 1992                           Italy - September 1992
                                              3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months         3 months   6 months 12 months 24 months

Retail prices                                    93.9       91.4       85.3       74.2          101.3      100.3     100.8    101.3

Export / import prices                           50.4       73.7       60.1       41.5           38.0      40.5      47.1     48.7
Import prices                                    38.4       64.9       47.3       38.2           25.1      34.4      48.6     45.5


                                                         Sweden - August 1992                            UK - August 1992
                                              3 months   6 months 12 months 15 months         3 months   6 months 12 months 15 months

Retail prices                                    93.0       92.7       92.3       92.5           99.6      98.0      99.2     107.2

Export / import prices                           73.4       63.8       62.0       45.3           74.2      34.5      -4.7     -11.8
Import prices                                    69.1       55.0       49.0       36.1           59.3      31.2      -8.0     -23.6
                                                                                              Table 15
                                                                                  Small Devaluations, 1971:1 - 2001:4
                                                                                             HP Filtered Data

                                      Canada         Denmark        Finland        Germany          Italy     Japan     Netherlands   Sweden   UK     U.S.   Average   Median

Trade-weighted

S                                    3.37           2.46           4.45           3.06           4.11       8.61        2.28        4.40    5.49   3.82    4.21      3.97

RER CPI /S                        1.04           1.02           1.06           1.11           0.94       1.00        1.14        0.98    1.11   1.00    1.04      1.03
RER IEPI /S                       0.54           0.72           0.77           0.97           0.68       0.42        0.74        0.64    0.55   0.54    0.66      0.66

RER IEPI /RER CPI                 0.52           0.71           0.73           0.87           0.72       0.42        0.65        0.65    0.49   0.54    0.63      0.65

S, RER CPI                           0.95           0.91           0.97           0.94           0.94       0.98        0.95        0.96    0.94   0.79    0.93      0.95
S, RER IEPI                          0.59           0.63           0.85           0.81           0.65       0.66        0.28        0.88    0.74   0.52    0.66      0.66

Bilateral with U.S.

S                                    3.06           8.33           8.48           8.58           8.94       9.63        8.47        8.45    8.59   n.a.    8.06      8.48

RER CPI /S                        1.07           0.99           0.93           0.97           0.90       0.99        0.98        0.93    0.96   n.a.    0.97      0.97
RER IEPI /S                       0.56           0.68           0.73           0.75           0.60       0.40        0.60        0.69    0.59   n.a.    0.62      0.60

RER IEPI /RER CPI                 0.53           0.68           0.78           0.78           0.67       0.40        0.62        0.74    0.61   n.a.    0.65      0.67

S, RER CPI                           0.94           0.99           0.97           0.98           0.98       0.98        0.98        0.98    0.97   n.a.    0.98      0.98
S, RER IEPI                          0.48           0.91           0.94           0.94           0.90       0.80        0.89        0.93    0.86   n.a.    0.85      0.90


x : Standard deviation of variable x.
x, y : Correlation coefficient between x and y.
RERCPI: CPI-based-real exchange rate.
RERIEPI: Import/export price - based - real exchange rate.
S: Nominal exchange rate.

Source: International Financial Statistics, Direction of Trade Statistics. For details see data appendix.
                                          Figure 1: Exchange Rates and Prices in Large Devaluations



                                                     Argentina                                                                    Brazil

                          120                                                                            50

                          100                                                                            40
% cumulative change




                                                                                   % cumulative change
                               80                                                                        30
                               60
                                                                                                         20
                               40
                                                                                                         10
                               20
                                                                                                         0
                               0
                                2002      2002.5        2003       2003.5                                 1999         1999.5       2000     2000.5


                                                      Korea                                                                       Mexico

                               60                                                                        80
                               50
         % cumulative change




                                                                                   % cumulative change




                                                                                                         60
                               40

                               30                                                                        40
                               20
                                                                                                         20
                               10

                               0                                                                         0
                                       1998      1998.5         1999      1999.5                              1995       1995.5       1996    1996.5


                                                     Thailand

                               60
                                                                                                                     Trade-weighted exchange rate
         % cumulative change




                               50                                                                                    Import/Export Prices
                                                                                                                     Retail Price of Tradables
                               40
                                                                                                                     Price of Nontradables
                               30                                                                                    CPI

                               20

                               10

                               0
                                1997.5        1998     1998.5          1999
                                           Figure 2: Total Import Prices and Consumer Import Prices in Large Devaluations

                                                   Argentina                                                                             Brazil


                          120                                                                                      50


                          100                                                                                      40
% cumulative change




                                                                                             % cumulative change
                               80
                                                                                                                   30

                               60
                                                                                                                   20
                               40
                                                                                                                   10
                               20
                                                                                                                   0
                               0
                                    2002       2002.5           2003    2003.5                                          1999   1999.5      2000    2000.5
                                                                                   Total Import Prices
                                                                                   Consumer Import Prices

                                                        Korea                                                                           Thailand
                               50                                                                                  70

                                                                                                                   60
                               40
         % cumulative change




                                                                                             % cumulative change
                                                                                                                   50
                               30
                                                                                                                   40

                               20                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                   20
                               10
                                                                                                                   10
                               0                                                                                    0

                                     1998        1998.5          1999     1999.5                                    1997.5     1998       1998.5   1999
                                                 Figure 3: Price Accounting, Change in Gross Markup (µ)


                                          Argentina                                                                          Brazil

           20
                                                                                                     0

            0
                                                                                                    -10
% change




                                                                                         % change
           -20
                                                                                                    -20

           -40
                                                                                                    -30


           -60                                                                                      -40


                 2002          2002.5            2003          2003.5                                     1999    1999.5       2000      2000.5
                                                                                 Assumption B
                                                                                 Assumption C
                                                                                 Assumption D
                                            Korea                                                                            Mexico

                                                                                                    10
            0
                                                                                                     0
           -10
                                                                                                    -10
% change




                                                                                         % change
           -20                                                                                      -20

                                                                                                    -30
           -30
                                                                                                    -40
           -40
                                                                                                    -50

                        1998            1998.5          1999            1999.5                             1995     1995.5        1996     1996.5
                                           Figure 4: Real Exchange Rate Changes in Large Devaluations



                                                      Argentina                                                                    Brazil
                                0
                                                                                                           0

                               -20
% cumulative change




                                                                                    % cumulative change
                                                                                                          -10
                               -40
                                                                                                          -20
                               -60
                                                                                                          -30
                               -80
                                                                                                          -40
                          -100
                                     2002 2002.2 2002.4 2002.6 2002.8 2003                                  1999        1999.5       2000     2000.5


                                                       Korea                                                                       Mexico

                                0                                                                          0
         % cumulative change




                                                                                    % cumulative change



                               -10                                                                        -10

                               -20                                                                        -20

                               -30                                                                        -30

                               -40                                                                        -40

                               -50                                                                        -50

                                        1998      1998.5         1999      1999.5                               1995      1995.5       1996    1996.5


                                                      Thailand

                                0

                               -10
         % cumulative change




                                                                                                                       CPI-based (RER)
                               -20                                                                                     PT-based (RERT)
                                                                                                                       Import/Export Price Based (RERT)
                               -30

                               -40

                               -50

                               -60
                                 1997.5        1998     1998.5          1999
                                                                        Figure 5
                                                     Histogram, Frequency of Price Changes: Services


                            0.8
                                      Median
                            0.7


                            0.6
Percentage of Total Items




                            0.5


                            0.4


                            0.3


                            0.2


                            0.1


                             0
                                  0    0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95   1
                                                           Percentage of Weeks in Which Price Changed




                                                      Histogram, Frequency of Price Changes: Goods


                            14

                                                                  Median
                            12


                            10
Percentage of Total Items




                             8


                             6


                             4


                             2


                             0
                                  0   0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95    1
                                                          Percentage of Weeks in Which Price Changed
