NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCE, FIRM SIZE, AND GROWTH
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10983
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

We would like to thank Maria Carkovic, Stijn Claessens, and seminar participants at the World Bank and
the University of North Carolina for helpful comments, and Ying Lin for excellent research assistance. This
paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Finance, Firm Size, and Growth
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10983
December 2004
JEL No. G2, L11, L25, O1
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether financial development boosts the growth of small firms more than
large firms and hence provides information on the mechanisms through which financial development
fosters aggregate economic growth. We define an industry's technological firm size as the firm size
implied by industry specific production technologies, including capital intensities and scale
economies. Using cross-industry, cross-country data, the results indicate that financial development
exerts a disproportionately large effect on the growth of industries that are technologically more
dependent on small firms. This suggests that financial development accelerates economic growth by
removing growth constraints on small firms and also implies that financial development has sectoral
as well as aggregate growth ramifications.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Luc Laeven
World Bank
llaeven@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I.

Introduction
Although a large literature suggests that financial development fosters economic growth,

considerably less research examines the cross-firm, cross-industry distributional effects of financial
development.1 Some theories imply that financial development boosts economic growth by
disproportionately fostering small firm growth. If smaller, less wealthy firms face tighter credit
constraints than large firms face due to greater informational barriers or high fixed costs associated
with accessing financial systems, then financial development that ameliorates market frictions will
exert an especially positive impact on smaller firms (Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Galor and Zeira,
1993; Aghion and Bolton, 1997).2 In contrast, other research suggests that most small, less wealthy
firms, especially in poor countries, cannot afford financial services, so that financial development
disproportionately facilitates the growth of large firms (Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990).3
This paper assesses whether financial development boosts the growth of small firms more
than large firms and hence sheds empirical light on (1) debates concerning the distributional
implications of financial development, (2) one mechanism through which financial development
may affect aggregate economic growth, and (3) a large policy-oriented literature that stresses the
importance of small firm growth for economic development. In terms of public policies, the World
Bank (1994, 2002, 2004) argues that small firms foster competition, innovation, and employment to
a greater degree than large firms and has devoted more than $10 billion in the last five years toward
1

See Levine (2005) for a review of the literature on financial development and growth. Specifically, cross-country
studies (King and Levine 1993; Beck, Levine, and Loayza 2000; Levine, Loayza, and Beck 2000), firm-level studies
(Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic 1998), and industry-level studies (Rajan and Zingales 1998; Wurgler 2000) find that
the level of financial development is positively related to growth and this relationship is not due only to simultaneity
bias. Aghion, P., Howitt, and D. Mayer-Foulkes (2005) find that financial development accelerates the speed of
convergence toward a steady state, but does not influence steady-state growth.
2
In these models, financial development that lowers information or transaction costs disproportionately benefits less
wealthy entrepreneurs. In terms of U.S. banks, Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) find that efficiency improvements reduced
fixed costs included in loan prices, helping small firms.
3
Levine and Schmukler (2003, 2004) provide evidence that international financial liberalization has primarily benefited
large, rich firms. Also, local banking monopolies may foster close relationships between banks and small firms and

1

promoting small enterprises. Rather than examining whether small firms per se accelerate growth,
we examine whether financial under-development exerts a particularly onerous impact on small
firms. Furthermore, while considerable research suggests that finance is closely associated with
economic growth, dissecting the mechanisms connecting finance and growth provides information
on whether – and if so how -- financial development causes growth, or whether financial
development is simply associated with fast growing economies. Toward this end, this paper
examines whether financial development accelerates growth by boosting small firm growth.
Finally, as stressed above, financial development may have distributional implications. This paper
examines whether financial development is particularly good for large firms or small firms, or
whether financial development has a balanced impact on firms of different sizes.
We examine whether industries that are composed of small firms for technological reasons
grow faster in economies with well-developed financial systems. As formulated by Coase (1937),
firms should optimally internalize some activities, but size enhances complexity and coordination
costs. Thus, an industry’s optimal firm size depends on that industry’s particular production
technologies, including capital intensities and scale economies (Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales, 2001).
Given estimates of each industry’s technological firm size, we use a sample of 44 countries and 36
industries in the manufacturing sector to examine the growth rates of different industries across
countries with different levels of financial development. If “small-firm industries” – industries
naturally composed of small firms for technological reasons – grow faster than “large-firm
industries” in economies with more developed financial systems, then this suggests that (i) financial
development boosts the growth of small-firm industries more than large-firm industries and (ii) one
mechanism through which financial development accelerates growth is by fostering the growth of

thereby increase credit availability to small firms (Petersen and Rajan, 1994, 1995). If financial development intensifies
competition and breaks these monopolies, it may also hurt small firms.

2

small firms. Instead, if financial development disproportionately boosts the growth of large-firm
industries, then this implies quite different distributional effects. Finally, financial development
may foster balanced growth, and therefore we would not find cross-industry distributional effects.
More specifically, we extend the Rajan and Zingales (1998, henceforth RZ) methodology to
examine whether financial development enhances economic growth by easing constraints on
industries that are technologically more dependent on small firms. RZ find that industries that are
technologically more dependent on external finance grow disproportionately faster in countries with
developed financial systems. They measure an industry’s need for external finance (the difference
investment and cash from operations) using data on large, public corporations in the U.S.
Assuming that financial markets are relatively frictionless in the U.S., RZ identify each industry’s
“technological” demand for external finance, i.e., the demand for external finance in a frictionless
financial system. They further assume that this technological demand for external finance is the
same across countries. Instead of only considering each industry’s technological dependence on
external finance, we also examine each industry’s technological firm size. We measure an
industry’s “technological” composition of small firms relative to large firms as the share of
employment in firms with less than 20 employees in the U.S. Assuming that financial markets are
relatively frictionless in the U.S., we therefore identify each industry’s “technological” firm size in
a relatively frictionless financial system. While conducting a large of number of sensitivity checks
regarding the validity of this measure of technological firm size, we test whether industries that are
technologically more dependent on small firms grow faster in countries with more developed
financial systems.
The results indicate that small-firm industries grow disproportionately faster in economies
with well-developed financial systems, which has two key implications. First, the findings indicate

3

that financial development has cross-industry distributional ramifications: Financial development
exerts a particularly positive growth effect on industries that are technologically more dependent on
small firms. Second, the analyses advertise one mechanism through which finance influences
aggregate economic growth: Financial development removes growth constraints on small-firm
industries. Our analyses suggest that large-firm industries are not the same as industries that rely
heavily on external finance. We control for cross-industry differences in external dependence, and
confirm the RZ finding that financial development disproportionately boosts the growth rate of
industries that are more dependent on external finance. Even when controlling for cross-industry
differences in external dependence, however, we find that financial development disproportionately
accelerates the growth of industries that for technological reasons are composed of small firms.
These results are robust to an array of sensitivity checks. Besides confirming that the results
hold over different estimation periods, we assess the sensitivity of our findings to using different
financial development indicators and alternative measures of small-firm share for each industry.
Furthermore, we were concerned that small-firm share might proxy for other industry characteristics
that interact with country-level traits to explain industry growth. For instance, Claessens and
Laeven (2003) find that industries characterized by high levels of intangible assets grow faster in
countries with strong private property rights protection. If small firms have higher levels of
intangible assets and strong property rights underlie financial development (Levine, 1999), then our
results on firm size may be spurious. We confirm our results, however, when controlling for the
interaction of industrial reliance on intangible assets and national property rights protection.
Similarly, Fisman and Love (2003b) argue that financial development is particularly important for
industries with substantial growth opportunities. If in our sample, small-firm industries are also
those industries with above average growth opportunities, we may be capturing cross-industry

4

differences in growth opportunities, not cross-industry differences in firm size. Again, however,
when controlling for the interaction of financial development and each industry’s growth rate in the
United States, we continue to find that financial development exerts a particularly large impact on
the growth of industries that are naturally composed of small firms. Finally, we were concerned that
market size, human capital skills, and the level of economic development could influence industry
size, invalidate the use of the U.S. as the benchmark country, and lead to inappropriate inferences.
Nevertheless, even when controlling for these country-specific traits, we continue to find that
financial development exerts a particularly pronounced growth-effect on small-firm industries.
Moreover, we confirm this paper’s findings using the United Kingdom as the benchmark country
and when employing alternative definitions of industrial firm size.
There are limitations to our analyses. Some theories predict that financial development
lowers information and transaction costs in ways that are particularly beneficial to small firms. We
find evidence consistent with these theories. We do not, however, examine the links in the chain
from financial development, to particular information and transaction costs, and on to small firm
growth. This is similar to RZ. They find evidence consistent with theories stressing that financial
development reduces the cost of external finance. They do not, however, measure the cost of
external finance directly. Thus, although this paper’s findings indicate that financial development
boosts economic growth by fostering the growth of industries that are naturally composed of small
firms, further research needs to link these findings to specific information and transactions costs.
Along similar lines, financial market imperfections could impede the growth of small-firm
industries by causing firm size to deviate from its optimum or by hindering the flow of capital and
other financial services to small firms. We do not explicitly distinguish among these possibilities.
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2003), however, find no evidence that financial under-

5

development distorts firm size. Given this finding, our results imply that financial underdevelopment disproportionately hinders the flow of growth-enhancing financial services to small
firms.
Our paper relates closely to two recent papers that examine the importance of financial
development for small firms. Using evidence across different region in Italy, Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2004) find that small firms enjoy more growth benefits than large firms from regional
financial development.4 Rather than focusing on inter-regional differences in Italy, we undertake a
cross-country, country-industry investigation. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005) use
firm-level survey data to assess the relationship between the financing obstacles that firms report
they face and firm growth. They find that the negative impact of reported obstacles on firm growth
is stronger for small firms than large firms and stronger in countries with under-developed financial
systems. Their study has the advantage of using cross-country, firm-level data, but it has the
disadvantage of relying on survey responses regarding the obstacles that firms encounter. In
contrast, we use a different methodology that assesses whether industries that are naturally
composed of small firms grow faster in countries with better-developed financial systems. Our
research provides complimentary information on whether financial development fosters aggregate
growth by disproportionately facilitating the growth of small firms.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the data, while
Section 3 describes the methodology. Section 4 presents the main results and sensitivity tests.
Section 5 concludes.

4

In terms of new firm formation, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) also find that new firm creation is higher in
Italian regions that are more financial development. Similarly, Black and Strahan (2002) show that more competitive
banking markets are associated with higher levels of new incorporations in the United States.

6

II.

Data
To assess whether financial development boosts the growth of industries that for

technological reasons are naturally composed of small firms more than the growth rate of large-firm
industries, we need (i) measures of industry growth, (ii) measures of each industry’s technological
firm size, and (iii) country-level indicators of financial development. This section describes these
key variables. The data cover 44 countries and 36 industries in the manufacturing sector. Tables 1
and 2 present descriptive statistics.

II.1. Industry growth rates
Growthi,k equals the average annual growth rate of real value added of industry k in country
i over the period 1980 to 1990. Thus, we have cross-country, cross-industry data on industrial
growth rates. We use the data obtained by RZ from the Industrial Statistics Yearbook database,
which is assembled by the United Nations Statistical Division (1993). In robustness tests below, we
show that the results hold over different estimation periods.

II.2. Measure of Small Firm Share
Since our goal is to assess whether industries that are naturally composed of small firms
grow faster, or slower, than large-firm industries in countries with greater financial development,
we need to measure each industry’s “natural” or technological firm size. Differences in productive
technologies, capital intensities, and scale economies influence an industry’s technological firm size
(Coase, 1937, and Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales, 2001).5 To get a proxy measure of each industry’s
natural firm size, therefore, we need a benchmark economy with relatively few market

5

See You (1995) for an overview.

7

imperfections and policy distortions, so that we capture, as closely as possible, only the impact of
cross-industry differences in production processes, capital intensities, and scale economies on crossindustry firm size.
Small Firm Sharek equals industry k’s share of employment in firms with less than 20
employees in the United States, and is obtained from the 1992 Census. 6 In our baseline regressions,
we use Small Firm Share as the measure of each industry’s “natural” or “technological” share of
small firms. Table 1 lists the Small Firm Share for each industry in the sample. The Small Firm
Share has a mean of 6 %, but varies widely from 0.1 % in manufacturing of pulp, paper and
paperboard to 21% in wood manufacturing. In sensitivity checks emphasized below, we consider
many alternative measures of each industry’s natural firm size and we test for the importance of
many potential problems associated with using the United States as the benchmark country for
measuring technological firm size.
Given our focus on the relationship between financial development, firm size, and growth, it
is logical to use the United States to form the benchmark measure of an industry’s technological
share of small firms. As in RZ, this relies on the assumption that U.S. financial markets are
relatively frictionless. Based on this assumption, Small Firm Share measures the share of small
firms for each industry in a relatively frictionless financial system. U.S. markets, of course, are not
perfect. Indeed, Evans and Jovanovic (1989) argue that small firms in the United States are more
liquidity constrained than large firms.
Our empirical methods, however, do not require that the U.S. financial system is perfect.
Rather, we require that financial market imperfections in the United States do not distort the ranking
of industries in terms of the technological share of small firms within each industry. Since the

8

United States has one the most developed financial systems in the world by many measures
(Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2001), it represents a natural benchmark for providing a ranking of
each industry’s technological firm size.
As noted, the perfect benchmark country has relatively frictionless markets and policies
distorting firm size beyond the financial sector. For instance, differences in human capital, market
size, contract enforcement, and overall institutional development may influence industrial firm size
beyond technological factors, such as scale economies, capital intensities, and industry-specific
production processes shaping long-run average cost curves (You, 1995, and Kumar, Rajan, and
Zingales, 2001). Thus, the ideal benchmark economy not only has relatively frictionless financial
markets; it has relatively frictionless markets in general.
Again, the United States is a reasonable benchmark to derive each industry’s technological
Small Firm Share. The United States has the full spectrum of human capital skills and indeed
attracts both high and low human capital workers from the rest of the world (Easterly and Levine,
2001). Furthermore, comparative studies of U.S. and European labor markets suggest that the
United States has many fewer policy distortions. Moreover, the U.S. internal market is huge and –
given its size – it is comparatively open to international trade. Furthermore, many studies point to
the United States as having a superior contracting environment and well-developed institutions (La
Porta et al, 1999). Moreover, the United States does not need to have perfect labor markets,
contracting systems, or institutions to act as a reasonable benchmark. To represent a good
benchmark for Small Firm Share, we simply require that policy distortions and market
imperfections in the United States do not distort the ranking of industries in terms of the
technological share of small firms within each industry.
6

We do not use measures of Small Firm Share prior to 1992 because the U.S. Census did not start collecting firm size
data at the firm level until 1992. Before 1992, the data were collected at the plant level. From a theoretical perspective,

9

Furthermore, we present a battery of sensitivity analyses that assess the validity of using the
United States as the benchmark country. We use different measures of Small Firm Share and also
use a different benchmark country. Furthermore, since omitting country-specific factors that
interact with industry characteristics and explain industry growth could bias the results, we control
for an array of country traits. As we describe below, however, the results are robust to a variety of
sensitivity checks.

II.3. Indicators of financial development
Ideally, one would like indicators of the degree to which the financial system ameliorates
information and transactions frictions and facilitates the mobilization and efficient allocation of
capital. Specifically, we would like indicators that capture the effectiveness with which financial
systems research firms and identify profitable projects, exert corporate control, facilitate risk
management, mobilize savings, and ease transactions. Unfortunately, no such measures are
available across countries. Consequently, we rely on an assortment of traditional measures of
financial development that existing work shows are robustly related to economic growth.
Private Crediti equals the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector
divided by GDP for country i. It captures the amount of credit channeled through financial
intermediaries to the private sector. Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) show that Private Credit is a
good predictor or economic growth and also use instrumental variables in stressing that the strong,
positive association between Private Credit and economic growth is not due to reverse causality. In
our baseline regression, we measure Private Credit in the initial year of our estimation period, 1980
(or the first year in which data are available). We use the initial year to control for reverse
causation. Since using initial values instead of average values implies an informational loss, we

we need data at the firm level, not the plant level, and we therefore do not resort to Census data prior to 1992.

10

also use Private Credit, averaged over the period 1980-89 in our sensitivity analysis. Furthermore,
we use instrumental variables to extract the exogenous component of Private Credit. Data for
Private Credit are from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2000). There is a wide variation in
Private Credit in our sample, ranging from 7% in Bangladesh to 117% in Japan.
In sensitivity tests, we use several alternative indicators of financial development. To save
space, we do not define the different financial development measures here. Rather, we jointly
define these variables and present the sensitivity analyses below.

III.

Methodology

To examine whether industries that are naturally composed of small firms grow faster than
large-firm industries in countries with higher levels of financial development, this paper extends the
methodology developed by RZ. In particular, we interact an industry characteristic – each
industry’s technological small firm share – with a country-characteristic – the level of financial
development. In describing the econometrics more rigorously, we only discuss the interaction
between financial development and Small Firm Share. In the actual implementation, we control for
the interaction of financial development with the external financial dependence of each industry as
stressed by RZ.
Econometrically, we use the following regression:

Growthi ,k = ∑α j Countryj + ∑ β l Industryl + γ Sharei ,k + δ (Small Firm Sharek * FDi ) + ε i ,k , (1)
j

l

where Growthi,k is the average annual growth rate of value added, in industry k and country i, over
the period 1980 to 90. Country and Industry are country and industry dummies, respectively, and
Sharei,k is the share of industry k in manufacturing in country i in 1980. Small Firm Sharek is the
benchmark share of small firms in industry k, which in our baseline specification equals the share of

11

employment in firms with less than 20 employees in the United States in 1992. FDi is an indicator
of financial development for country i, which equals Private Credit in our baseline regression. We
include the interaction between the small firm share in an industry with financial development. We
do not include financial development on its own, since we focus on within-country, within-industry
growth rates. The dummy variables for industries and countries correct for country and industry
specific characteristics that might determine industry growth patterns. We thus isolate the effect
that the interaction of Small Firm Share and Private Credit has on industry growth relative to
country and industry means. By including the initial share of an industry we control for a
convergence effect: industries with a large share might grow more slowly, suggesting a negative
sign on γ. We include the share in manufacturing rather than the level, since we focus on withincountry, within-industry growth rates. We exclude the United States (the benchmark country) from
the regressions.
In interpreting the results, we focus on the interaction of financial development and small
firms share, i.e., we focus on the sign and significance of δ. If δ is positive and significant, this
suggests financial development exerts a disproportionately positive effect on small-firm industries
relative to large-firm industries. This would suggest that financial development tends to ease
growth constraints on small firms more than on large firms. A negative and significant sign would
suggest that it is mostly large firms that benefit from the development of financial markets. An
insignificant coefficient would suggest that financial development influences industries that are
naturally composed of small firms the same as industries naturally composed of large firms. Thus,
if δ enters insignificantly, this would not support the view that financial development has crossindustry distributional consequences and would not support the view that one channel through

12

which financial development boosts aggregate economic growth is by disproportionately easing
constrains on small firm growth.
Apart from using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions, we also run Instrumental
Variables (IV) regressions to address the issue of endogeneity of financial development. Based on
research by La Porta et al. (1998), Levine (1999), Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000), and Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003), we use the legal origin of countries as instrumental variables
for financial development. Legal systems are typically classified into four major legal families: the
English common law and the French, German, and Scandinavian civil law countries, and we use
dummy variables for these categories of legal origin as instruments (excluding one category,
Scandinavian civil law countries, which is included in the constant term).

IV.

Results and Sensitivity Tests

IV.1. Main Results
Table 3 results suggest that small-firm industries (industries with technologically larger
shares of small firms) grow faster in economies with better-developed financial intermediaries. The
interaction of Private Credit with Small Firm Share enters positively and significantly at the 5%
level in column (1). We also find that the coefficient on Industry Share enters negatively and
significantly. This is consistent with the convergence effect identified by RZ. Overall, these results
indicate that industries whose organization is based more on small firms than on large firms grow
faster in countries with better-developed financial intermediaries.
The relationship between financial development, an industry’s small firm share, and industry
growth is not only statistically, but also economically large. To illustrate the effect, we compare the
growth of an industry with a relatively large share of small firms and an industry with a relative low

13

share of small firms across two countries with different levels of financial development.
Specifically, the results in column (1) suggest that the furniture industry (75th percentile of Small
Firm Share) should grow 1.4% per annum faster than the spinning industry (25th percentile of Small
Firm Share) in Canada (75th percentile of Private Credit) than in India (25th percentile of Private
Credit).7 Since the average growth rate in our sample is 3.4%, this is a relatively large effect.
Given the influential findings of RZ, we were concerned that there might be a large,
negative correlation between industries that are naturally heavy users of external finance and
industries that are naturally composed of small firms. If this were the case, then it would be
difficult to distinguish between the RZ finding that externally dependent industries grow faster in
economies with well-developed financial systems and our result that small-firm industries grow
faster in economies with well-developed financial systems. While there is a negative correlation
between Small Firm Share and External Dependence, it is very small (-0.04) and insignificant. This
suggests that the industry characteristics explaining firm size distribution are not the same as the
characteristics explaining technological dependence on external finance.
Moreover, Table 3 (i) advertises the robustness of the original RZ result on external
dependence and (ii) illustrates the robustness of the result on industry firm size when controlling for
external dependence. As shown in column (2), the interaction between each industry’s level of
external dependence and financial development (Private Credit * External Dependence) enters
positively and significantly. This indicates that industries that are naturally heavy users of external
finance grow faster in economies with higher levels of financial development. Since we also
control for cross-industry differences in the technological level of firm size, this represents an
additional robustness test on the RZ finding. Moreover, column (2) shows that the interaction
between each industry’s technological Small Firm Share and financial development (Private
7

We use the results of column 2 in Table 3 for this experiment.

14

Credit*Small Firm Share) enters positively and significantly when controlling for external
dependence. Thus, we find that industries with technologically larger shares of small firms grow
more quickly in countries with higher levels of financial development even when controlling for
cross-industry differences in external dependence. 8
Finally, Table 3 column (3) presents results using instrumental variables, which indicate that
the relationship between Small Firm Share, financial development, and industry growth is not due
to reverse causation or simultaneity bias. Here we extract the exogenous component of Private
Credit using the legal origin of countries. We instrument both the interaction of Private Credit with
Small Firm Share and the interaction of Private Credit with External Financial Dependence. The
first-stage regression results support the use of legal origin as an instrument for Private Credit. The
interaction of Small Firm Share with Private Credit continues to enter positively and significantly.9

IV.2. Sensitivity to Controlling for Different Industry Characteristics
There are a number of potential complications with using the United States as the
benchmark country to identify the technological level of small firm share for each industry. In
particular, Small Firm Share in the United States may be correlated with other industry-specific
traits that interact with country-level characteristics to explain industry growth. This would produce
spurious results.

8

In unreported regressions, we also tested whether the interaction between Private Credit and small firm share varies
across industries with different degrees of external dependence. The triple interaction term does not enter significantly
and the interactions of Private Credit with external dependence and the small firm share continue to enter significantly
and positively, suggesting that small firms consistently face high financing constraints, irrespective of whether they are
in an industry with a naturally high or low demand for external finance.
9
We have used alternative instrument sets, including latitude and settler mortality – proxying for initial endowments -,
religious composition and ethnic fractionalization, factors that have been proposed by the literature has having a
significant impact on financial and institutional development (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2003, Easterly and
Levine, 1997; Stulz and Williamson, 2004), and obtain similar results.

15

As a sensitivity test, therefore, we include the interaction between financial development
and different industry traits. First, as we have emphasized, the results are robust to controlling for
the interaction of Private Credit with the RZ measure of external financial dependence. If the Small
Firm Share is highly (negatively) correlated with External Dependence, the findings on Small Firm
Share should vanish when controlling for external dependence. As noted, however, there is not a
strong correlation between the Small Firm Share and External Dependence and we find that
financial development exerts a particularly pronounced growth-effect on small-firm industries even
when controlling for the interaction between financial development and external dependence.
As a second concern, Claessens and Laeven (2003) show that industries that naturally use a
high proportion of intangible assets grow faster in countries with strong private property rights
protection. If small firms rely heavily on intangible assets and strong private property rights are
closely associated with financial development, then our findings may simply be confirming the
Claessens and Laeven (2003) results rather than establishing a new channel linking financial
development and economic growth. In Table 4 column 1, we therefore control for the interaction of
Property Rights with the percentage of intangible assets in each industry. We use the ratio of
intangible assets to fixed assets of U.S. firms over the period 1980 to 1989 calculated using data
from Compustat. We confirm the Claessens and Laeven (2003) result: The interaction of Property
Rights with Intangibility enters significantly and positively. However, this does not affect our main
finding: Industries with a larger small firm share grow faster in economies with better-developed
financial intermediaries.10
Third, we consider the possibility that industries classified as small-firm industries face
different growth opportunities than industries composed of larger firms, which might lead us to
spuriously link industrial firm size with faster economic growth in financial developed economies.

16

Fisman and Love (2003b) argue that financial development boosts the growth rate of industries with
particularly good growth opportunities. Thus, we want to assess the independent importance of the
relationship between industry growth and the interaction between financial development and Small
Firm Share when controlling for cross-industry growth opportunities. Thus, in Table 4’s column 2,
we follow Fisman and Love (2003b) and also include the interaction between Private Credit and
their measure of industrial Sales Growth to control for growth opportunities. Sales Growth is
calculated as real annual growth in net sales of U.S. firms over the period 1980 to 1989 using data
from Compustat. Even when controlling for both external dependence and growth opportunities,
the interaction of Small Firm Share with Private Credit enters positively and significantly.

IV.3. Sensitivity to Controlling for Different Country Characteristics
There may also exist concerns that financial development is highly correlated with other
country-specific traits that interact with industry firm size and shape cross-industry growth rates.
To examine the sensitivity of the results to different country factors, we choose country traits that
on theoretical grounds are associated with financial development and influence industry firm size
and growth (Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990; Galor and Moav, 2005). Specifically, we include the
interaction between Small Firm Share and country characteristics besides financial development.
Thus, in Table 4, columns 3 – 5, we control for the interaction of (i) the log of GDP per
capita with the Small Firm Share, (ii) average years of schooling with the Small Firm Share, and
(iii) openness to trade with the Small Firm Share. Small firms might benefit from a generally more
developed institutional environment. Thus, we include the overall level of economic development.
If financial development is simply proxying for the overall level of institutional development, then
including the interaction between Per Capita GDP and Small Firm Share should drive out the
10

We also tried an interaction of intangibility and financial development and obtained similar results.

17

significance of the interaction between financial development and Small Firm Share. Similarly, a
more educated population might be more conducive to the growth of industries composed of
smaller (or larger) firms since technical, entrepreneurial, and managerial skills influence industrial
organization and growth. If financial development is closely linked with human capital
development, then controlling for the interaction between Small Firm Share and Human Capital (as
measured by each country’s average years of schooling of the population over the age of 25) should
drive out the results on industrial firm size. Finally, market size may be associated with financial
development, industrial firm size, and the growth rate of different industries. For instance,
industries that depend on relatively large firms may grow faster in economies with larger markets
that allow them to exploit economies of scale more fully. To test this, we include the interaction
between Small Firm Share and a proxy measure of openness to international trade, Openness, which
equals exports plus imports divided by GDP.
The finding that financial development disproportionately boosts the growth of industries
that are naturally composed of small firms holds even when controlling for these other country
characteristics. The interaction of Private Credit with Small Firm Share enters positively and
significantly in Table 4’s columns 3 – 5. The interaction of Per Capita GDP and Small Firm Share
and the interaction between Openness and Small Firm Share do not enter significantly in columns 3
and 5 respectively. The interaction of Human Capital and Small Firm Share enters positively and
significantly at the 10% level, which provides some support to the view that small-firm industries
grow faster in economies with more educated work forces. However, this does not affect the
significance or size of the interaction term of Small Firm Share with Private Credit. Thus, this
paper’s core results on financial development, industrial firm size, and industry growth are robust to
controlling for different country characteristics.

18

IV.4. Sensitivity to Alternative Measures of Industrial Small Firm Share
Table 5 indicates that the results are robust to using alternative definitions of Small Firm
Share. In all of these regressions, we control for the interaction between financial development and
external dependence. We use four different cut-offs to define a small firm: 5, 10, 100 and 500
employees respectively.11 Table 1 lists Small Firm Share for different for the different definitions
of a small firm. There is a high correlation among the different measures of Small Firm Share, and
the average correlation is 91%.12 Nevertheless, some additional information may be garnered from
examining the results with different cut-offs. This allows us to (a) test the robustness of the results
to different definitions of a small firm and (b) assess more fully the relationship between crossindustry firm size, financial development, and growth.
Using the alternative definitions of a small firm does not change our main finding: Financial
development fosters the growth of small-firm industries more than large-firm industries, though the
significance of the interaction term between Private Credit and Small Firm Share is significant only
at the ten percent level when defining a small firm as having 100 or fewer employees. We also find
that once we include firms up to 500 employees in the definition of Small Firm Share, then the
interaction of financial development and firm size distribution turns insignificant. Thus, these
sensitivity checks (i) emphasize that financial development exerts a particularly large growth effect
on small-firm industries and (ii) indicate “small-firm” industries that enjoy a disproportionately
large growth effect from financial include industries with a large share of firms with less than 100
employees.

11

Note that we loose two industries due to missing data in the U.S. Census when we use 5 and 10 employees as cut-off.
Not surprisingly, the correlation decreases as we move towards higher thresholds. The correlation between S5 and
S10 is 99%, but 78% between S5 and S500.

12

19

We also find that the economic size of the impact of financial development on industries
with different Small Firm Shares is robust to using different definitions of small firm share.
Specifically, using the example above, moving from India (25th percentile Private Credit) to Canada
(75th percentile Private Credit) benefits the industry at the 75th percentile of Small Firm Share
relatively more than the industry at the 25th percentile of Small Firm Share. According to the
estimated coefficients, this change induces a 1.4% growth differential between these two types of
industries using 20 employees as the cut-off definition for a small firm. For example, the growth
differentials are virtually identical (1.6% and 1.5 % growth differential respectively) when using 10
or 5 employees as alternative definitions of small firm in categorizing the technological level of
small firm share. Given that we control for the interaction of financial development with external
financial dependence, these results suggest that small-firm industries benefit more than large-firm
industries from financial development.
Next, we were concerned that using indicators of Small Firm Share that are measured after
the dependent variable would induce biases. While we cannot measure Small Firm Share in earlier
periods due to the data constraints discussed above, we can assess whether Small Firm Share is
stable and then see whether using Small Firm Share from a different year alters the results. The
correlation between the small firm shares in 1992 and 1997 using the 20-employee cut-off is 90%,
significant at the 1% level, and the Spearman rank correlation is 92%. This suggests that firm size
distribution across industries in the United States is persistent and does not vary significantly over
the business cycle (in 1992, the U.S. economy was just emerging from a recession, while 1997 was
a boom year).
Moreover, this paper’s findings are also robust to measuring Small Firm Share for U.S.
industries in 1997 instead of 1992. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 report the results when using the

20

Small Firm Share across U.S. industries when using the 1997 Census and 10 or 20 employees as the
cut-off. Using the 1997 data does not change our findings: the interaction of the Small Firm Share
with Private Credit enters positively and significantly at the 1% level.
Critically, we also confirm the robustness of the results when using the United Kingdom as
the benchmark economy for computing each industry’s technological firm size. We use AMADEUS
data for 1997 to calculate the small firm share across industries for the United Kingdom.
AMADEUS is a commercial database maintained by Bureau Van Dijk containing financial
statements and employment data for over 5 million firms in Europe, including the United Kingdom.
Unfortunately, the data on industrial firm size distribution is not as complete for the United
Kingdom as for the United States.13 Nevertheless, we continue to find that small-firm industries
grow faster in countries with well-developed financial systems. The interaction of Small Firm
Share in the United Kingdom and Private Credit enters positively and significantly at the 5% level
(Table 6 column 3), which again confirms this paper’s core conclusion.
Finally, the results are robust to controlling for the average size of large firms in each
industry. We were concerned that industry variation in the size of the largest firms could reflect
U.S. specific factors and distort our results. Thus, we control for the median size of the large, listed
firms by industry in the United States, using Compustat data to calculate the log of the median
number of employees across large, listed firms in the United States. The regressions in columns (4)
and (5) of Table 6 show that the interaction of Private Credit with the median firm size of large,
listed firms does not enter significantly in any of the regressions at the 5% level. In contrast, we
13

Unlike for the U.S. Census, for the U.K. dataset we only have complete data for enterprises above 10 employees so
that our U.K. small firm share is calculated as employment in enterprises between 10 and 20 employees relative to
employment in enterprises with more than 10 employees. We only include limited liability companies in our
calculations, since in the United Kingdom unlimited liability companies are not required to file financial accounts (for
further details, see Klapper, Laeven, and Rajan, 2004). Also, we exclude industries with less than 20 firm-observations.
The correlation between the small firm shares for industries in the U.S. in 1992 and small firm shares in the U.K. in
1997 is 58%, significant at the 1% level and the Spearman rank correlation is 52%.

21

continue to find that the interaction of Private Credit and Small Firm Share enters positively and
significantly at the 5% level.
IV.5. Sensitivity to Alternative Measures of Financial Development
The findings are also robust to using alternative measures of financial development as
shown in Table 7. First, we use Private Credit, averaged over the period 1980 to 1989 instead of
using the value in the initial year. While using the average value may introduce a bias in our
estimates, the interaction with the Small Firm Share enters positively and significantly at the 1%
level, and the coefficient is only slighter higher than when using the initial value (regression 1).
Second, we use Liquid Liabilities, which equals the liquid liabilities of the financial system
(currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank financial
intermediaries) divided by GDP. Unlike Private Credit, Liquid Liabilities simply measures the size
financial intermediaries and does not focus on the intermediation of credit to the private sector. As
shown in Table 7 regression 2, the results hold when using Liquid Liabilities. 14
Third, we test whether small-firm industries grow faster in economies with more active
stock markets. Market Turnover equals the ratio of the value of stock transactions divided by
market capitalization for each country’s stock exchange. While the interaction with the Small Firm
Share is positive, it is not significant (Table 7 regression 3). This suggests that, consistent with
Petersen and Rajan (1995), small firms benefit more from services provided by financial
intermediaries than by stock markets.15
Fourth, we use several indicators that do not directly measure the size or efficiency of the
financial system, but instead measure the institutional foundations for financial development.
Specifically, we also use Legal Efficiency, which measures the efficiency and integrity of a

14
15

These results also hold when using Commercial-Central Bank from Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000).
These results hold when using stock market capitalization and value traded as alternative stock market indicators.

22

country’s legal environment. Data are averaged over 1980-83 and are originally from Business
International Corporation. Also, we use the Law and Order index compiled by ICRG, which is
based on survey data that seek to elicit the degree of trust that citizens have in the legal system’s
ability to resolve disputes. Finally, we use Accounting Standards, which measures the number of
items listed on firms’ financial statements, an indicator ranging from zero to 90 and compiled by
CIFAR. Accounting Standards is a proxy for the quality of financial information about firms and
has been used by RZ as a proxy for financial development. As shown in Table 7, the interaction
between Legal Efficiency and Small Firm Share and the interaction between the Law and Order and
Small Firm Share both enter positively and significantly at the 5% level (columns 4 and 5). The
interaction of Accounting Standards with Small Firm Share, however, enters insignificantly
(column 6). This suggests that the quality of financial statements does not foster disproportionately
faster growth in small-firm industries. This finding is consistent with the insignificant result for the
interaction of Turnover with Small Firm Share and emphasizes the particularly large, positive
relationship between the development of financial intermediaries and the growth rate of industries
that are naturally composed of small firms. While not direct evidence, this result is consistent with
arguments that small firms rely on financial intermediaries to obtain information on the firm
through means other than publicly available financial statements (such as information deriving from
long-term bank-firm relationships), so that financial intermediary development induces a
particularly large, positive effect on small firms.
IV.6. Sensitivity to Alternative Sampling Period
As a robustness test, we use industry value added growth over an extended period, 1980
through 1999. The core sample includes 1242 country-industry observations for the period 1980 to
1990 (the original RZ sample). When we move to the extended period, the sample drops by one-

23

third to only 827 country-industry observations because we lose data on several countries and
industries.
Nevertheless, the results in Table 8 indicate that our main findings are robust to calculating
industry growth over this longer period. The results in columns 1 and 2 confirm a significant and
positive coefficient on the interaction of Small Firm Share and financial development when using
(i) industry growth rates over the period 1980-99 and (ii) defining Small Firm Share with either the
10 or 20 employees cut-off. The regression in column 3 suggests that the significance over the
longer period is not due to the reduced sample because the results for the 1980s also hold for the
smaller sample for which we have data through 1999.

V. Conclusions
This paper finds that financial development boosts the growth of industries that are naturally
composed of small firms more than large-firm industries. This result is robust to controlling for
other industry characteristics, many country traits, different measures of financial development,
various methods for computing the technological firm size of industries, and alternative estimation
samples. The results imply that one way in which financial development boosts growth is by
relieving constraints on the growth of small firms.
This result has three interrelated implications. First, this paper contributes to the literature
on the mechanisms through which financial development boosts aggregate economic growth.
Although a large literature shows that there is a strong positive relationship between financial
development and economic growth, it is crucial to dissect the channels connecting finance and
growth to (i) better understand the finance-growth nexus and (ii) assess whether finance causes
growth, or whether financial development is simply a characteristic of successful economies. Past
work suggests that financial development facilitates economic growth by boosting the growth of

24

firms that rely heavily on external finance. Besides confirming this finding, we show that financial
development fosters economic growth by relieving constraints on small firm growth. Thus, we
identify an additional mechanism through which financial development fosters aggregate economic
growth. Second, this paper’s findings support the view that financial development
disproportionately boosts the growth of small firms relative to large firms. Some theories of the
firm argue that financial development is particularly beneficial to large firms. Others predict that
financial development is especially important for lowering transaction costs and informational
barriers that hinder small firm growth. Our findings support the view that under-developed
financial systems are particularly detrimental to the growth of firms with less than 100 employees.
Finally, we find that financial development has cross-industry distributional consequences.
Although we do not examine specific policies, the results suggest that policies that improve the
operation of the financial system will tend to boost the growth of small-firm industries more than
large firm industries.

25

References
Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton (1997), “A Trickle-Down Theory of Growth and Development
with Debt Overhang.” Review of Economic Studies 64, 151-72.
Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and David Mayer-Foulkes (2005), “The Effect of Financial
Development on Convergence: Theory and Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Newman, Andrew (1993), “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development.” Journal of Political Economy 101, 274-98.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine (2003). “Law, Endowments, and Finance”,
Journal of Financial Economics, 70: 137-181.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2000). “A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure”, World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. (2000). “Finance and the Sources of Growth.”
Journal of Financial Economics 58, 261-300.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. (2005). “Financial and Legal
Constraints to Firm Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Black, Sandra E., and Philip Strahan. (2002). “Entrepreneurship and the Availability of Bank
Credit.” Journal of Finance 67(6), 2807-2833.
Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven. (2003). “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.”
Journal of Finance 58(6), 2401-2436.
Coase, Ronald (1937). “The Nature of the Firm”, Economica, 4: 386-405.
Cole, Rebel, and John Wolken. (1994). “Financial Services used by Small Businesses: Evidence
from the 1993 Survey of Small Business Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 81, 629-676.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine. (2001). Financial Structures and Economic Growth: A
Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic. (1998). “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth.” Journal
of Finance 53, 2107-2137.
Diamond, Douglas. (1991). “Monitoring and Reputation: the Choice Between Bank Loans and
Directly Placed Debt”, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. (1997). “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.

26

Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. (1989). “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
under Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy 97, 808-827.
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love. (2003a). “Trade Credit, Financial Development, and Industry
Growth.” Journal of Finance 58(1), 353-374.
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love. (2003b). “Financial Dependence and Growth Revisited.”
NBER Working Paper 9582, March 2003.
Galor, Oded and J. Zeira. (1993), “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” Review of Economic
Studies 60, 35-52.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav (2005), “From Physical to Human Capital Accumulation: Inequality
and the Process of Development.” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Jovanovic, Boyan (1990), “Financial Development, Growth, and the
Distribution of Income.” Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076-1107.
Gomes, Joao F. (2001). “Financing Investment.” American Economic Review 91(5), 1263-1285.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. (2004). “Does Local Financial Development
Matter?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. (1996). “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branching Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3), 639-670.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. (1998). “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and Dynamic
Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking.” Journal of Law and Economics 49, 239-274.
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. (2004). “Business Environment and Firm Entry:
Evidence from International Data.” NBER working paper No. 10380.
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. (2001). “What Determines Firms
Size?” University of Chicago. CRSP Working Paper No. 496.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. (1998).“Law
and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. (1999). “The
Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.
Levine, Ross. (1999), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth”, Journal of Financial Intermediation,
8: 36-67.
Levine, Ross. (2005). “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence.” in Handbook of Economic
Growth, Eds: Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, forthcoming.
27

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck. (2000). “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Levine, Ross and Sergio Schmukler. (2003). “Migration, Spillovers, and Trade Diversion: The
Impact of Internationalization on Stock Market Liquidity.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, 9614.
Levine, Ross and Sergio Schmukler. (2004). “Internationalization and the Evolution of Corporate
Valuations.” University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram G. Rajan. (1994). “The Benefits of Lending Relationships:
Evidence from Small Business Data.” Journal of Finance 49, 3-38.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram G. Rajan. (1995). “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on
Lending Relationships.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 407-444.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram G. Rajan. (2002). “Does Distance Still Matter: The Information
Revolution in Small Business Lending.” Journal of Finance 57, 2533-2570.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. (1998). “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American
Economic Review 88, 559-586.
Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson. (2004). “Culture, Openness, and Finance,” Journal of
Financial Economics 70(3), forthcoming.
World Bank. (2004). World Bank Group Support for Small Business. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
World Bank. (2002). World Bank Group Review of Small Business Activities. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
World Bank. (1994). Can Intervention Work? The Role of Government in SME Success.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wurgler, J. (2000), “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital”, Journal of Financial
Economics, 58: 187-214.
You, Jong-Il. (1995). “Small Firms in Economic Theory.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 19,
441-462.

28

Table 1

Firm Size Distribution in the United States in 1992

This table shows employment shares by firm size bin in the United States by ISIC Revision 2 industries. Sx is the industry’s share
of employment by firms with less than x employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the
year 1992. Employment shares are expressed in percentages of total number of employees.
ISIC
311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
352
353
354
355
356
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384

385
390
3211
3411
3511
3513
3522
3825
3832
3841
3843
Average

Industry name
Food manufacturing
Beverage industries
Tobacco manufactures
Manufacture of textiles
Manufacture of wearing apparel, except footwear
Manufacture of leather and products of leather, leather substitutes
and fur, except footwear and wearing apparel
Manufacture of footwear, except vulcanized or molded rubber or
plastic footwear
Manufacture of wood and wood and cork products, except
furniture
Manufacture of furniture and fixtures, except primarily of metal
Manufacture of paper and paper products
Printing, publishing and allied industries
Manufacture of other chemical products
Petroleum refineries
Manufacture of miscellaneous products of petroleum and coal
Manufacture of rubber products
Manufacture of plastic products not elsewhere classified
Manufacture of pottery, china and earthenware
Manufacture of glass and glass products
Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel basic industries
Non-ferrous metal basic industries
Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and
equipment
Manufacture of machinery except electrical
Manufacture of electrical machinery apparatus, appliances and
supplies
Manufacture of transport equipment
Manufacture of professional and scientific, and measuring and
controlling equipment not elsewhere classified, and of
photographic and optical goods
Other Manufacturing Industries
Spinning, weaving and finishing textiles
Manufacture of pulp, paper and paperboard
Manufacture of basic industrial chemicals except fertilizers
Manufacture of synthetic resins, plastic materials and man-made
fibers except glass
Manufacture of drugs and medicines
Manufacture of office, computing and accounting machinery
Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment
and apparatus
Ship building and repairing
Manufacture of motor vehicles

29

S5
0.56
0.60
0.09
0.40
1.30

S10
1.68
1.76
0.20
1.17
3.60

S20
3.82
4.04
0.30
2.81
8.18

S100
13.77
14.75
1.49
13.43
31.74

S500
28.71
30.66
5.14
32.95
58.39

1.94

4.78

10.45

36.89

61.08

0.31

0.81

1.61

7.40

30.89

4.20
1.57

11.20
4.19

3.64
0.87
0.05
1.26
0.38
0.69
2.30
1.15
1.87
0.20
0.50

9.16
2.68
0.18
3.93
1.21
2.24
4.91
2.82
5.88
0.59
1.78

21.37
9.09
3.03
16.32
5.80
0.36
9.26
3.15
6.09
8.80
5.05
14.17
1.62
4.76

47.31
28.74
16.16
35.80
17.67
1.90
29.80
13.23
27.19
26.52
13.92
40.78
8.05
18.65

67.42
50.78
33.60
51.65
31.53
5.67
52.11
27.46
54.98
41.71
24.41
60.42
23.38
37.07

1.28
2.15

4.07
6.37

9.98
13.68

33.87
34.60

55.62
50.87

0.50
0.18

1.48
0.54

3.44
1.21

14.18
4.20

28.97
8.15

0.68
3.54
0.26

1.87
8.72
0.73

0.29

0.89

4.01
16.95
1.91
0.14
1.75

12.88
43.48
9.14
1.29
6.51

25.74
66.66
24.54
7.27
12.90

0.11
0.26
0.48

0.31
0.86
1.32

0.66
2.10
2.85

3.17
8.09
10.43

8.41
18.46
21.67

0.57
1.73
0.32
1.07

1.40
3.58
1.00
2.88

3.09
6.56
2.28
5.85

11.67
16.35
8.04
18.42

27.85
30.26
17.62
33.75

Table 2

Summary statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the main variables in our analysis. Country-industry variables: Growth in real value
added is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1989 by country and ISIC industry. Share in value added is the
industry’s share in total value added of the country. Industry variables: Small firms share (empl<x) is the industry’s share of
employment by firms with less than x employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year
1992. External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on external finance, from Rajan and Zingales
(1998). Intangibility is a measure of the industry’s dependence on intangible assets from Claessens and Laeven (2003). Sales
growth is an industry measure of sales growth from Fisman and Love (2003b). Industry size is the logarithm of the industry’s
median number of employees, and is calculated using data for the year 1980 on U.S. listed firms from Compustat. UK Small firms
share is the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than 20 employees, and is calculated using firm-level data from
Amadeus on all U.K. limited liability firms with 10 or more employees for the year 1997 (we exclude industries with less than 20
firm-observations). Country variables: Private Credit is claims by financial institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in
1980. Liquid liabilities is liquid liabilities to GDP in 1980. Market turnover is total value of trades to total value of shares averaged
in 1980. Per capita GDP is the logarithm of the country’s real GDP per capita in 1980. Accounting standards is an index of the
quality of accounting standards in 1990. Legal efficiency is the measure of the country’s efficiency of the legal system used by
LLSV (1998), and is an average for the years 1980-1983. Law and order is an index of the law and order tradition in the country
from LLSV (1998), and is an average for the years 1982-1995. Property rights is a measure of the country’s protection of property
rights from the Heritage Foundation. Average for the years 1995-99. Human capital is average years of schooling in population
age over 25 in the year 1980.
Variable
Mean
Median
St.dev. Minimum Maximum
Panel A: Country-industry variables
Growth in real value added
Share in value added

0.034
0.016

0.029
0.009

0.099
0.021

-0.447
0.000

1.000
0.224

Panel B: Industry variables
Small firms share (empl<5)
Small firms share (empl<10)
Small firms share (empl<20)
Small firms share (empl<100)
Small firms share (empl<500)
External financial dependence
Intangibility
Sales growth
Industry size
UK Small firms share

0.011
0.029
0.059
0.184
0.337
0.319
0.625
0.045
2.309
0.010

0.006
0.018
0.039
0.14
0.305
0.231
0.460
0.042
1.225
0.009

0.011
0.027
0.053
0.13
0.183
0.406
0.810
0.037
2.649
0.009

0.001
0.002
0.001
0.013
0.051
-0.451
0.020
-0.037
0.250
0.000

0.042
0.112
0.214
0.473
0.674
1.492
4.540
0.129
10.60
0.037

Panel C: Country variables
Private Credit
Liquid liabilities

0.425
0.487

0.341
0.447

0.270
0.234

0.073
0.142

1.173
1.342

Market turnover
Per capita GDP
Human capital
Property rights
Accounting standards
Legal efficiency
Law and order

0.157
7.791
5.811
3.966
0.613
7.704
6.692

0.109
7.860
5.313
4.000
0.620
7.375
6.575

0.164
1.334
2.853
0.879
0.132
2.012
2.770

0.001
4.793
1.681
2.000
0.240
2.500
1.900

0.712
9.573
12.141
5.000
0.830
10.000
10.000

30

Table 3

Financial development, small firms share, and growth

Dependent variable is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC industry.
Share in value added is the industry’s share in total value added of the country. Private Credit is claims by financial
institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in 1980. Small firms share is the industry’s share of employment
by firms with less than 20 employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the
year 1992. External dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on external finance, from Rajan and
Zingales (1998). The industry measures are based on U.S. data. The regression in column (3) is estimated using
legal origin dummies as instrumental variable for Private Credit. All regressions include country and industry
dummies, but these are not reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.

Share in value added
Private Credit * Small firm share

(1)
OLS
-1.012***
(0.253)
0.409**
(0.172)

(2)
OLS
-1.095***
(0.253)
0.445**
(0.173)
0.144***
(0.039)

(3)
IV
-1.086***
(0.253)
0.567**
(0.220)
0.101***
(0.037)

1242
0.26

1242
0.28

1242
0.27

Private Credit * External dependence

Observations
R-squared

31

Table 4

Controlling for Additional Industry and Country Characteristics

Dependent variable is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC industry. Share in value added is the industry’s share in
total value added of the country. Private Credit is claims by financial institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in 1980. Property rights is a measure of
the country’s protection of property rights from the Heritage Foundation. Average for the years 1995-99. We reverse the original order of the index such that
higher values indicate more protection (score of 1-5). Per capita GDP is the logarithm of the country’s real GDP per capita in 1980. Human capital is average
years of schooling in population age over 25 in the year 1980. Openness is the sum of exports and imports relative to GDP in 1980. Small firms share is the
industry’s share of employment by firms with less than 20 employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1992.
External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on external finance, from Rajan and Zingales (1998). Intangibility is a measure of the
industry’s dependence on intangible assets from Claessens and Laeven (2003), and is calculated as the ratio of intangible assets to fixed assets of U.S. firms over
the period 1980 to 1989 using data from Compustat. Sales growth is an industry measure of sales growth from Fisman and Love (2003b), and is calculated as real
annual growth in net sales of U.S. firms over the period 1980 to 1989 using data from Compustat. The industry measures are based on U.S. data. We include
country and industry dummies, but these are not reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Share in value added
Private Credit * Small firms share
Private Credit * External financial dependence
Property rights * Intangibility

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-1.114***
(0.255)
0.356**
(0.167)
0.139***
(0.038)
0.008***
(0.003)

-1.108***
(0.255)
0.468***
(0.176)
0.092**
(0.040)

-1.089***
(0.258)
0.485**
(0.190)
0.143***
(0.039)

-0.955***
(0.253)
0.457**
(0.186)
0.121***
(0.037)

-1.155***
(0.265)
0.500***
(0.188)
0.141***
(0.039)

-0.013
(0.043)

-0.156*
(0.081)
0.071**
(0.028)

-0.012
(0.046)

Private Credit * Sales growth

0.774*
(0.425)

Per capita GDP * Small firms share
Human capital * Small firms share
Openness*Small Firm share

Observations
R-squared

0.000
(0.002)
1242
0.28

1242
0.28

32

1242
0.28

1207
0.30

1215
0.27

Table 5

Alternative measures of firm size distribution

Dependent variable is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC industry. Share in value added is the industry’s share in
total value added of the country. Private Credit is claims by financial institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in 1980. Small firms share (empl<x) is
the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than x employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1992.
External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on external finance, from Rajan and Zingales (1998). The industry measures are based
on U.S. data. We include country and industry dummies, but these are not reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.

Share in value added
Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<5)

(1)
-1.134***
(0.265)
2.807***
(0.911)

(2)
-1.139***
(0.266)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<10)

(3)
-1.095***
(0.253)

(4)
-1.076***
(0.251)

1.141***
(0.353)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<20)

0.445**
(0.173)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<100)

0.130*
(0.072)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<500)
Private Credit * External financial dependence

Observations
R-squared

(5)
-1.055***
(0.249)

0.154***
(0.040)

0.153***
(0.040)

0.144***
(0.039)

0.142***
(0.039)

0.045
(0.051)
0.141***
(0.038)

1170
0.28

1170
0.28

1242
0.28

1242
0.27

1242
0.27

33

Table 6

Alternative small firm data and controlling for the size of large firms

Dependent variable is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC industry. Share in value added is the industry’s share in
total value added of the country. Private Credit is claims by financial institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in 1980. Small firms share (empl<x) is
the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than x employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1997.
UK Small firms share is the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than 20 employees, and is calculated using firm-level data from Amadeus on all
U.K. limited liability firms with 10 or more employees for the year 1997 (we exclude industries with less than 20 firm-observations). Industry size in 1980 is the
log of the median number of employees across all U.S. listed firms in Compustat. External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on
external finance, from Rajan and Zingales (1998). The industry measures are based on U.S. data. We include country and industry dummies, but these are not
reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Share in value added
Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<20) in 1997

(1)
-1.146***
(0.273)
0.685***
(0.249)

(2)
-1.129***
(0.292)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<10) in 1997

0.157***
(0.041)

0.191***
(0.048)

1.696**
(0.827)
0.153***
(0.042)

1102
0.28

1005
0.29

1180
0.28

34

(5)
-1.120***
(0.268)

1.403***
(0.390)

Private Credit * Industry size in 1980

Observations
R-squared

(4)
-1.079***
(0.255)
0.603***
(0.198)

1.522***
(0.507)

Private Credit * UK Small firms share
Private Credit * External financial dependence

(3)
-1.055***
(0.259)

0.175***
(0.044)
0.020*
(0.012)

0.182***
(0.045)
0.019
(0.013)

1242
0.28

1170
0.28

Table 7

Alternative measures of financial development

Dependent variable is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC industry. Share in value added is the industry’s share in
total value added of the country. Private credit 1980-89 is the country’s private credit to GDP averaged over the period 1980-89. Liquid liabilities is liquid
liabilities to GDP in 1980. Market turnover is total value of trades to total value of shares in 1980. Accounting standards is an index of the quality of accounting
standards in 1990. Legal efficiency is the measure of the country’s efficiency of the legal system used by LLSV (1998), and is an average for the years 19801983. Law and order is an index of the law and order tradition in the country from LLSV (1998), and is an average for the years 1982-1995. Small firms share is
the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than 20 employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1992.
External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s dependence on external finance, from Rajan and Zingales (1998). The industry measures are based
on U.S. data. We include country and industry dummies, but these are not reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.

Share in value added
Private credit 1980-89 * Small firms share
Private credit 1980-89 * External financial dependence

(1)
-1.127***
(0.255)
0.444***
(0.161)
0.097***

Liquid liabilities * Small firms share

(2)
-1.043***
(0.251)

(3)
-1.020***
(0.257)

(4)
-0.794***
(0.195)

(5)
-0.827***
(0.210)

0.399**
(0.184)
0.085***
(0.032)

Liquid liabilities * External financial dependence
Market turnover * Small firms share

0.018
(0.234)
0.074**
(0.036)

Market turnover * External financial dependence
Legal efficiency * Small firms share

0.053***
(0.020)
0.009***
(0.003)

Legal efficiency * External financial dependence
Law and order * Small firms share

0.053***
(0.020)
0.007***
(0.002)

Law and order * External financial dependence
Accounting standards * Small firms share

0.363
(0.244)
0.158***
(0.034)

Accounting standards * External financial dependence

Observations
R-squared

(6)
-0.669***
(0.209)

1242
0.27

1242
0.27

35

1222
0.26

1174
0.31

1174
0.31

1067
0.35

Table 8

Alternative dependent variable: Growth over the period 1980-99

Dependent variable in columns (1) to (2) is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1999 by country and ISIC
industry. Dependent variable in columns (3) is average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1990 by country and ISIC
industry. Share in value added is the industry’s share in total value added of the country. Share in value added is the industry’s
share in total value added of the country. Private Credit is claims by financial institutions on the private sector divided by GDP in
1980. Small firms share (empl<x) is the industry’s share of employment by firms with less than x employees, and is calculated
using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1992. External financial dependence is a measure of the industry’s
dependence on external finance, from Rajan and Zingales (1998). The sample in column (3) is restricted to those observations that
take non-missing values for the average growth in real value added over the period 1980-1999 variable. The industry measures are
based on U.S. data. We include country and industry dummies, but these are not reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
(1)
(2)
Growth over 1980 to 1999
Share in value added
Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<20)

-0.330
(0.224)
0.249*
(0.141)

Private Credit * Small firms share (empl<10)
Private Credit * External financial dependence

Observations
R-squared

-0.334
(0.221)

(3)
Growth over 1980 to
1990
-1.293***
(0.306)
0.852***
(0.265)

0.067**
(0.032)

0.568**
(0.258)
0.070**
(0.032)

0.107**
(0.046)

827
0.33

805
0.33

827
0.31

36

Annex 1

Firm Size Distribution in the United States in 1997

This table shows SME shares in the United States by ISIC Revision 2 industries. Sx is the industry’s share of employment by firms
with less than x employees, and is calculated using data from the U.S. Census on all U.S. firms for the year 1997. SME shares are
expressed in percentages of total number of employees.
ISIC
311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
352
353
354
355
356
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384

385
390
3211
3411
3511
3513
3522
3825
3832
3841
3843
Average

Industry name
Food manufacturing
Beverage industries
Tobacco manufactures
Manufacture of textiles
Manufacture of wearing apparel, except footwear
Manufacture of leather and products of leather, leather substitutes
and fur, except footwear and wearing apparel
Manufacture of footwear, except vulcanized or molded rubber or
plastic footwear
Manufacture of wood and wood and cork products, except
furniture
Manufacture of furniture and fixtures, except primarily of metal
Manufacture of paper and paper products
Printing, publishing and allied industries
Manufacture of other chemical products
Petroleum refineries
Manufacture of miscellaneous products of petroleum and coal
Manufacture of rubber products
Manufacture of plastic products not elsewhere classified
Manufacture of pottery, china and earthenware
Manufacture of glass and glass products
Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel basic industries
Non-ferrous metal basic industries
Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and
equipment
Manufacture of machinery except electrical
Manufacture of electrical machinery apparatus, appliances and
supplies
Manufacture of transport equipment
Manufacture of professional and scientific, and measuring and
controlling equipment not elsewhere classified, and of
photographic and optical goods
Other Manufacturing Industries
Spinning, weaving and finishing textiles
Manufacture of pulp, paper and paperboard
Manufacture of basic industrial chemicals except fertilizers
Manufacture of synthetic resins, plastic materials and man-made
fibers except glass
Manufacture of drugs and medicines
Manufacture of office, computing and accounting machinery
Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment
and apparatus
Ship building and repairing
Manufacture of motor vehicles

37

S5
0.53
0.80

S10
1.61
2.22

0.44
1.53

1.23
4.40

S20
3.68
4.70
0.55
2.95
10.04

S100
13.01
16.38
3.03
13.29
34.42

S500
27.01
33.29
9.02
30.57
57.26

10.17

31.95

57.93

0.52

1.18

2.18

10.29

31.54

3.80
1.39

9.90
3.92

19.50
8.62

43.78
28.53

3.24
0.89
0.04

8.27
2.63
0.09

0.32
0.63
2.34

1.07
2.03
5.31

15.08
5.93
0.21
9.01
2.90
5.44
9.42

34.47
18.08
1.60
27.90
12.65
25.23
26.95

0.16
0.42

0.46
1.40

1.20
3.77

7.73
17.12

63.82
50.69
32.16
50.66
33.36
6.72
47.10
26.91
50.88
50.41
24.21
58.54
23.18
36.82

1.10
1.98

3.69
5.73

9.46
12.26

34.59
33.37

57.75
51.05

0.45
0.46

1.31
1.32

3.07
3.05

12.78
12.55

28.43
28.25

0.44
0.78
0.61

1.12
2.17
1.46

2.29
4.73
2.85

7.56
15.34
10.00

0.38

0.87

1.83

7.23

15.98
28.50
26.75
8.74
15.46

0.19
0.33
0.47

0.43
0.91
1.29

1.11
2.13
2.81

5.86
8.93
9.42

12.90
20.94
20.31

0.51
2.12
0.31
0.94

1.34
4.63
0.87
2.51

3.00
8.01
1.91
5.43

11.50
19.44
6.97
17.56

27.45
36.19
17.12
33.28

