                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ENFORCEMENT, PRIVATE POLITICAL PRESSURE
                          AND THE GATT/WTO ESCAPE CLAUSE

                                            Kyle Bagwell
                                           Robert W. Staiger

                                         Working Paper 10987
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10987


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




For helpful comments, we thank participants at The University of Chicago Conference on International
Dispute Resolution. We thank the NSF (SES-0214021) for providing funding. All errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Enforcement, Private Political Pressure and the GATT/WTO Escape Clause
Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 10987
December 2004
JEL No. F1

                                            ABSTRACT

We consider the design and implementation of international trade agreements when: (i) negotiations
are undertaken and commitments made in the presence of uncertainty about future political
pressures; (ii) governments possess private information about political pressures at the time that the
agreement is actually implemented; and (iii) negotiated commitments can be implemented only if
they are self-enforcing. We thus consider the design of self-enforcing trade agreements among
governments that acquire private information over time. In this context, we provide equilibrium
interpretations of GATT/WTO negotiations regarding upper bounds on applied tariffs and
GATT/WTO escape clauses. We find that governments achieve greater welfare when they negotiate
the optimal upper bound on tariffs rather than precise tariff levels; furthermore, when governments
negotiate the optimal upper bound on tariffs, the observed applied tariffs often fall strictly below the
bound. Our analysis also provides a novel interpretation of a feature of the WTO Safeguard
Agreement, under which escape clause actions cannot be re-imposed in the same industry for a time
period equal to the duration of the most recent escape clause action. We find that a dynamic usage
constraint of this kind can raise the expected welfare of negotiating governments.

Kyle Bagwell
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kwb8@columbia.edu

Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
The University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
rstaiger@wisc.edu
                                           I. Introduction
        Efforts to implement international agreements typically take place in the presence of three
broad features. First, negotiations are undertaken and commitments made in the presence of
substantial uncertainty over the state of the world that will exist at the time the agreement is actually
implemented. Second, at the time of implementation, governments are privately informed about
specific features of the realized state of the world as these features apply to them. And third,
negotiated commitments will be implemented successfully only if they are self-enforcing.


        These three features are readily apparent in the context of international market access
agreements negotiated within the GATT/WTO. For example, the market access commitments
negotiated in the most recently completed (Uruguay) round of GATT/WTO negotiations were agreed
to in 1994, but many of these commitments were not scheduled to be fully implemented until 10
years later: the elimination of the system of textile quotas known as the Multi-Fiber Agreement
(MFA) is a prominent and instructive example. It seems fair to say that the state of the world that
exists now that these commitments are due to be implemented was unknown at the time that
governments originally signed on to these commitments. There also seem to be many examples
(e.g., the growing political debate in the United States over the appropriate response to the cost
inflicted on U.S. textile workers of the scheduled elimination of the MFA at the end of 2004) that
confirm the observation that it is difficult for affected trading partners (e.g., China) to know with
precision the extent of political pressure that another government actually faces at the time of
implementation of its market access commitments. And finally, it seems widely acknowledged that
a government can be expected to abide by commitments it negotiates within the GATT/WTO only
if and for as long as it sees doing so to be in its self interest (i.e., GATT/WTO commitments are not
meaningful unless they are self-enforcing).


        In this paper, we suggest that these three broad features can help account for a number of
broad characteristics of the design of the GATT/WTO and of the international commitments that are
negotiated within the bargaining forum shaped by its rules. We emphasize two such characteristics
that are central to the GATT/WTO. First, rather than negotiating precise tariff levels, the tariff


                                                   1
bindings with which governments anchor their negotiated market access commitments in the
GATT/WTO define upper bounds above which a government agrees not to set its applied tariffs, and
in practice the negotiated tariff bindings do not always appear to constrain the applied tariffs that
governments select (i.e., governments sometimes set their applied tariffs at levels that are strictly
below their associated GATT/WTO bindings). And second, rather than negotiating rigid tariff
bindings to which governments agree to abide in all circumstances, the tariff bindings to which
governments agree in GATT/WTO negotiations carry with them a variety of escape clauses that can
be triggered under certain circumstances. As we demonstrate, these broad characteristics – which
reflect choices made by the GATT/WTO member governments concerning both the design of their
bargaining forum and the negotiating outcomes within this forum – follow naturally in an
environment that exhibits the three features described above.


       We undertake our analysis within a simple partial equilibrium two-country two-good trade
model in which governments face political pressures from their import-competing producers and
make choices over the levels of their import tariffs. Our formal model builds from Bagwell and
Staiger (2001), but we assume here that the degree of political pressure faced by each government
is a random variable that is determined (iid) each period according to a commonly known
distribution function, and that each government privately observes the realization of its own political
pressure in each period. We assume further for simplicity that the two governments can undertake
negotiations only once, that they undertake these negotiations under a “veil of ignorance” (i.e., before
observing present or future realizations of political pressure), and that they then make their tariff
choices simultaneously in each subsequent period after privately observing their realized political
pressure for the period and in light of the commitments they have negotiated.


       We begin by considering negotiations over a rigid tariff binding that can be exogenously
enforced. This tariff binding could either imply a strong commitment, or a weak commitment.
Under a strong commitment, the negotiated tariff binding specifies the precise level at which a
government must set its (applied) tariff. Under a weak commitment, the negotiated tariff binding
specifies the maximal level at which a government may set its (applied) tariff. We characterize


                                                   2
negotiations over both, and establish that: (i) governments prefer negotiating commitments that take
the form of weak bindings over strong bindings; (ii) when governments negotiate commitments that
take the form of weak bindings, they choose to adopt tariff bindings which are higher than those they
would choose if their negotiated commitments instead took the form of strong bindings; and (iii)
when governments negotiate commitments that take the form of weak bindings, they choose to adopt
tariff bindings which imply that governments with low realizations of political pressure will set their
applied tariffs strictly below the bound level.


        We next consider the enforcement of rigid tariff bindings, focusing on the case of weak
bindings. We show that, when negotiated commitments are constrained to be self-enforcing: (i) the
self-enforcement constraint does not bind provided that the rate at which governments discount the
future is below a critical level; (ii) for discount rates just above this critical level, the negotiated tariff
bindings must be higher – and the applied tariffs must therefore fall below the bound level with
greater frequency – if the commitments are to remain self-enforcing; and (iii) there can be a critical
discount rate above which governments are incapable of sustaining any commitments in a self-
enforcing agreement, and are therefore destined to remain in the (one-shot) Nash tariff equilibrium.


        Focusing on the high-discount-rate case, we then consider the value of introducing an escape
clause in some form, as a way to enhance the ability of governments to benefit from self-enforcing
tariff commitments and to expand the range of discount rates over which self-enforcing agreements
are possible. We model an escape clause as allowing governments, in effect, to negotiate two
bindings, one (lower) tariff to apply during “normal” times, and the other (higher) tariff to apply
during “exceptional” times. Our first result here is negative: when bindings are weak, tariff
commitments with an escape clause can offer no improvement over tariff commitments without an
escape clause (i.e., the negotiation of a single rigid tariff). Intuitively, the problem is that each
government’s private information over its realized political pressure will allow it to always claim
sufficient pressure to exercise the higher escape clause binding, which it will surely do as it is then
permitted to set its applied tariff at or below the escape clause binding, and so in effect there will
only be one binding (the escape clause binding).


                                                      3
       Our negative result is instructive: what is needed to make an escape clause potentially
valuable to governments in this private-information setting is a cost associated with its use, so that
exercising the escape clause might be made incentive compatible. When bindings are weak, the
required cost is absent, and so an escape clause is worthless to governments. We proceed to consider
several ways in which a cost associated with the use of an escape clause might be introduced, and
ask whether an escape clause in this form could then be useful to governments.


       A first approach is to insist that the escape clause binding is a strong commitment. The cost
associated with the use of the escape clause is then the cost of being held to an applied tariff at the
level of the escape clause binding. Evidently, this will be viewed as costly by a government in the
event that the escape clause binding lies above that government’s best-response tariff: this event in
turn occurs for governments that experience relatively low realizations of political pressure. We
show that this cost allows an incentive compatible escape clause to be designed, and that there exist
escape clauses of this form that might enhance the value of government commitments. Of course,
as we have observed, GATT/WTO commitments do not take this strong form. One interpretation
of our result is then that introducing strong bindings into the GATT/WTO escape clause could
enhance its value to governments. Appealing to the literature on trade agreements as devices to help
governments make commitments to their own private sectors, we suggest as well that it may also be
possible to offer an alternative interpretation of this result and of the cost associated with strong
bindings that underlies it. Under this alternative interpretation, the escape clause binding is weak
but a government operates in an environment of enhanced policy discretion whenever it invokes the
escape clause. This policy discretion, in turn, can lead to tariff choices for the government that,
while optimal ex-post, are sub-optimally protective ex-ante. Arguing in these broad terms, we
suggest that the costs of government discretion may provide a way that incentive compatibility
problems that would otherwise plague an escape clause with weak bindings might be mitigated.


       A second approach to introduce a cost for invoking the escape clause is to maintain weak
bindings but insist that a side-payment is made to the trading partner when a government uses the
escape clause. We show that this too can allow an incentive compatible escape clause to be


                                                  4
designed, and that there exist escape clauses of this form that enhance the value of government
commitments. Again we suggest two interpretations of our result. The first interpretation is literal:
requiring that a government make cash payments to its trading partners when it invokes an escape
clause can enhance the value of the escape clause to governments by addressing the incentive
compatibility problems that would otherwise arise. As cash payments between governments have
never been required within the GATT/WTO, this first interpretation indicates a possible direction
for improvement of the design of the GATT/WTO escape clause. In this regard, we observe that the
“quota rents” associated with Voluntary Export Restraints (VERs) are a form of cash payments made
from the importing country to the exporting country, and so our result lends some support to GATT’s
permissive stance regarding VERs and indicates some discord with the proscription of VERs
introduced by the WTO. The second interpretation is more suggestive: we observe that it may be
possible to interpret the compensation/retaliation provisions of the GATT/WTO escape clause as
serving a similar purpose to the side-payments in our formal model, and thereby possible to interpret
these provisions as critical for ensuring the incentive-compatible use of escape clause actions. We
also discuss and interpret distinctions between the GATT and WTO-era escape clause rules from this
perspective.


       A third approach to introducing a cost to invoking the escape clause is to impose a dynamic
use constraint on governments. We consider a particularly simple form: if a government uses the
escape clause in this period, then it must wait a period before it can use the escape clause again. We
demonstrate that this sort of constraint can work to address the incentive compatibility problem, and
we show that there exist escape clauses of this form that enhance the value of government
commitments. We suggest that this may be particularly relevant for the WTO safeguard provisions,
which introduce a dynamic use constraint of this nature.


       There are several strands of literature that relate to this paper. In the legal literature, Sykes
(1991) is closest to our paper, and emphasizes many of the same themes that we emphasize here.
In the economics literature, earlier papers by Bagwell and Staiger (1990, 2003), Feenstra and Lewis
(1991), Rosendorff and Milner (2001) and Herzing (2004) are concerned specifically with the issue


                                                  5
of escape clauses in international agreements. Recent work by Martin and Vergote (2004) also
explores some related themes in the context of anti-dumping policies. Also in the economics
literature, the approach to analyzing collusion in the presence of private information developed in
Athey and Bagwell (2001) and Athey, Bagwell and Sanchirico (2004) is methodologically related.
We discuss the relationship of our results to these papers at later points in the paper.


           The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the basic model and
derives the incentive compatibility conditions in a static setting. Section III derives the optimal rigid
tariff bindings when bindings are strong and when bindings are weak. Section IV introduces the
repeated game to consider issues of enforcement. Section V considers the value of an escape clause
in various forms. Section VI concludes. An Appendix supplies proofs not included elsewhere.


                                                  II. The Model
II.1 The Basic Setup
           We begin by describing a simple two-country partial equilibrium world of trade in the
presence of political considerations, analogous to that considered in Bagwell and Staiger (2001).
In this world, the domestic (no *) country exports good y to the foreign (*) country in exchange for
imports of good x from the foreign country.1 With Px and Py denoting respectively the price of good
x and good y in the domestic country market, domestic country demands for goods x and y are given
by D(Px)1Px and D(Py)1Py respectively, while domestic country supplies of goods x and y are
given by Qx(Px)Px/2 and Qy(Py)Py respectively, with associated profit (producer surplus)
                                                                                 
functions πx(Px)(Px)2/4 and πy(Py)(Py)2/2 . And with Px and Py denoting respectively the price
of good x and good y in the foreign country market, the analogous expressions for foreign demands,
                                                                                                             
supplies and profit (producer surplus) functions are D (Px )1Px , D (Py )1Py , Qx (Px )Px ,
                                                  
Qy (Py )Py /2 , πx (Px )(Px )2/2 and πy (Py )(Py )2/4 . Domestic country imports of x and exports
of y are then given by Mx(Px)/D(Px)Qx(Px)13Px/2 and Ey(Py)/Qy(Py)Dy(Py)2Py1 ,
respectively.      Similarly, foreign country imports of y and exports of x are then given by


           1
           As usual, the partial equilibrium model can be re-interpreted as a general equilibrium model in which there
is an additional traded numeraire good in the background that consumers value in a quasi-linear fashion.

                                                          6
                                                                                
My (Py )/D (Py )Qy(Py )13Py /2 and Ex (Px )/Qx (Px )Dx (Px )2Px 1 , respectively.


       The government of each country has a single policy instrument, namely, a specific tariff ( τ
for the domestic government and τ for the foreign government) that it can impose on its imports.
            w
Letting Px be the price received by foreign exporters of x, we then have the following price
                                                                           w                  w               w
expressions that must hold for any non-prohibitive τ : PxPx τ and Px Px . Similarly, letting Py
be the price received by domestic country exporters of y, we then the following price expressions that
                                                   
must hold for any non-prohibitive τ : Py Py τ and PyPy . We refer to Px and Py as the
                                                           w                   w                   w       w


“world” (exporter) prices of x and y, respectively. Using these relationships, the market clearing
world prices for x and y are determined by the respective market clearing conditions
                                                                                                   w
Mx(Px)Ex (Px ) and My (Py )Ey(Py) , yielding the market clearing prices Px (τ)[43τ]/7 ,
                                                       
P̂ x(τ)[44τ]/7 , Py (τ)[43τ]/7 and P̂ y(τ)[44τ]/7 for τ<1/6 and τ<1/6 . Trade in good
                               w


x (good y) is prohibited when τ$1/6 ( τ$1/6 ).


       Finally, we define the government objectives. We follow Baldwin (1987) and assume that
each government seeks to maximize a weighted sum of producer surplus, consumer surplus and tariff
revenue in its economy, with a relatively greater weight on import-competing producer surplus
reflecting political economy influences.2 Specifically, let γ0[1,7/4] denote the weight placed by the
domestic government on its import-competing producer surplus. Then the welfare experienced by
the domestic government on its import and export goods is defined as follows:

                 1
                                                           w
          Wx/ D(Px)dPx  γπx(P̂ x)  [P̂ xPx ]Mx(P̂ x) , and
             m
                P̂ x


                 1
          Wy/ D(Py)dPy  πy(P̂ y) .
             m
                P̂ y


The domestic government welfare function is then the sum of these two terms. Similarly, let



       2
          Grossman and Helpman (1994) provide micro-foundations to this interpretation.

                                                               7
γ0[1,7/4] denote the weight placed by the foreign government on its import-competing producer
surplus. Then the welfare experienced by the foreign government on its import and export goods
is defined as:

                1
                                                                     
                    D (Py )dPy  γπy (P̂ y)  [P̂ yPy ]My (P̂ y) , and
                                                                w
        Wy /
               m
                 
               P̂ y


                1
                                            
        Wx / D (Px )dPx  πx (P̂ x) .
            m
                 
               P̂ x

The foreign government welfare function is then the sum of these two terms.


                                                                                
       Notice that the domestic tariff choice only effects Wx and Wx , while the foreign tariff choice
                      
only effects Wy and Wy . In light of this, we may characterize Nash and efficient choices of τ with
                                    
reference only to Wx and Wx , and similarly we may characterize Nash and efficient choices of τ
                               
with reference only to Wy and Wy . In addition, owing to the symmetry across goods x and y in our
model, we may henceforth focus our characterizations on τ . Finally, our focus on political economy
pressures in import-competing sectors only implies that only the domestic political economy
parameter γ enters into the determination of Nash and efficient choices for τ . For future reference,
                                                                    
we record the explicit expressions for Wx and Wx in terms of τ for given domestic political
economy weight γ :

                           98γ   [8γ5]     2[2γ17] 2
(1)     Wx(τ;γ)                        τ          τ and
                            98      49          49

                         25   9τ2   3τ
(2)     Wx (τ)                       .
                          98   49    49

II.2 The Nash Tariff Choices and Efficient Tariff Choices
       We next derive the Nash and efficient tariff choices. Using (1), the first-order necessary
condition for the optimal unilateral choice of τ for the domestic government yields




                                                            8
                   8γ5
(3)     τN(γ)            .
                 4[172γ]

The second order condition is satisfied over the entire parameter range γ0[1,7/4] , and we note as
well that τN is non-prohibitive over the parameter range γ0[1,7/4) , reaching the prohibitive level
of 1/6 when γ7/4 . From (3), it may be confirmed that the domestic Nash tariff takes on a value of
1/20 when γ1 , reflecting the strictly positive optimal tariff of the national-income maximizing
domestic government in this case, and that the domestic Nash tariff is increasing monotonically in
γ , reflecting the desire for a higher tariff that is associated with increased weight placed on domestic
import-competing producer surplus by the domestic government. Using (2), it may also be
                    
confirmed that Wx is strictly decreasing in ττN(γ) over γ0[1,7/4) , indicating that the foreign
government is strictly hurt by a further increase in the domestic tariff provided there is any export
volume from the foreign country (i.e., provided τ<1/6 ).


       The internationally efficient domestic tariff choice in our partial equilibrium setting is the
                                                         
domestic tariff that maximizes the sum of Wx(τ;γ)Wx (τ) . Using (1) and (2), we have that


                             98γ [8γ5] 2[2γ17] 2 2518(τ)26τ
(4)     Wx(τ;γ)Wx (τ)                 τ       (τ)            .
                               98    49      49          98

Using (4), the first-order necessary condition for the efficient choice of τ yields

                 4[γ1]
(5)     τE(γ)          .
                 254γ

Again the second order condition is satisfied over the entire parameter range γ0[1,7/4] . Comparing
(3) and (5), we find that τN>τE for γ0[1,7/4) , and we observe that τNτE for γ7/4 . That is, the
Nash tariff is inefficiently high as long as political economy forces do not drive the Nash tariff to a
prohibitive level (in which case the Nash tariff is efficient). Figure 1 depicts the Nash and efficient
domestic tariff levels over the entire parameter range γ0[1,7/4] . To focus our attention on political
economy pressures that are consistent with strictly positive trade volumes, we henceforth restrict our


                                                   9
parameter range to γ0[γ,γ̄] , where γ1 and γ̄0(γ,7/4) .




II.3 Incentive Compatibility
        We now assume that the political economy parameters γ and γ are each drawn
independently from a common distribution with cumulative distribution function H(γ) and density
h(γ)/H (γ) defined over the support γ0[γ,γ̄] . We assume that each government privately observes
its own political realization but not that of the other government.


        In this private-information setting, an incentive compatibility problem may arise. For
example, governments may wish to negotiate tariff bindings in such a way as to allow that a
government’s applied tariff may vary with its realized level of political pressure. Efficiency may be
improved, for example, when a government applies a higher tariff when it experiences greater
political pressure. The potential incentive compatibility problem is that a government might be
tempted to apply a higher tariff, even when the political pressure that it actually experiences is low.
Here we define and characterize the incentive constraints that rule out this kind of opportunistic
behavior. For now, we continue to focus on a static model. In Section IV, we consider the
enforcement of trade agreements and explain how the findings presented here extend to the repeated
game context.


        To this end, we define

                 9 5  34             4 8   4
        G(τ)/      τ τ2; and f(τ)/  τ τ2,
                98 49 49            49 49 49

and observe that f(τ)>0 and f (τ)>0 for τ0[0,1/6] . Using (1), we may then write Wx(τ;γ) in the
equivalent form Wx(τ;γ)G(τ)γf(τ) . Anticipating the possibility that an agreement might result in
an applied tariff that is a function of political pressure, we let the applied tariff function be denoted
by τ(γ) . Given this tariff function, we may define the domestic government welfare (in good x) that
is enjoyed when the realized political pressure is γ and the domestic government “announces” that


                                                   10
it faces γ̂ (i.e., applies τ(γ̂) ):


(6)        W̃ x(γ̂,γ)/G(τ(γ̂))γf(τ(γ̂)) .


The tariff function is incentive compatible if and only if, for all γ0[γ,γ̄] and γ̂0[γ,γ̄] , the following
is true:


(7)        W̃ x(γ,γ) $ W̃ x(γ̂,γ) .


           Incentive compatibility of the tariff function τ(γ) requires that the domestic government can’t
do better than announcing its realized political pressure truthfully. Using (6) this in turn requires that


           W̃ x(γ,γ) $ W̃ x(γ̂,γ)  W̃ x(γ̂,γ̂)  (γγ̂)f(τ(γ̂)) , and also
           W̃ x(γ̂,γ̂) $ W̃ x(γ,γ̂)  W̃ x(γ,γ)  (γ̂γ)f(τ(γ)) .


Rearranging yields


(8)        (γγ̂)f(τ(γ)) $ W̃ x(γ,γ)W̃ x(γ̂,γ̂) $ (γγ̂)f(τ(γ̂)) .


According to (8), a first requirement for incentive compatibility is that f(τ(γ)) is non-decreasing in γ
which, with f (τ)>0 as noted above, implies in turn that τ(γ) must be non-decreasing in γ .
Moreover, with τ(γ) monotonic, we then have that f is differentiable almost everywhere in γ , and
therefore that dW̃ x(γ,γ)/dγ is well defined.3 A second requirement for incentive compatibility is then
that dW̃ x(γ,γ)/dγf(τ(γ)) : otherwise, by (6) the domestic government could benefit by
misrepresenting its true political pressure. These two requirements for incentive compatibility are
also sufficient (see, for example, Mas-Colell, Whinston and Green (1995)), and so we may state:




           3
         For simplicity, we assume further that the applied tariff schedule τ(γ) is continuously differentiable, except
perhaps at a finite number of points. We are thus able to include schedules with jumps.

                                                         11
Lemma 1 (IC): A tariff function τ(γ) is incentive compatible iff
         (i) τ(γ) is non-decreasing in γ , and
         (ii) dW̃ x(γ,γ)/dγf(τ(γ)) .




                                               III. Rigid Tariffs
         In this section we consider the possibility that governments might negotiate a single tariff
binding that is used (in each sector) regardless of the realized political pressure that each government
faces. By focusing on a rigid tariff binding, τR , we thus exclude for now the possibility that the
governments might allow for safeguard exceptions, whereby a government is subjected to a higher
binding under specific circumstances. We suppose that governments negotiate this tariff binding
once and that the negotiation occurs before each observes its realized political pressure. As above,
we continue to focus on a static model and defer discussion of the enforcement of trade agreements
until Section IV.


         We consider two forms that the tariff binding might take. Under a strong binding, the tariff
binding defines the precise tariff that governments must apply under the agreement. Under a weak
binding, the tariff binding defines the maximum tariff that governments can apply. An incentive
compatibility problem clearly does not arise when bindings are strong, since the particular tariff that
is applied does not depend upon the political pressure that a government experiences. Likewise,
when bindings are weak, governments are sure to announce their types truthfully: only a government
with sufficiently low political pressure could gain from applying a tariff below the binding, and such
a government can apply its optimal tariff, τN(γ)<τR , by being honest. In each case, we look for the
tariff binding that maximizes the ex-ante welfare of the two governments, and therefore the tariff
                                                                      
binding that induces applied tariffs that maximize E[WxWx ] where E denotes here the expectation
operator and where expectations are taken over the domestic political pressure γ .4



         4                                                                
           There is an equivalent choice of τR which maximizes E[WyWy ] with the expectations taken over the foreign
political pressure γ . However, since the ex-ante symmetry of our setup ensures that the resulting choices of τR and
τR will be the same, we continue to characterize solutions in terms of the x-sector variables.

                                                         12
III.1 Strong Bindings
       Under strong bindings, τR defines the precise tariff the governments must apply. To
characterize the optimal τR in this case, we first define γE(τR) implicitly by τE(γ)τR . In words,
γE(τR) represents the marginal political realization, below which a government sets its tariff above
the efficient level, and above which a government is constrained by the binding τR to set a tariff
below the efficient level. Using (5), we calculate that

                        50τR8
        γE(τR)                   .
                        8[1τR]
                    
Observe that γE (τR)>0 . We next define the expected domestic political pressure in any period:

               γ̄
        Eγ/ γdH(γ) .
           m
               γ

                                                                          
With τR independent of γ , we may now observe from (4) that [WxWx ] is linear in γ . Hence, we
have


                               98Eγ [8Eγ5] R 2[2Eγ17] R 2 2518(τR)26τR
(9)     E[WxWx ]                          τ          (τ )               ,
                                  98     49         49             98

which is identical to (4) with γ replaced by Eγ .


       The first order condition associated with (9) reduces to


(10)    Eγ  γE(τR)  0 .


In words, (10) indicates that the strong binding should be set at the level which is efficient for the
                                                         R
expected realization of political pressure. Letting τs denote the rigid tariff with strong bindings that
                            
maximizes E[WxWx ] , we then have


         R     4[Eγ1]
(11)    τs            ,
               254Eγ

                                                    13
which is by (5) simply τE(Eγ) .


       We henceforth impose


(A1)    Eγ>5/4 .


                                                                      R
Comparing (11) to (3), it may be checked that (A1) ensures that τs >τN(γ) . At later points in the
paper we will appeal to the uniform distribution to characterize specific results. We observe here
that (A1) is satisfied when γ is uniformly distributed over the support [γ,γ̄] for γ̄0[3/2,7/4) .


III.2 Weak Bindings
       Under weak bindings, τR defines the maximum tariff that governments must apply. Thus,
when τR is a weak binding, the applied tariff τ will depend on the realization of political pressure
according to


        τmin{τN(γ),τR} .


To characterize the optimal τR in this case, we begin by defining γN(τR) implicitly by τN(γ)τR . In
words, γN(τR) represents the marginal political realization, below which a government is
unconstrained by the binding τR and sets an applied tariff equal to τN(γ) , and above which a
government is constrained by the binding τR and applies its tariff at this level. Using (3), we
calculate that

                       68τR5
        γN(τR)                  .
                       8[1τR]
                   
Observe that γN (τR)>0 , γN(τR)>1γ if and only if τR>τN(γ)1/20 , and γN(τR)<γ̄ if and only if
τR<τN(γ̄)[8γ̄5]/[4(172γ̄)] .


       We are now prepared to define expected welfare as a function of a weak binding, τR . Our


                                                  14
definition reflects the fact that the applied tariff is τN(γ) when γ#γN(τR) , while the applied tariff is
equal to the binding, τR , when γ$γN(τR) . We thus represent expected welfare under weak bindings
as

                                  γN(τR)                                             γ̄
                                                                                                    
(12)    E[WxWx |τR]                      [Wx(τ N
                                                     (γ);γ)Wx (τN(γ))]dH(γ)             [Wx(τR;γ)Wx (τR)]dH(γ)
                                      m                                             m
                                      γ                                            γN(τR)


where we use notation that conditions on τR to denote that expected welfare is calculated for the case
of a weak binding at τR .


        Let us now define the expected political pressure conditional on being constrained by the
binding τR . Denoting this conditional expectation by E(γ|τR) , we have that

                         γ̄
                              γdH(γ)
                         m
                     γN(τR)
(13)    E(γ|τR)                             .
                     1H(γN(τR))

Using (12) and (13), we may now write the effect of a small increase in τR on expected welfare when
bindings are weak:

                     
         ME[WxWx |τR]                    [1H(γN(τR))][8(1τR)]
(14)                                                            {E(γ|τR)  γE(τR)} .
               MτR                                 49

        As (14) indicates, the impact of a small increase in τR when bindings are weak is only felt
by the part of the distribution of political pressure to the right of (above) γN(τR) . At an interior
                                                             
solution for the τR that maximizes E[WxWx |τR] , we must by (14) have


(15)    E(γ|τR)  γE(τR)  0 .


In words, (15) indicates that the weak binding should be set at the level which is efficient for the
expected realization of political pressure conditional on being constrained by the binding τR .




                                                                 15
          We prove in the Appendix that an interior solution exists to the optimal weak binding
                                              R
problem. Denoting this solution by τw (which we assume for simplicity is unique), we may use the
                                                                    R   R
first order conditions (10) and (15) to conclude that τw>τs .5 That is, if governments negotiate a rigid
tariff binding, they will set the binding higher if it is a weak binding than if it is a strong binding.
                                                           R    R
In fact, it is direct to establish that τN(γ̄)>τE(γ̄)>τw>τs >τN(γ)>τE(γ)0 . Figure 2 illustrates the position
      R        R
of τw and τs and these implied rankings. A second implication is that, when tariff bindings are
weak, they will be set at a level which implies that a range of low-political-pressure realizations (i.e.,
                R
for γ0[γ,γN(τw)) will cause governments to set their applied tariffs strictly below the bound level (see
Figure 2). And a third implication is that governments prefer to negotiate weak bindings. To see
                     R                                                                                             R
this, note that τw gives higher expected welfare than would occur under weak bindings if τs were
                             R                                                                                    R
instead selected. But τs under weak bindings would deliver higher expected welfare than τs under
                                                       R                                        R
strong bindings (the same welfare for γ$γN(τs ) , and higher welfare for γ<γN(τs ) – see Figure 2). We
summarize with


Proposition 1: Governments prefer negotiating commitments that take the form of weak bindings
over strong bindings. When governments negotiate commitments that take the form of weak
bindings, they choose to adopt tariff bindings which: (i) are higher than those they would choose if
their negotiated commitments instead took the form of strong bindings; and (ii) imply that
governments with low realizations of political pressure will set their applied tariffs strictly below the
bound level.


          It is instructive at this point to consider the case of the uniform distribution in more detail.
Recall that (A1) is satisfied when γ is uniformly distributed over the support [γ,γ̄] for γ̄0[3/2,7/4) .
We also have

                    1γ̄
          Eγ            ,
                     2
and


          5                                                                      R
           This conclusion follows since (i) γE(τR) is strictly increasing, (ii) τw is interior and thus exceeds τN(γ) , and
(iii) E(γ|τ )>Eγ for all τR>τN(γ) . Part (iii) is verified in the Appendix using (Z1) and (Z2).
          R



                                                               16
                    γ̄γN(τR)
        E(γ|τR)              .
                        2

Using these expressions and (10), (15) and the expressions for γE(τR) and γN(τR) , it follows that
                                                                           R       R
under the uniform distribution we have unique interior solutions for τs and τw given by


         R     2[γ̄1]        R   γ̄11/8
        τs            ; and τw          .
               232γ̄               4γ̄

                                                           R   R
It is now direct to confirm that the ranking τN(γ̄)>τE(γ̄)>τw>τs >τN(γ)>τE(γ)0 holds in the case of the
uniform distribution, and the statements of Proposition 1 can be readily confirmed as well.


                                          IV. Enforcement
        Thus far, we have focused on a static model and ignored issues of enforcement. No external
enforcement mechanism exists for the GATT/WTO; instead, trade agreements must be self-
enforcing. In this section, we thus adopt a repeated game approach. We begin by describing the
repeated game and the solution concept. Next, restricting our focus to weak bindings, we show that
                                                                   R
the applied tariffs induced by the optimal rigid tariff binding, τw , can be sustained in a self-enforcing
agreement provided governments are sufficiently patient. Finally, we consider what can be done in
the presence of governments that lack the required level of patience.


IV.1 The Repeated Game
        The repeated game is informally defined as follows. In each period, each government
privately observes its political economy parameter, where these draws are iid across governments
and over time. The governments then simultaneously apply tariffs. The tariff selections are
publically observed, and then the governments proceed to the next period. This process continues
over an infinite number of periods, t1,...,4 .


        As our solution concept, we use perfect public equilibria (Fudenberg, Levine and Maskin,
1994). We thus allow that a government’s applied tariff strategy in any period t can depend upon


                                                   17
the government’s current political economy parameter and the public history of past applied tariff
selections. A government’s period-t strategy does not depend upon its private information about its
own past political economy parameters or the tariff strategies that it used in previous periods.
Throughout the paper, we focus further on equilibria in which governments use symmetric
strategies.6 Henceforth, we refer to symmetric perfect public equilibria simply as equilibria. In this
section and most of the next section, we restrict attention to stationary equilibria. In a stationary
equilibrium, along the equilibrium path, in every period a single function τ(γ) determines the tariff
that is applied by a government with political economy parameter γ .


         In our repeated game, an equilibrium must be robust against two types of deviations. A first
kind of deviation is called an on-schedule deviation.7 Such a deviation occurs when a government
observes that its current political economy parameter is γ and applies instead the equilibrium tariff
that is called for when γ is observed. Consider a stationary equilibrium. A government then
undertakes an on-schedule deviation if it observes γ and yet applies the tariff τ(γ) , where τ(γ)
differs from τ(γ) . Such a deviation is not observable, as a deviation, to the other government, which
interprets the selection τ(γ) as indicating that γ was observed. As a consequence, when a
government observes that its current parameter is γ and considers an on-schedule deviation, the
government simply compares the current-period welfare from selecting τ(γ) with that from selecting
τ(γ) . This is the same comparison that is defined in Section II.3 with respect to the incentive
compatibility of an applied tariff schedule in the static game. Thus, for stationary equilibria of the
repeated game, the applied tariff schedule τ(γ) does not invite an on-schedule deviation if and only
if the schedule is incentive compatible in the static game.8



         6
        Symmetric strategies do not depend upon governments’ “names” and are thus interchangeable across
governments. In other words, when strategies are symmetric, the current-period tariff strategies are permuted across
governments when the governments’ public histories of past tariff selections are permuted.
         7
          For further discussion, see Athey, Bagwell and Sanchirico (2004).
         8
          Of course, in non-stationary equilibria, on-schedule deviations must also be unattractive. In this case, though,
the equilibrium may call for a different path of future play depending upon whether τ(γ) or τ(γ) is selected in the
current period. As discussed in Section IV.4, the described relationship between on-schedule deviations in the repeated
game and incentive compatibility in the static game is no longer valid.

                                                           18
         A second kind of deviation is called an off-schedule deviation. A government undertakes an
off-schedule deviation when it applies a tariff that is not called for in equilibrium, for any political
economy parameter γ that the government might possibly have observed.                                In a stationary
equilibrium, a government undertakes an off-schedule deviation if the government applies a tariff τ
where τ differs from τ(γ) for all γ0[γ,γ̄] . An off-schedule deviation is thus observable, as a
deviation, to both governments. Once an off-schedule deviation is observed, play has moved off the
equilibrium path, and the governments may then abandon cooperation and enter a punishment phase.
For simplicity, we assume that following an off-schedule deviation governments revert to Nash play
and select their Nash tariffs in all future periods.9 The off-schedule incentive constraint is thus
analogous to a participation constraint.


         Using these concepts, we may preview the analysis that follows.                           We assume that
governments negotiate a bindings system at date zero, before learning their respective first-period
political economy parameters. The bindings system then constrains applied tariffs, and we
characterize the induced applied tariffs that correspond to equilibrium behavior. In the present
section, we consider the enforcement of the tariffs that are applied under the optimal rigid tariff
binding when bindings are weak. As noted in the previous section, the on-schedule incentive
compatibility constraint for applied tariffs is trivially satisfied. The key issue is then whether
governments are sufficiently patient to resist off-schedule deviations and thereby enforce the
agreement. In the next section, we consider alternative binding systems in which the on-schedule
constraint plays a more substantial role.


IV.2 Patient Governments
         We characterize here the critical discount factor above which governments can maintain the
                                                                 R
applied tariffs induced by the optimal weak binding τw in a self-enforcing agreement. To this end,
we define




         9
           The reversion to Nash play is possible even in stationary equilibria, since stationarity is then required only
for play along the equilibrium path. As noted below, other punishments would lead to qualitatively similar predictions.

                                                          19
                                         
         EW N/E[Wx(τN;γ)Wx (τN)] ,


                                R               R   R
and observe that E[Wx(τw;γ)Wx (τw)|τw] > EW N .10 For simplicity, we assume that the alternative
to cooperation is infinite reversion to Nash. In particular, if a government undertakes an off-schedule
deviation by applying a tariff in excess of the weak binding, then a punishment phase is entered
whereby Nash tariffs are applied for the remainder of time. Other punishments may lead to different
                                                                  R
values for the critical discount factor above which τw can be sustained, but the qualitative features
of our results are robust to other punishments.


                                                                                          R
         Let the per-period value of cooperation with any (not necessarily τw ) rigid tariff under weak
bindings be


                                             
         ω(τR) / E[Wx(τR;γ)Wx (τR)|τR]  EW N ,


                                     R
where, as just observed, ω(τw)>0 . This per-period value of cooperation is received in each period
by each government, since the countries and goods are symmetric and the levels of political pressure
(types) are drawn iid. Let δ0(0,1) be the discount factor with which governments discount the
future. That is, δ/1/[1r] where r is the rate at which governments discount the future. Hence, a
low δ is associated with impatient (high r) governments. The discounted future value of cooperation
under τR is then

           δ
              ω(τR) ,
          1δ

                        R
where δ/[1δ]ω(τw)>0 . Figure 3 depicts all that can be said in general about δ/[1δ]ω(τR) . In
                                                                                               R
particular, as Figure 3 illustrates, δ/[1δ]ω(τR) takes its maximum value at τw and takes a value of
                                                                            R
zero at τN(γ̄) . The slope of δ/[1δ]ω(τR) is also zero at τw and τN(γ̄) .11 But without further


         10                                              R
            This follows because a weak binding at τw yields higher expected welfare than does a weak binding at
τ τ (γ̄) . The latter binding generates an expected welfare of EW N .
 R   N


         11
              A formal confirmation of the latter property is found in (Z6) in the Appendix.

                                                             20
restrictions on the distribution of γ , δ/[1δ]ω(τR) can be convex/concave, non-monotonic and even
                                       R
take on negative values between τw and τN(γ̄) .


        Next we consider the one-period incentive to cheat. When a government considers cheating
on the agreement, it knows its realized political pressure (type) for that period.                    Fix any
τR0[τN(γ),τN(γ̄)] . If γ#γN(τR) , then the government applies the tariff τN(γ) , and so the incentive to
cheat is zero. Next, suppose that γ>γN(τR) . For these types, the binding lies below the Nash tariff,
and so there exists an incentive to cheat by undertaking an off-schedule deviation and selecting
τN(γ)>τR . We define this incentive as follows:


        Ω(τR;γ) / Wx(τN(γ);γ)  Wx(τR;γ) for γ>γN(τR) .


Notice that Ω(τR;γ)>0 and MΩ(τR;γ)/Mγ>0 over the domain γ>γN(τR) . Therefore, the highest one-
period incentive to cheat is associated with the highest realization of political pressure γ̄ , and so
preventing this type from defecting from the agreement is necessary and sufficient for sustaining
cooperation. The associated incentive constraint for a government with realized political pressure γ̄
is

                       δ
(16)     Ω(τR;γ̄) #       ω(τR) .
                      1δ

        From the explicit expression for Ω(τR;γ̄) , given by

                       [138γ̄] 98γ̄ 8γ̄5 R 2[172γ̄] R 2
         Ω(τR;γ̄)                       τ          (τ ) ,
                      8[172γ̄] 98     49        49

we may conclude that the one-period incentive to cheat for type γ̄ exhibits the features depicted in
Figure 4. In particular, Ω(τR;γ̄) is decreasing and convex in τR for τR0[τN(γ),τN(γ̄)] , and takes on
a value of zero and has slope zero at τN(γ̄) . In Figure 5, we plot Ω(τR;γ̄) and δ/[1δ]ω(τR) together.
                                                                  R                                           R
As the figure illustrates, there exists a critical discount factor δw0(0,1) such that (16) is satisfied at τRτw
            R                                                            R
for all δ$δw . Thus, the applied tariffs induced by the binding τw can be supported in a stationary


                                                      21
                                   R
equilibrium, provided that δ$δw .


        We now introduce some definitions so that our findings may be stated at a more formal level.
First, for τR0[τN(γ),τN(γ̄))] , the applied tariffs induced by a weak tariff binding τR are defined as the
function τ(γ) such that τ(γ)τN(γ) for γ#γN(τR) and τ(γ)τR for γ$γN(τR) . Second, for a given
δ0(0,1) , we say that a weak tariff binding τR is an equilibrium binding if a stationary equilibrium
exists for the repeated game in which in each period governments select the applied tariffs induced
by τR . Third, for a given δ0(0,1) , we say that an equilibrium binding τR is an optimal equilibrium
binding if no other equilibrium binding exists that yields higher expected welfare. We now have:


                               R                               R       R
Proposition 2: There exists δw0(0,1) such that, for all δ$δw , τw is the optimal equilibrium binding.


IV.3 Impatient Governments
                                           R
        Let us now suppose that δ<δw . What can be done to try to preserve cooperation? A natural
                                                               R
possibility is to allow the tariff binding τR to rise above τw . This will have two effects. First, as
Ω(τR|γ̄) is decreasing in τR for τR0[τN(γ),τN(γ̄)] , raising τR will reduce Ω(τR|γ̄) , and this by itself
                                                                                                  R
helps to relax the incentive constraint (16). On the other hand, increasing τR above τw must
                                                                                  R
eventually reduce δ/[1δ]ω(τR) , since δ/[1δ]ω(τR) takes its maximum at τw and reaches a value
                                                                                                      R
of zero at τN(γ̄) . Still, the level of δ/[1δ]ω(τR) is unaffected by small changes in τR around τw , and
so for small changes the first effect must dominate. We may thus state:


                                       R                           R
Proposition 3: There exists δ0(0,δw) such that for all δ0[δ,δw) , the optimal equilibrium binding is
                                               R
characterized by τR(δ) where τN(γ̄)>τR(δ)>τw and MτR/Mδ<0 .


        Proposition 3 captures the notion that less-patient governments may be forced to set a higher
rigid tariff. One interesting implication in the presence of weak bindings is that, when cooperation
is strained (due to impatience, or other analogous forces), our model predicts that tariff bindings will
be higher, and applied tariffs will fall below the bound tariff level with greater frequency. It is also
interesting to observe that the ability to maintain cooperation by raising the level of τR may not be


                                                   22
                                       R
possible for δ sufficiently far below δw . The reason is that, as pointed out above, δ/[1δ]ω(τR) can
                                                                                  R
be convex/concave, non-monotonic and even take on negative values between τw and τN(γ̄) . Hence,
the sustainable level of τR can fall smoothly to τN(γ̄) as δ falls toward zero, but it can also exhibit
discontinuous jumps toward or all the way to τN(γ̄) along the way.


                       V. The Purpose and Design of the Escape Clause
       It is now time to consider the value of introducing an escape clause in some form, as a way
to enhance the ability of governments to benefit from self-enforcing tariff commitments and to
expand the range of discount rates over which self-enforcing agreements are possible. We model
an escape clause as allowing governments in effect to negotiate two bindings, one (lower) tariff to
apply during “normal” times, and the other (higher) tariff to apply during “exceptional” times. Our
first result, presented in the next subsection, is negative: when bindings are weak, tariff commitments
with an escape clause can offer no improvement over tariff commitments without an escape clause
(i.e., the negotiation of a single rigid tariff binding). Intuitively, the problem is that each
government’s private information over its realized political pressure will allow it to always claim
sufficient pressure to exercise the higher escape clause binding, which it will surely do as it is then
permitted to set its applied tariff at or below the escape clause binding, and so in effect there will
only be one binding (the escape clause binding).


       However, our negative result is instructive: what is needed to make an escape clause
potentially valuable to governments in this private-information setting is a cost associated with its
use, so that exercising the escape clause might be made incentive compatible. When bindings are
weak, the required cost is absent, and so an escape clause is worthless to governments. We proceed
in subsequent subsections to consider several ways in which a cost associated with the use of an
escape clause might be introduced, and ask whether an escape clause in this form could then be
useful to governments.


V.1 Escape Clause with Weak Bindings
       Throughout the paper, in any given period, we assume that governments apply their


                                                  23
respective tariffs after privately observing their respective types. In this context, the specification
of a bindings system has the effect of selecting equilibrium behavior, since an applied tariff that
violates a binding is regarded as an (off-schedule) deviation. In the present subsection, we consider
a two-step binding system, under which an applied tariff in excess of the highest binding is regarded
as an (off-schedule) deviation. Focusing on weak bindings, the question that we pose is whether
such a system could ever induce applied tariffs that satisfy (on-schedule) incentive compatibility and
yield higher expected welfare than can be achieved in a system with a single rigid tariff binding. As
anticipated, our answer is negative, since the lower binding then has no real bite. The analysis is,
however, instructive.


         We establish a negative answer, making reference only to the on-schedule incentive
constraints. It is thus sufficient to focus on the incentive compatibility constraints that arise in a
static setting. Equivalently, we may imagine that the discount factor δ is sufficiently high, so that
off-schedule constraints are assuredly satisfied (i.e., the highest binding is never exceeded).


         We consider a two-step binding system. This system is described by a “breakpoint” type
                                                     R                                             R
γb0(γ,γ̄) such that types γ0[γ,γb] bind at τ1 (i.e., apply a tariff no higher than τ1 ), types γ0(γb,γ̄]
           R                                             R                  R    R            R   R
bind at τ2 (i.e., apply a tariff no higher than τ2 ), and τN(γ̄)$τ1 , τ2 , where τ2 …τ1 .12


         Recall from Lemma 1 that incentive compatibility can be achieved only if the applied tariff
                                                                                                                       R   R
is (weakly) increasing in γ . We now consider what this implies for bindings. Suppose that τ2 <τ1 .
                                           R                                             R
Then from above we have τN(γ̄)>τ2 . But then type γ̄ would bind at τ1 , so that it could apply a
                                                                                                       R       R
higher tariff, closer to τN(γ̄) . Thus, bound tariffs must also increase with γ : τ2 >τ1 . We may
                                                                                              R    R
therefore state: There does not exist a system of two-step rigid tariffs with τ2 #τ1 .


                                                                        R    R                             R       R
         There are now three remaining possibilities: (a) τ1 <τ2 #τN(γb) ; (b) τN(γb)#τ1 <τ2 ; and (c)
 R             R
τ1 <τN(γb)<τ2 . We next observe that, given incentive compatibility, in any system of two-step rigid


         12
           If one of the bindings exceeds τN(γ̄) , then the two-step binding system clearly allows governments to apply
their Nash tariffs, τN(γ) , for all γ . This is the same outcome as would emerge under a single tariff binding at τN(γ̄) .

                                                             24
               R              R                                                                              R
tariffs, if τ1 #τN(γb) , then τ2 >τN(γb) . This is because otherwise, type γbε would bind at τ2 , so that
it could apply a higher tariff, closer to τN(γbε) . This, though, rules out case (a) above. We
                                                                                         R       R
therefore have: There does not exist a system of two-step rigid tariffs with τ1 <τ2 #τN(γb) .


                                                                                                         R
          We next observe that case (b) above would leave no type constrained by τ1 , and therefore
      R
only τ2 would be constraining for types above a critical level of γ . But this would then be equivalent
                                                 R
to a rigid tariff with weak bindings set at τ2 . We may therefore state: Any system of two-step rigid
                   R                                                                         R
tariffs with τ1 $τN(γb) is equivalent to a rigid tariff with weak bindings at τRτ2 .


          This leaves case (c) as the only possible avenue for improvement. But this case is also ruled
                                                                                                                 R
out by incentive compatibility in light of the weak bindings: type γbε would bind instead at τ2 ,
                                                                                                             R
knowing that it could then almost apply its preferred tariff, since it could set ττN(γb)<τ2 . Hence
                                                                                  R                  R
we have: There does not exist a system of two-step rigid tariffs with τ1 <τN(γb)<τ2 .


          Having exhausted all the possibilities, we conclude with:


Proposition 4: A system of two-step rigid tariffs cannot offer any improvement over a system with
a single rigid tariff, when bindings are weak.


We close this subsection with two remarks. First, both private information and weak bindings are
key for this result. If either were absent, then a two-step system could be designed which would
improve upon the rigid tariff. And second, the problem is that there is no mechanism for preventing
opportunistic use of the escape clause. This second observation has also been made by Rosendorff
and Milner (2001) and Herzing (2004) in an environment that can be thought of as analogous to our
weak-binding setting.13 In the next three subsections, we consider different ways of controlling
opportunistic behavior by introducing a cost to the exercise of the escape clause so as to achieve



          13
           Rosendorff and Milner (2001) and Herzing (2004) consider an environment in which bindings are strong but
where an escape clause is interpreted as providing for the temporary absence of a binding. In the context of our
discussion above, this interpretation carries with it the same implications as our weak-binding assumption.

                                                        25
incentive compatibility, and in this way we identify the possibility that an escape clause can become
useful to governments.


V.2 Escape Clause with Strong Bindings
                                                                                           R
        We next consider a hybrid system where the baseline bound tariff, τ1 , is subject to weak
                                                       R
bindings, but the escape clause tariff binding, τ2 , can be used only if the binding is strong so that
                                                                               R                     R   R
the government exercising the escape clause must actually apply τ2 . In this case, if τ2 >τ1 , a
                                                       R       R
government that applies a tariff τ such that τ2 >τ>τ1 undertakes an off-schedule deviation and
induces the Nash punishment in future periods. Intuitively, incentive compatibility might then be
achieved, since a government now bears a cost when it exercises the escape clause (namely, being
                                       R                   R
held to the precise tariff level τ2 ) whenever τ2 lies strictly above the government’s optimal
unilateral tariff choice τN(γ) .


        To see how incentive compatibility could be achieved under this hybrid system, consider
                                                       R                                         R
Figure 6. For purposes of illustration, we set τ2 τN(γ̄) . With an appropriate choice of τ1 , type γb
                                                                           R       R
can be made the “breakpoint” type who is indifferent between τ1 and τ2 . Moreover, as observed
in Section II.3, M2Wx(τ;γ)/MτMγf >0 , and so types higher than γb prefer τ2 while types lower than
                                                                                       R

           R
γb prefer τ1 . Of course, as Figure 6 illustrates, it is critical that the binding is strong; otherwise, the
                        R                                                      R
applied tariff (when τ2 is the binding) would be τN(γb) , and no such τ1 could be found.


        Notice that the achievement of an incentive compatible two-step arrangement entails a cost:
when its type is high, a government sets its tariff above its best-response level (at least when γγb ),
hurting itself and its trading partner. Nevertheless, it is possible that governments could gain from
                                                                   R
such an arrangement. For example, suppose δ is below δw , so that governments are not patient
                                                                       R
enough to support the optimal rigid tariff with weak bindings, τw . Consider again the arrangement
                                           R       R
illustrated in Figure 6, only now set τ1 τw , and let γb denote the implied breakpoint type (i.e., the
                             R     R           R
type indifferent between τ1 τw and τ2 τN(γ̄) ). This arrangement leaves the incentive to cheat
Ω(τR;γ) unchanged for γ0[γ,γb] , but it reduces Ω(τR;γ) for γ0(γb,γ̄] . Moreover, if [1H(γb)] is
sufficiently small, then the probability of realizations of political pressure at the level γ0(γb,γ̄] in the


                                                       26
future will be small, and so the impact of this arrangement on ω(@) will be approximately zero. In
this case, the off-schedule incentive constraint is relaxed, and such an arrangement might succeed
                                  R
where a rigid adherence to τw would fail.14


         As we have observed, the GATT/WTO escape clause does do not take this strong form.
Hence, one interpretation of our result is that it raises the possibility that introducing strong bindings
into the GATT/WTO escape clause might enhance the value of the escape clause to governments.
Appealing to the literature on trade agreements as devices to help governments make commitments
to their own private sectors, we suggest as well that it may also be possible to offer an alternative
interpretation of this result, and of the cost associated with strong bindings that underlies it. Under
this alternative interpretation, the escape clause binding is weak but a government operates in an
environment of enhanced policy discretion whenever it invokes the escape clause. This policy
discretion, in turn, can lead to tariff choices for the government that, while optimal ex-post, are sub-
optimally protective ex-ante.15 Under this alternative interpretation, then, a government that invokes
the escape clause may find itself making tariff choices that lie strictly above its (ex-ante) optimal
unilateral tariff choice, much as under the strong-binding arrangement illustrated in Figure 6. In
these broad terms, we suggest that the costs of government discretion may provide a way that
incentive compatibility problems that would otherwise plague an escape clause with weak bindings
might be mitigated.


V.3 Escape Clause with Side Payments
         We now consider a slight modification of our repeated game, in which governments may
make transfers to each other at the time that they apply their respective tariffs. Maintaining our focus


         14
          For a related argument in the context of a model of self-enforcing collusion, see Athey, Bagwell and
Sanchirico (2004).
         15
           For theoretical arguments that government discretion in trade policy can lead to sub-optimally high levels
of protection, see, for example, Staiger and Tabellini (1987) and Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998). For empirical
evidence, see Staiger and Tabellini (1999), who compare the tariff binding choices made by the United States in the
Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations with the U.S. tariff choices made under the GATT escape clause, and find that the
added discretion associated with escape clause actions appears to lead to tariff decisions that are over-protective from
an ex-ante perspective.

                                                          27
on stationary equilibria, we let T(γ) be a transfer function that describes the transfer to be paid by
the domestic government to the foreign government in exchange for the right to impose the tariff
τ(γ) . The transfer T has no direct efficiency implications, as it merely affects the allocation of
surplus between the two governments, not the total amount of surplus.16 But the ability to make such
transfers does have an important indirect effect on efficiency. Specifically, as we next demonstrate,
if governments are sufficiently patient, then the fully efficient tariffs ( τE(γ) ) can be implemented in
a stationary equilibrium of the modified repeated game, where in each period along the equilibrium
path the governments adopt a tariff-transfer scheme {τ(γ),T(γ)} with τ(γ)τE(γ) .


        To develop this result, we first show that an efficient tariff-transfer scheme can be
constructed that satisfies the on-schedule incentive constraints (i.e., that is incentive compatible in
a static game). Our second step is to suppose that governments use this scheme in each period and
then show that no government can gain from cheating with an off-schedule deviation, if governments
are sufficiently patient.


        To begin, observe that the domestic government welfare (in good x) that is enjoyed when the
realized political pressure is γ and the domestic government “announces” that it faces γ̂ (i.e., applies
τ(γ̂) ) will now be given by W̃ x(γ̂,γ)  T(γ̂) . In analogy with (7) in Section II.3, the tariff-transfer
scheme is incentive compatible if and only if, for all γ0[γ,γ̄] and γ̂0[γ,γ̄] , the following is true:


(17)     W̃ x(γ,γ)  T(γ) $ W̃ x(γ̂,γ)  T(γ̂) .


        In words, incentive compatibility of the tariff-transfer scheme {τ(γ),T(γ)} requires that the
domestic government can’t do better than announcing its realized political pressure truthfully. Under
arguments exactly analogous to those in Section II.3 (see, e.g., Mas-Colell, Whinston and Green,
1995), the necessary and sufficient conditions for incentive compatibility of {τ(γ),T(γ)} are that (i) τ(γ)
is non-decreasing in γ , and (ii) d[W̃ x(γ,γ)T(γ)]/dγf(τ(γ)) . Using the Fundamental Theorem of


        16
          As above, we focus on the x-sector, and symmetric tariff and transfer specifications are implied for the
foreign government with respect to the y-sector.

                                                       28
Calculus to rewrite the second condition, we have:


Lemma 2 (IC): A tariff-transfer scheme {τ(γ),T(γ)} is incentive compatible iff
       (i) τ(γ) is non-decreasing in γ , and
                                                  γ
       (ii) W̃(γ,γ)  T(γ)  W̃(γ,γ)  T(γ)          f(τ(γ))dγ .
                                                  m
                                                  γ

                                         
       Consider, then, τE(γ) . Since τE (γ)>0 , condition (i) of Lemma 2 is satisfied. And we may
define T E(γ;T(γ)) according to condition (ii) of Lemma 2, which using (6) leads to:

                                                                        γ
(18)    T (γ;T(γ)) / [G(τ (γ))γf(τ (γ))]  [G(τ (γ))γf(τ (γ))] 
          E                E         E                E             E
                                                                         f(τE(γ))dγ  T(γ) .
                                                                        m
                                                                        γ


We note by (18) that MT E(γ;T(γ))/Mγ>0 . We may now state:


Lemma 3: For any T(γ) , the efficient tariff-transfer scheme {τE(γ),T E(γ;T(γ))} is incentive
compatible.


       We now turn to our second step and examine the off-schedule constraint. We argue that this
consideration determines the intercept term T(γ) in the efficient transfer function defined by (18).
To establish this point, we note that, given symmetry, the per-period value of cooperation ω(@) is
                                                                                         R
independent of the transfer T . Hence, analogous to cooperation under the rigid tariff τw discussed
in Section IV.1, the per-period value of cooperation under the efficient tariff transfer scheme, ωE ,
is given by


                                
        ωE / E[Wx(τE(γ);γ)Wx (τE(γ))]  EW N > 0 .


Observe that δ/[1δ]ωE is then arbitrarily large as δ approaches 1.


       Next we consider the one-period incentive to cheat. Again as in Section IV.1, when a
government considers cheating on the agreement, it knows its realized political pressure (type) for


                                                 29
that period. A novel aspect now arises, however, in that a government can cheat on both its tariff
selection and its transfer payment, if the called-for transfer payment is positive. To conform with
the GATT/WTO practice of associating escape clause tariffs with the payment of compensation to
affected exporters, we impose the restriction T E(γ)$0 for γ0[γ,γ̄] , indicating that the tariff-imposing
government pays a non-negative transfer to the exporting government. Under this restriction,
cheating then means raising the import tariff to τN(γ) and making no transfer payment to the
exporting government (with the tariff/transfer activity in the export sector unchanged in that period).
Thus, the one-period incentive to cheat for type γ , ΩE(γ) , is given by


        ΩE(γ;T(γ)) / Wx(τN(γ);γ)  [Wx(τE(γ);γ)T E(γ;T(γ))] .


        With these expressions, we may now state the off-schedule constraint for type γ :

                         δ E
(19)    ΩE(γ;T(γ)) #        ω .
                        1δ

The lowest discount factor compatible with the off-schedule constraint for every type, denoted
δE0(0,1) , is found by selecting T(γ) to minimize ΩE(γ;T(γ)) , subject to our constraint that T E(γ)$0
for γ0[γ,γ̄] . Recall that, from (18), MT E(γ;T(γ))/Mγ>0 . Therefore, since ΩE(γ;T(γ)) is increasing in
T(γ) , it follows that δE is found by setting T(γ)0 and is defined implicitly by

                                                                            δE
         Maxγ0[γ,γ̄] {Wx(τN(γ);γ)  Wx(τE(γ);γ)T E(γ;T(γ)0)]}                     ωE .
                                                                          1δ    E



        We have thus established:


Proposition 5: There exists δE0(0,1) such that for all δ0[δE,1] , the fully efficient tariffs ( τE(γ) ) can
be implemented in a stationary equilibrium of the modified repeated game, where in each period
along the equilibrium path the governments adopt the tariff-transfer scheme {τE(γ), T E(γ;T(γ)0)} .


In effect, the transfer permits the efficient tariff function to be implemented for sufficiently patient


                                                    30
governments, with the intercept of the transfer T(γ) being set to address the off-schedule incentive
constraint and the slope of the transfer being set to address the on-schedule incentive constraint.


        We suggest two interpretations of Proposition 5. The first interpretation is literal: requiring
that a government make cash payments to its trading partners when it invokes an escape clause can
enhance the value of the escape clause to governments by addressing the incentive compatibility
problems that would otherwise arise, and in principle allow governments to implement fully efficient
tariffs. As cash payments between governments have never been required within the GATT/WTO,
this first interpretation indicates a possible direction for improvement of the design of the
GATT/WTO escape clause. In this regard, we observe that the “quota rents” associated with
Voluntary Export Restraints (VERs) are a form of cash payments made from the importing country
to the exporting country, and so our result lends some support to GATT’s permissive stance
regarding VERs and indicates some discord with the proscription of VERs introduced by the WTO
Safeguards Agreement.


        The second interpretation of Proposition 5 is more suggestive: we observe that it may be
possible to interpret the compensation/retaliation provisions of the GATT/WTO escape clause as
serving a similar purpose to the side-payments in our formal model, and thereby possible to interpret
these provisions as critical for ensuring the incentive-compatible use of escape clause actions. Under
this second interpretation, our result again indicates some discord -- or at least reason for caution --
with the WTO’s elimination of the compensation/retaliation provisions associated with escape clause
actions (that meet certain criteria) for the first three years of their use. An interesting feature of the
WTO Safeguard Agreement, however, is that in permitting governments to impose escape clause
protection for up to three years without the need to compensate trading partners, a new constraint
on the use of escape clause actions was also introduced: if a government imposes escape clause
protection in an industry for a period of Y years, then it cannot reimpose escape clause protection
in that industry for the next Y years. In the next subsection, we consider whether a dynamic use
constraint of this nature can help address the incentive compatibility problem associated with the
use of escape clause protection.


                                                   31
       We close this subsection by briefly discussing the relationship between Proposition 5 and
the findings of Feenstra and Lewis (1991), and also Bagwell and Staiger (1990, 2003), Rosendorff
and Milner (2001), Herzing (2004) and Martin and Vergote (2004). Feenstra and Lewis report a
finding similar to that reported in Proposition 5, in that the fully efficient tariff can be implemented
with a tariff-transfer scheme analogous to ours. Our result here differs in two dimensions. First,
Feenstra and Lewis impose an exogenous participation constraint, while our participation constraint
is endogenously determined through the off-schedule constraint (19), i.e., Feenstra and Lewis do not
address enforcement issues. And second, they restrict the transfer payment from importer to exporter
to be no greater than the tariff revenue collected by the associated tariff, while we impose only that
the transfer payment be non-negative. Proposition 5 is also somewhat related to the results of
Bagwell and Staiger, with the most important distinction being that the results of Bagwell-Staiger
are not derived in a private-information setting and hence are established without reference to an on-
schedule incentive compatibility constraint. Rosendorff and Milner and also Herzing observe that
requiring a fixed compensation payment for use of the escape clause (under which the binding is
temporarily absent) can address the incentive compatibility problem, but these papers do not consider
the optimal tariff-transfer scheme when the tariff and transfer can each depend on the announced
state. Hence, the novelty of Proposition 5 relative to these papers is to characterize the optimal
tariff-transfer scheme when both (off-schedule and on-schedule) constraints are operable. Finally,
in recent work, Martin and Vergote also observe that transfers schemes can induce efficiency in
repeated trade-policy games with private information. Their main focus, however, is on the use of
retaliatory anti-dumping duties as a means of achieving greater cooperation among governments.


V.4 Escape Clause with Dynamic Use Constraint
          As mentioned just above, the WTO Safeguard Agreement introduces a dynamic use
constraint that applies to escape clause actions: once escape clause protection is removed, it cannot
be re-imposed in the same industry for a period of time equal to the duration of the most recent
escape clause action. Motivated by this constraint, we consider in this subsection a rule whereby the
escape clause cannot be used two periods in a row. The effect of such a rule is to raise the
opportunity cost of using the escape clause, and it might be conjectured that incentive compatibility


                                                  32
could then be achieved as a result. In this subsection, we confirm that this conjecture is indeed
correct.


        We consider a two-state dynamic binding system that involves two tariff bindings, τ and τ̄ ,
where τN(γ̄)$τ̄>τ$τN(γ) . The first state occurs if, in the preceding period, a government applied a
tariff τ such that τ#τ . In this state, the government elected to bind at τ in the preceding period. The
second state arises if, in the preceding period, the government applied a tariff τ such that τ>τ and
τ#τ̄ . Here, the government elected to bind at τ̄ in the previous period. In the first state, the
government has flexibility in the current period: it can either bind again at τ and thereby maintain
the state, or it can bind at τ̄ . In the second state, the government has no choice in the current period:
having bound at τ̄ in the previous period, it must now bind at τ . To facilitate the comparison of our
two-step dynamic binding system with the analysis above, we impose further that the bindings are
positioned at or near the optimal rigid tariff binding when bindings are weak. Specifically, we
              R
consider ττw and τ̄τε for ε>0 and small. Finally, we assume that the governments begin the
game in the first state.


        As in Section V.1, this system is described by a “breakpoint” type. In the first state, where
the government has flexibility, the breakpoint type is indifferent between binding at τ (maintaining
the state) and binding at τ̄ (changing the state). We denote the breakpoint type by γ0(γ,γ̄) . A first
observation is that the system as defined requires that γ>γN(τ) . If instead γ#γN(τ) , then
τN(γ)#τ<τ̄ . Type γ would then strictly prefer to bind at τ by applying τN(γ) , since it thereby
enjoys its optimal tariff in the present and maintains future flexibility. A second observation is then
that τ̄<τN(γ) for ε>0 but sufficiently small.


        With these observations in hand, we may refer to Figure 7. As illustrated there, in the two-
state dynamic binding system, applied tariffs in the current period are induced as follows. In the first
state when γ#γ , the government binds at τ ; and it does so by applying its optimal tariff, τN(γ) , if
γ0[γ,γN(τ)] , and by applying the tariff τ if γ0[γN(τ),γ] . In the first state when γ0(γ,γ̄] , the
government binds at τ̄ ; and it does so by applying the tariff τ̄ . Finally, in the second state, the


                                                   33
government must bind at τ ; and it does so by applying its optimal tariff, τN(γ) , if γ0[γ,γN(τ)] , and
by applying the tariff τ if γ0[γN(τ),γ̄] .


        We are now prepared to formally define and analyze the two-state dynamic binding system.
There are three equations. The first two equations characterize the continuation value if last period’s
tariff binding was τ , which we denote by v , and the continuation value if last period’s tariff binding
was τ̄ , which we denote by v̄ . Defining τ(γ)/min{τN(γ),τ)} , it follows that v and v̄ are defined by

               γ                                   γ̄
                                             
(20)    v          Wx(τ(γ);γ)dH(γ)  H(γ )δv           Wx(τ̄;γ)dH(γ)  (1H(γ))δv̄
               m                                    m
               γ                                    γ


and

               γ̄
(21)    v̄         Wx(τ(γ);γ)dH(γ)  δv .
               m
               γ


The third equation characterizes the required indifference of type γ :


(22)    Wx(τ;γ)  δv  Wx(τ̄;γ)  δv̄


This three-equation system has three unknowns: v , v̄ and γ . Our next task is to use these equations
to prove that γ0(γN(τ),γ̄) does exist, and that it is unique.


        Using Wx(τ;γ)G(τ)γf(τ(γ)) , we may manipulate (20)-(22) to obtain


(23)    γ  (E γ)δ(1H(γ))  [ḠG]/[f¯f] ,


where Ḡ/G(τ̄) , G/G(τ) , f¯/f(τ̄) , f/f(τ) , and

                     γ̄
                          γdH(γ)
                    m
                    γ
        E /                       .
                    1H(γ)

                                                         34
We prove in the Appendix the following:


Lemma 4: There exists a unique γ0(γN(τ),γ̄) solving (20)-(22).


         We now consider the existence of an equilibrium in which, along the equilibrium path, the
governments select the applied tariffs induced by the two-state dynamic binding system. We note
that such an equilibrium is non-stationary: along the equilibrium path, current play is determined by
the state and thus the history of play.17 As (22) reveals, the on-schedule incentive constraint, which
occurs only in the first state, now reflects a dynamic comparison and is no longer equivalent to the
incentive compatibility constraint of the static game. With f (τ)>0 and τ̄>τ , we see that indifference
of type γ ensures that higher (lower) types prefer to bind at τ̄ ( τ ). Thus, the on-schedule
constraint is satisfied by construction. As before, we specify that an off-schedule deviation results
in a reversion to Nash tariffs in all future periods. An off-schedule deviation occurs if a government
applies a tariff in excess of τ̄ ; likewise, a government undertakes an off-schedule deviation if it is
in the second state and yet applies a tariff in excess of τ . For ε>0 and sufficiently small, the applied
tariffs induced by the two-state dynamic binding system generate an expected discounted welfare
that is strictly higher than that under Nash tariffs.18 Thus, if δ<1 is sufficiently large, the future cost
of an off-schedule deviation is then sure to overwhelm any immediate gain from cheating. We thus
have:


Proposition 6: There exists ε>0 and δ<1 such that, for all ε0(0,ε) and δ0(δ,1) , there exists a
non-stationary equilibrium for the repeated game in which, along the equilibrium path, governments



         17
            The associated perfect public equilibrium is symmetric, since governments adopt the same strategy for the
game. The equilibrium is not strongly symmetric, however: if the governments are in different states at a given point
in time, they will enjoy different continuation values. See Athey and Bagwell (2001) for a related analysis in which
different continuation values are used to provide truth-telling incentives in a repeated game with private information.
         18
            When ε>0 is small, the applied tariffs induced by the two-state dynamic binding system generate
approximately the same expected discounted welfare as do the applied tariffs that are induced by the weak tariff binding,
  R
τw . As we show in Proposition 2, the latter give higher expected discounted welfare than would the applied tariffs
induced by a weak tariff binding at τRτN(γ̄) . But a weak tariff binding at τRτN(γ̄) induces the application of Nash
tariffs and thus generates the expected discounted welfare of Nash play.

                                                          35
                                                                                                         R
select the applied tariffs induced by the two-state dynamic binding system in which ττw and τ̄τε .


         According to Proposition 6, sufficiently patient governments can support the applied tariffs
induced by the two-state dynamic binding system as a non-stationary equilibrium of the repeated
game. A remaining question is whether this two-state arrangement generates expected discounted
                                                                                                     R
game welfare that exceeds that which arises under the optimal weak tariff binding at τw . Our finding
is as follows:


Proposition 7: Suppose that the distribution function, H(γ) , is uniform. Suppose further that the
discount factor δ<1 is sufficiently large that equilibria for the repeated game exist in which
                                                                                                         R
governments select the applied tariffs induced by (i) the optimal weak tariff binding τw , and (ii) the
                                                         R
two-state dynamic binding system in which ττw and τ̄τε . If ε>0 is sufficiently small, then the
two-state dynamic binding system generates strictly higher expected discounted game welfare than
                                               R
does the optimal weak tariff binding, τw .


Thus, under further distributional assumptions, if governments are sufficiently patient, the escape
clause captured by the dynamic two-state binding system offers a strict gain for government
welfare.19 In this way, the results of this sub-section provide an economic foundation for the
dynamic usage constraint found in the WTO Safeguard Agreement. Proposition 7 is proved in the
Appendix. Intuitively, when the distribution function is sufficiently close to uniform, γ is not too
                  R                                      R
far below γE(τw) , so that the move from τ/τw to τ̄ is a move toward τE(γ) for most of the
probability distribution above γ (see Figure 7).


                                                   VI. Conclusions
         We consider the design and implementation of international trade agreements, when (i)
negotiations are undertaken and commitments made in the presence of uncertainty about future
political pressures; (ii) governments possess private information about political pressures at the time


         19
          The result holds also if the distribution function is sufficiently close to uniform. Proposition 7 holds, for
example, under the power distribution, whereby H(γ)[(γγ)/(γ̄γ)]α , if α>0 is sufficiently close to unity.

                                                         36
that the agreement is actually implemented; and (iii) negotiated commitments can be implemented
successfully only if they are self-enforcing. Our analysis thus offers insights with respect to the
optimal design of self-enforcing trade agreements when governments acquire private information
over time.


       We also provide equilibrium interpretations of specific features of GATT/WTO negotiations.
In particular, we offer interpretations of GATT/WTO negotiations regarding upper bounds on
applied tariffs and GATT/WTO escape clauses. In our model, governments achieve greater welfare
when they negotiate upper bounds on tariffs rather than precise tariff levels; furthermore, when
governments negotiate the optimal upper bound on tariffs, the observed applied tariffs often fall
strictly below the bound. This is consistent with the observation of governments that often set their
applied tariffs strictly below their associated GATT/WTO bindings. Our analysis also provides a
novel interpretation of a feature of the WTO Safeguard Agreement, under which escape clause
actions cannot be re-imposed in the same industry for a time period equal to the duration of the most
recent escape clause action. We find that a dynamic use constraint of this kind can raise the expected
welfare of negotiating governments.


       Our formal analysis does not capture the potential role that a dispute settlement body might
play in this context. At several points in the paper, we suggest that GATT’s approach to escape
clause actions seems more in line with the broad message of our formal analysis than does the
approach taken by the WTO. However, one possible interpretation is that with the creation of a more
effective dispute settlement body, the WTO seeks to rely more on its newly created legal system and
investigatory powers to force the direct revelation of conditions that would justify escape clause
actions than was possible under GATT’s weaker legal environment. Whether this is indeed
practical, and if so whether the WTO environment has achieved an appropriate mix between the use
of legal investigative measures and the kind of incentives against escape clause abuse that we have
highlighted and studied in this paper is an interesting and important question that we leave for future
research.




                                                  37
                                           References
Athey, Susan and Kyle Bagwell, “Optimal Collusion with Private Information,” The Rand Journal
       of Economics, vol. 32, no. 3, Autumn 2001, pp. 428-465.
Athey, Susan, Kyle Bagwell and Chris Sanchirico, “Collusion with Price Rigidity,” The Review of
       Economic Studies, vol. 71, no. 2, 2004, pp. 317-349.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, “A Theory of Managed Trade,” American Economic Review,
       vol. 80, September 1990, pp. 779-795 .
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, “Reciprocity, Non-Discrimination and Preferential
       Agreements in the Multilateral Trading System,” European Journal of Political Economy
       vol. 17, no. 2, June 2001, pp. 281-325.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, "Protection over the Business Cycle," Advances in Economic
       Analysis & Policy, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2003, Article 3, 1-43.
Baldwin, Richard, “Politically Realistic Objective Functions and Trade Policy, Economics Letters,
       vol. 24, pp. 287-90.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Tracy R. Lewis, “Negotiated Trade Restrictions with Private Political
       Pressure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 196, no. 4, November 1991, pp. 1287-1307.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Protection for Sale,” American Economic Review, vol.
       84, September 1994, pp. 833-50.
Herzing, Mathias, “The Escape Clause as a Contingent Contract,” October 2004, mimeo, Institute
       for International Economic Studies.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Value of Trade Agreements in the Presence of
       Political Pressure,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, June 1998, pp. 574-601.
Martin, Alberto and Wouter Vergote, "A Case for Strategic Antidumping," 2004, Columbia
       University.
Mas-Colell, A., M. D. Whinston and J. R. Green, Microeconomic Theory, Oxford University Press,
       1995.
Rosendorff, Peter and Helen Milner, “The Optimal Design of International Trade Institutions:
       Uncertainty and Escape,” International Organization, vol. 55, no. 4, Autumn 2001, pp. 829-
       857.


                                                 38
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini, “Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive Protection,”
       American Economic Review, vol. 77, March 1987, 1265-77.
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini, “Do GATT Rules Help Governments Make Domestic
       Commitments?,” Economics and Politics, vol. 11, 1999, pp. 109-44.
Sykes, Alan O., “Protectionism as a ‘Safeguard’: A Positive Analysis of the GATT ‘Escape Clause’
       with Normative Speculations,” University of Chicago Law Review 58, 1991, pp. 255-305.




                                              39
                                          Appendix


In this Appendix, we first prove that an interior solution exists to the optimal
weak binding problem leading up to Proposition 1.

Proof (interior solution): To establish the existence of an interior solution
for the optimal weak binding problem, we begin by recording some properties
of the conditional expectation, E(γ | τ R ), defined in (13):

                                    E(γ | τ N (γ)) = Eγ;                     (Z1)


                  ∂E(γ | τ R )                                  _
                       R
                               > 0 for all τ R ∈ [τ N (γ), τ N (γ));         (Z2)
                    ∂τ
                                                        _
                                lim   _
                                            E(γ | τ R ) = γ; and             (Z3)
                            τ R →τ N ( γ)


                                                                   _
                                  ∂E(γ | τ R )   1 ∂γ N (τ N (γ))
                        lim            R
                                               =                  .          (Z4)
                              _
                    τ R →τ N ( γ)   ∂τ           2     ∂τ R

The proof of (Z1) is immediate, and (Z2) also follows from straightforward
calculations. A single application of L’Hopital’s Rule yields (Z3), and (Z4) can
be shown to follow from repeated applications of L’Hopital’s Rule.
    Next, we consider the derivative given in (14). First, at τ R = τ N (γ), we
have from (Z1) that E(γ | τ R ) = Eγ. Further, we find that γ E (τ R ) = 5/4 and
γ N (τ R ) = γ. Thus, by (A1), we have

                    ∂E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ]
                                        > 0 at τ R = τ N (γ).                (Z5)
                          ∂τ R
                        _
Second, at τ R = τ N (γ), we have from (Z3)_that E(γ | τ R ) is finite, and of
course γ E (τ R ) is also finite. Since γ N (τ R ) = γ, H(γ N (τ R )) = 1 and thus

                    ∂E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ]                   _
                             R
                                        = 0 at τ R = τ N (γ).                (Z6)
                          ∂τ
                    _
Third, at τ R = τ N (γ), we may diﬀerentiate (14) and use (Z3), H(γ N (τ R )) = 1
                                                R
and (Z4), where the latter ensures that ∂E(γ|τ
                                           ∂τ R
                                                  )
                                                    is finite, to find
                                                    _          _
   ∂ 2 E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ]           N   N
                              0 _ ∂γ (τ (γ)) 2[25 − 4γ] N _          _
                          = H  ( γ)                    [τ (γ) − τ E (γ)].
          ∂(τ R )2                    ∂τ R       49
                                _                                  _   _
Under our assumption that γ < 7/4, it follows that τ N (γ) > τ E (γ), and so

                    ∂ 2 E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ]                   _
                              R 2
                                           > 0 at τ R = τ N (γ).             (Z7)
                           ∂(τ )


                                                1
     By (Z6) and (Z7), we_
                             may conclude that E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ] obtains a local
                R     N
minimum at τ = τ (γ). Given (Z5),         _
                                             it follows that E[Wx + Wx∗ | τ R ] has an
                      R        N       N
interior maximizer, τ w ∈ (τ (γ), τ (γ)). Finally, at the interior maximizer, (15)
                                                                    _              _
must hold. _Given (Z2) and (Z3), it follows that E(γ | τ R                 R     E
                                                              w ) < γ. At τ = τ (γ),
γ E (τ R ) = γ. Since γ E (τ R ) is_strictly increasing, the interior maximizer, τ Rw,
must satisfy τ R      N         E
                w ∈ (τ (γ), τ (γ)).


Proof of Lemma 4: We may re-write (4) as
                                                         _
                                                        Zγ
                 _          _
           0 = δ γ + β( τ + τ ) − γ ∗ (1 + δ) − δ            H(γ)dγ ≡ RHS(γ ∗ ),       (Z8)
                                                     γ∗

where
                                           _                      _
                            _          −[G − G]5 + 34(τ + τ )
                       β( τ + τ ) ≡ _        =        _       .                        (Z9)
                                    [f − f ]    8 + 4(τ + τ )
                                       _                                          _
Using_
        (Z9),
            _
              we observe that β 0 ( τ + τ ) > 0 and_β(2τ ) = γ N (τ ). For τ > τ with
τ (γ) ≥ τ and τ ≥ τ N (γ), it follows that β(τ + τ ) > β(2τ ) ≥ β(2τ N (γ)) =
  N
                         _              _            _                _     _
γ N (τ N (γ)) = γ, and β( τ + τ ) < β(2τ ) ≤ β(2τ N (γ)) = γ N (τ N (γ)) = γ.
    We may easily verify that RHS 0 (γ ∗ ) < 0. Further, simple calculations con-
firm that
                            _              _        _
                     RHS(γ) = β( τ + τ ) − γ < 0, and
                                              _
                     RHS(γ) = δ[Eγ − γ] + β( τ + τ ) − γ > 0.
                                                                          _
This establishes the existence of a unique solution γ ∗ ∈ (γ, γ) to (Z8).
   We next show that this solution satisfies γ ∗ > γ N (τ ). To this end, we com-
pute that
                        _
 RHS(γ N (τ )) = [β( τ + τ ) − γ N (τ )] + δ[1 − H(γ N (τ ))][E(γ | τ ) − γ N (τ )].
                                                                      _       _        _
Note that δ[1 − H(γ N (τ ))] > 0, since δ > 0 and τ < τ ≤ τ N (γ). Next, β(τ +
τ ) > β(2τ ) = γ N (τ ). Finally, let y(τ ) ≡_ E(γ | τ ) − γ _
                                                             N
                                                               (τ ). _Observe that
    N                                     N               N
y(τ (γ)) = Eγ − γ > 0 by (Z1), and y(τ (γ)) = E(γ | τ (γ)) − γ = 0 by (Z3).
Further, simple calculations reveal that

                                     ∂γ N (τ ) H 0 (τ )
                        y 0 (τ ) =            {           y(τ ) − 1}.
                                       ∂τ       1 − H(τ )
                                           _                  _
Thus, if y(τ ) ≤ 0 for τ < τ N (γ), then y(τ N (γ))  _
                                                        < 0, which is a contra-
diction. Hence, y(τ ) > 0 for all τ ∈ [τ N (γ), τ N (γ)). We may conclude that
RHS(γ N (τ )) > 0. The solution thus satisfies γ ∗ > γ N (τ ).




                                               2
Proof of Proposition 7: Referring to (15), we may express the first order
condition as follows:
                                     _
                                   Zγ
    ∂E[Wx + Wx∗         R
                     |τ ]                       ∂
                            =                       [Wx (τ R ; γ) + Wx∗ (τ R )]dH(γ) = 0   (Z10)
          ∂τ R                                 ∂τ R
                                γ N (τ R )


at τ R = τ R
           w . Let

                                     ∂
                     N (τ ; γ) ≡         [Wx (τ R ; γ) + Wx∗ (τ R )]H 0 (γ).               (Z11)
                                    ∂τ R
Using (Z11), we may re-write (Z10) as
                                           _
                                          Zγ
                                                 N (τ R ; γ)dγ = 0                         (Z12)
                                   γ N (τ R )


at τ R = τ Rw.                                              _
    When the distribution function is uniform, H 0 (γ) = 1/[γ − γ]. Thus, with
Wx (τ R ; γ) = G(τ R ) + γf (τ R ), we have

                            ∂N (τ R ; γ)               _
                                         = f 0 (τ R )/[γ − γ] > 0.                         (Z13)
                               ∂γ
                                                                                 _
                                                 e ∈ (γ N (τ R
Using (Z12) and (Z13), we thus conclude: for all γ           w ), γ), there exists
ε > 0 such that, for all ε ∈ [0, ε],
                                      _
                                    Zγ
                                          N (τ R
                                               w + ε; γ)dγ > 0.                            (Z14)
                                    e
                                    γ

    We now compare the eﬃciency gain oﬀered by an alternative applied tariﬀ
schedule relative to the applied _
                                       tariﬀ schedule induced by the weak tariﬀ binding
at τ R          e ∈ (γ N (τ R
     w . Fixing γ           w ), γ) and ε that satisfy (Z14), we define the alternative
schedule by τ A (γ) = τ N (γ) for γ ∈ [γ, γ N (τ R        A        R           N   R
                                                                                        e],
                                                   w )], τ (γ) = τ w for γ ∈ [γ (τ w ), γ
                                       _
       A         R
and τ (γ) = τ w + ε for γ ∈ [e     γ , γ]. The schedules diﬀer only for γ > γ e. Thus, by




                                                     3
(Z14), the eﬃciency gain is positive:
          _
         Zγ
              {[Wx (τ R            ∗ R                   R         ∗ R
                      w + ε; γ) + Wx (τ w + ε)] − [Wx (τ w ; γ) + Wx (τ w )]}dH(γ)
         e
         γ
          _       R
         Zγ τZw +ε
                           ∂
     =                         (Wx (τ R ; γ) + Wx∗ (τ R ))H 0 (γ)dτ R dγ
                          ∂τ R
         e
         γ     τR
                w
           R          _
          τZ
           w +εZγ

     =                    N (τ R ; γ)dγdτ R
          τR
           w       e
                   γ
               _
         Zε Zγ
     =             N (τ R
                        w + ε; γ)dγdε > 0.
         0    e
              γ




                                                  4
       τ




1/6



                           τN(γ)




1/20


                  τE (γ)



                                             γ
       0   γ =1                    γ   7/4

                  Figure 1
                   τ




       τ N (γ )
                                                                       τN(γ)
      τ E (γ )
                                                                     τE (γ)

         τ
               R
              W


         τ
              R
           S
τ N (γ) = /20
          1




τ E (γ) = 0
                                                                                            γ
                   0   γ =1   γ   N
                                  (τSR)    N   R
                                          γ (τ )    Eγ          R
                                                           E(γ|τ )             γ   7
                                               W               W
                                                                                       /4
                                                            E R
                                                   γE(τSR) γ (τW)

                                                   Figure 2
  δ
    ω(τR)
1-δ




      N                 R
                       τW         τN(γ)
                                          τR
     τ (γ)


                  Figure 3




Ω (τR; γ)




                   R          N
                                          τR
          τN(γ)   τW         τ (γ)

                  Figure 4
Ω (τR; γ)




                      δRW
                        R
                            ω(τR)
                     1-δW




                                     N
                                            τR
             R
            τW                      τ (γ)


                 Figure 5
                     τ




τ
    R
2       = τN(γ)


                                         τN(γ)


             τ
                 R
              1


                                τE (γ)



                                                             γ
                     0   γ =1                       γb   γ

                                         Figure 6
          τ




                                                 τN(γ)



τ=τ+ε                                                        τ
τ = τw
      R
                                                             τ


                     τE (γ)

                                                                 γ
          0   γ =1            γ N(τ ) γ *                γ

                                      Figure 7
