                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GLOBAL GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES AND MARKET INTEGRATION

                                           Geert Bekaert
                                         Campbell R. Harvey
                                         Christian Lundblad
                                           Stephan Siegel

                                         Working Paper 10990
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10990


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We appreciate the helpful comments of Will Goetzmann, John Graham, and participants at the 2004 EFA
meetings and the October 2004 Financial Market Integration lecture series at the ECB. Send correspondence
to: Campbell R. Harvey, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708. Phone: +1
919.660.7768, E-mail: cam.harvey@duke.edu . The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Growth Opportunities and Market Integration
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 10990
December 2004
JEL No. F30, F36, G15, O11, O57

                                            ABSTRACT

We measure a country's growth opportunities by investigating how its industry mix is priced in
global capital markets, using price earnings ratios of global industry portfolios. We derive three sets
of empirical results. First, these exogenous growth opportunities strongly predict future changes in
real GDP and investment in a large panel of countries. This relation is strongest in countries that
have liberalized their capital accounts, equity markets, and banking systems. Second, we re-examine
the link between financial development, investor protection, capital allocation, and growth. We find
that financial development and investor protection measures are much less important in aligning
growth opportunities with growth than is capital market openness. Third, we formulate new tests of
market integration and segmentation. Under integration, the difference between a country's local PE
ratio and its global counterpart should not predict relative growth, but the difference between its
"exogenous" global PE ratio and the world market PE ratio should predict relative growth.

Geert Bekaert                                          Christian Lundblad
Graduate School of Business                            Department of Economics
Columbia University                                    Indiana University
3022 Broadway/802 Uris Hall                            Bloomington, IN 47405
New York, NY 10027                                     clundbla@indiana.edu
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu                                     Stephan Siegel
                                                       Department of Economics
Campbell R. Harvey                                     Columbia University
Fuqua School of Business                               New York, NY 10027
Duke University                                        ss1110@columbia.edu
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu
1        Introduction

In a perfectly integrated world economy, capital should be invested where it expects to earn
the highest risk-adjusted return. Much of the research on real variables and quantities is
strongly at odds with the notion of global integration. For example, in their classic study of 16
developed countries, Feldstein and Horioka (1980) found that domestic saving rates explain
over 90% of the variation in investment rates. Because the Feldstein and Horioka sample
ends in 1974, it does not reflect the considerable progress towards globalization in the 1970s
and 1980s. However, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) continue to find a high correlation between
domestic investment and savings for the 1990-97 period, both for the OECD countries and
a group of mid-income emerging countries. Apart from a home bias in investment, research
has documented a home bias in trade. Even controlling for tariffs, a country is much more
likely to trade within its own borders than with neighboring countries.1 There is also a
well-documented home asset bias. Despite uncontroversial diversification benefits, there is a
strong preference for investing in domestic securities.2
        While the case for imperfect integration is strong when using real/quantity variables, it is
more mixed when using prices and returns. For example, Harvey (1991) finds evidence that
a global version of the CAPM cannot be rejected in the majority of developed country equity
returns (with Japan as the exception). For emerging markets, Bekaert and Harvey (1995,
2000) provide sharper evidence against the hypothesis of global equity market integration.
        While the welfare benefits from full integration may be large (see Lewis (1999)), the
benefits of increasing globalization are being questioned.3 We add a new perspective to the
literature. Our research proposes a simple measure of country-specific growth opportunities
based on two rather non-controversial assumptions. First, the growth potential of a country
is the growth potential of its mix of industries. Second, price earnings (P E) ratios contain
information about growth opportunities. If markets are globally integrated, we can measure
    1
        See, for example, McCallum (1995) and Helliwell (1998).
    2
        See, for example, French and Poterba (1991), Tesar and Werner (1995), Baxter and Jermann (1997),
and Lewis (1999).
   3
     See, for example, Rodrik (1998) and Stiglitz (2000).



                                                     1
a country’s growth opportunities by investigating how its industry mix is priced in global
capital markets using the price earnings ratios of global industry portfolios. This perspective
potentially offers a number of useful economic insights.
   First, for each country in the world, it permits the construction of an exogenous growth
opportunity measure that does not use local price information. Such a measure should prove
useful in numerous empirical studies seeking to avoid endogeneity problems. One example is
the study by Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2004), which examines the effect of equity mar-
ket liberalization on growth. If countries liberalize when growth opportunities are abundant,
regressions of future growth on a liberalization indicator suffer from a severe endogeneity
problem. Measures of growth opportunities that use local price information are problematic
because they may either reflect “exogenous” growth opportunities or better growth prospects
induced by the liberalization decision. For the exogenous growth opportunity measure to
be useful, it must actually predict growth. That is, countries that happen to have a high
concentration of high P E industries should grow faster than average. We find that they do.
   Second, our framework can be employed to shed new light on the link between financial
development, capital allocation, and growth (see Levine (2004) for a survey). Research by
Rajan and Zingales (1998), Wurgler (2000), LaPorta et al. (2000) stress the role of finan-
cial development in relaxing external financial constraints and improved investor protection
as the critical growth channels. However, recent work by Fisman and Love (2003, 2004)
suggests that financial development simply better aligns industry growth opportunities with
actual growth. We test this hypothesis directly in a panel framework, in contrast to the
purely cross-sectional approach followed in the existing literature. Moreover, the literature
implicitly ignores the role of international capital flows. We also investigate how important
financial openness is for aligning growth opportunities with growth. If financial liberalization
is effective, countries that have liberalized their capital accounts, equity markets, or banking
sectors, should display a closer association between growth opportunities and future real
activity.
   Third, our measure can be used in formal tests of market integration that bridge research
on real quantities with price-based variables. When growth opportunities are competitively


                                               2
priced and exploited in internationally integrated markets, P E’s for firms in the same indus-
try should be equalized (barring risk differences) across countries. Consequently, under the
null of market integration, the difference between a country’s industry weighted global P E
ratio and the world market P E ratio should predict future real GDP growth relative to world
growth. Conversely, the difference between a country’s global and local PE ratio should not
predict growth in excess of world growth. We also investigate how these integration tests
depend on measured degrees of financial openness.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section two motivates our growth
opportunities measure using a simple present value model, details its construction, its link
with market integration, and provides some summary statistics. The third section checks
whether our growth opportunity measure indeed predicts growth, contrasting the predictive
performance of local with global measures. The fourth section formulates and conducts our
test of market integration. Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section.


2     Measuring Growth Opportunities

2.1    Growth opportunities, market integration, and economic growth

Holding a number of factors constant, higher price earnings ratios indicate high growth
opportunities. Investors are willing to pay a large multiple of today’s earnings for the stock
only if they believe that there will be a high rate of growth in the future. Of course, there
are other determinants of the price to earnings ratio, such as risk.
    Others have proposed different proxies for growth opportunities. The corporate finance
literature often uses market to book value as a proxy for Tobin’s Q and a measure of invest-
ment opportunities (see e.g. Smith and Watts (1992), Booth et al. (2001), and Allayannis et
al. (2003)). Fisman and Love (2003) and Gupta and Yuan (2004) use historical sales growth
of U.S. industries as a measure of growth opportunities. In contrast to sales growth, P E has
the advantage of being forward looking.
    In integrated world capital markets, growth opportunities are competitively priced. This
implies that a country’s P E ratio for a particular industry should not significantly differ from

                                               3
its world counterpart. However, there are obviously different growth opportunities across
industries. Hence, one source of local GDP growth relative to world GDP growth is the
weighting of industries within a particular country. If a country has a large concentration in
high P E (high growth opportunity) industries, then it should grow faster than the world.
   To formalize this, we view each country as consisting of a set of industries that receive
stochastic growth opportunities. Under full integration, all opportunities are competitively
priced and exploited, so there is no country-specific growth opportunity for any industry.
Let (logarithmic) earnings growth be denoted by ∆ ln(EAt ) and let countries and industries
be indexed by i and j, respectively. Assume

                                ∆ ln(EAi,j,t ) = GOw,j,t−1 + ²i,j,t ,                            (1)

where GOw,j,t−1 represents the stochastic growth opportunity for each industry j which does
not depend on the country to which the industry belongs. In contrast, ²i,j,t is a country and
industry specific earnings growth disturbance. The discount rate process for each industry
(δi,j,t ) is an affine function of the world discount rate (δw,t ), as would be true in a financially
integrated market.
                                   δi,j,t = rf (1 − βi,j ) + βi,j δw,t ,                         (2)

where βi,j represented the exposure to systematic risk for industry j in country i. In addition,
suppose that
                                               βi,j = βj .                                       (3)

That is, industry systematic risk is the same across integrated countries. Of course, this
assumption will not hold if there are leverage differences across countries.
   For quite general dynamics for δw and GOw,j , but with normally distributed shocks,
Appendix A shows that it is possible to derive, in closed-form, the P E ratio as an infinite
sum of exponentiated affine functions of the current realizations of the growth opportunity
(with a positive sign) and the discount rate (with a negative sign).
   While the resulting expression is unwieldy, it can be linearized to yield:

                                pei,j,t = āi,j + b̄i,j δw,t + c̄j GOw,j,t                       (4)

                                                    4
where pe is the log P E ratio. Under full integration, b̄i,j = b̄j , and c̄j does not depend on
country i because of the assumption in (1). Why do certain countries grow faster than the
average? In a fully integrated world, there are only two channels of growth for a particular
country: luck (the error term) and an industry composition that differs from the world’s.
These assumptions also imply that industry P E ratios are similar across countries as they
are determined primarily by global factors.4
       Global industry P E ratios therefore contain the same information about industry growth
opportunities in a given country as local P E ratios. As a consequence, as local and global
industry P E ratios move together, the difference between them should contain no information
about the country’s future economic performance relative to the world economy. In contrast,
this is not true when markets are not fully integrated and growth opportunities are not
priced globally (but locally). That is, the link between our growth opportunities measures
and future growth can lead to a test of market integration.
       Let P Ei denote the vector of industry P E ratios in country i and P Ew the vector of world
industry P E ratios. Similarly, define country and world industry weights by IWi and IWw ,
respectively. Combining these vectors for country i, we define local growth opportunities
(LGO) and global growth opportunities (GGO):

                                                         0
                                          LGOi,t = ln[IWi,t−1 P Ei,t ]                                       (5)

                                                        0
                                         GGOi,t = ln[IWi,t−1 P Ew,t ].                                       (6)

These definitions are summarized in Table 1. In integrated markets, LGO and GGO re-
flect the same information and should hence both predict economic growth in country i.
Furthermore, the difference between the two measures, which we call local excess growth op-
portunities (LEGO), should be constant and should therefore have no predictive power for
relative economic growth. If markets are not fully integrated, though, LGO and GGO will
   4
       There is a country-specific intercept that comes from volatility terms and a potentially country-specific
component to the discount rate, but the time variation in the P E ratio is driven by global factors. However,
if there are systematic leverage differences across countries, P E ratios across countries will react differently
to changes in global discount rates.



                                                        5
display different temporal behavior and LEGO should predict economic growth in country
i in excess of world economic growth. In other words, under our auxiliary assumptions, the
hypothesis of no predictability constitutes a market integration hypothesis.
   If, on the other hand, we start from the hypothesis that markets are completely seg-
mented, we do not expect global industry P E ratios to contain information about local
growth opportunities. Hence, GGO should not necessarily predict economic growth in coun-
try i. Moreover, let’s define the difference between GGO and the log of the world market
price earnings ratio (W GO) as:

                                  GEGOi,t = GGOi,t − W GOt                                (7)

where
                                               0
                                  W GOt = ln[IWw,t−1 P Ew,t ].                            (8)

Under the null of market segmentation, GEGO should not predict relative growth in country
i as global prices contain no information about exploitable growth opportunities. If the
hypothesis of market segmentation is incorrect, GEGO should predict economic growth in
country i relative to world economic growth, because it reflects the difference between local
and global industry composition. Under the above assumptions of market integration, this
difference should be the only measure predicting relative growth. Predictive regressions of
future relative economic growth onto GEGO allow us therefore to also test the hypothesis of
market segmentation. Table 1 summarizes the proposed measures of growth opportunities
as well as their ability to predict economic growth under different assumptions.


2.2     Constructing the growth opportunity measures

We construct the measures of growth opportunities discussed above for a sample of 50 coun-
tries, listed in Appendix Table A1.
   To construct LGO and W GO, we simply take natural logs of the country-specific or
world market P E ratio. We use monthly P E ratios from Datastream as the primary source.
A few countries in our sample are not covered by Datastream and we use P E ratios from the
Standard & Poor’s Emerging Markets Data Base (IFC) instead. For Italy, Norway, Spain,

                                               6
and Sweden, we use P E ratios from MSCI to exploit the longer time series compared to
Datastream.
       For the construction of our exogenous measure of growth opportunities, GGO, we re-
quire global industry P E ratios as well as country-specific industry weights. We obtain
global industry P E ratios for 35 industrial sectors with 101 sub-sectors from Datastream.
We construct two alternative sets of country-specific industry weights; the first uses market
capitalization and the second uses value added to construct relative weights. Most of the
results in the paper are based on the market capitalization weights. As a robustness check,
we present some results based on an alternative value-added weighting.5 For 21 of our 50
countries, our measure simply uses the Datastream data to calculate the market capitaliza-
tion of a country’s industries relative to the country’s total stock market capitalization for
35 industries. For the remaining 29 countries, we use the 82 industries used by the IFC
to come up with an industry weight vector. The local weights for these 82 industries are
matched with the Datastream price earning ratios by linking the 101 Datastream sub-sectors
to the corresponding local market industry structure. Second, for our robustness exercise,
we use value added data from the UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database which covers 28
manufacturing industries in a large number of countries. The weight of an industry in a
given country is again determined by the industry-specific value added relative to the total
value added by the manufacturing sector in that country. A similar matching process links
the 28 manufacturing industries used by UNIDO to the Datastream price earnings ratios.6
Appendix B provides much more detail about the construction of all measures of growth
opportunities.
       Our tests may have low power when discount rate changes dominate the variation of the
P E ratios. Therefore, we create an alternative measure by removing a 60-month moving
   5
       A full set of results based upon the value added weighting is available upon request.
   6
       In a related application, Almeida and Wolfenzon (2004) use the UNIDO weights and world industry
measures of external financing needs, to construct an exogenous measure of a country’s external financing
needs.




                                                   7
average from the standard measure. For example, we define LGO M A as:
                                                         t−1
                                                    1 X
                          LGO M Ai,t = LGOi,t −               LGOi,s                       (9)
                                                    60 s=t−60

The relative measure is less likely to be dominated by discount rate changes, if discount rates
are more persistent than growth opportunities, for which there is some empirical evidence.
GGO M A, LEGO M A, and GEGO M A are calculated analogously.
   While some of our growth opportunity measures are available at a monthly frequency
from as early as January 1973 until December 2002, the starting points for measures using
local P E ratios vary across the 50 countries and other macro variables are available only at
an annual frequency. Therefore, we only use the December values of our growth opportunity
measures from 1980 until 2002. In addition to the complete set of the 50 countries, we study
the subset of 17 developed countries for which we are able to construct LGO and LEGO for
all years between 1980 and 2002. We also consider a subset of 30 emerging market countries
for which the LGO and LEGO time series are of varied length. Table 2 provides a summary
of the construction of all the variables and the data sources.


2.3    Comparing the growth opportunity measures

Table 3 contains summary statistics for the growth opportunity measures used in Sections 3
and 4, where we will investigate the predictive content of the different growth opportunity
measures with respect to GDP growth and investment growth.
   Panel A presents summary statistics for our unadjusted growth opportunity measures,
averaged over different country groups. The measure of local growth opportunities, LGO,
is based on local P E ratios. Not surprisingly, it exhibits substantial time-series variation.
It exhibits substantial cross-sectional variation as well. GGO, our measure of exogenous
growth opportunities, show lower dispersion than LGO. When comparing the sample of
developed countries to the emerging market sample, we find little difference in the means and
standard deviations of LGO and GGO. LEGO, the industry-weighted difference between
information contained in local and global P E ratios, is on average higher in developed
countries (−0.208) than in emerging market countries (−0.494). Similarly, GEGO has a

                                              8
higher mean in the sample of developed countries (0.044 vs. 0.009), possibly reflecting a
more favorable industrial composition in developed countries. The variability of LEGO and
GEGO is lower in the sample of developed countries than in the sample of emerging market
countries.
   Panel B reports the same summary statistics for the adjusted growth measures, that is
the original measures less a 60-month moving average. With the exception of LGO M A,
the same pattern as in Panel A emerges. LGO M A appears to be lower and more volatile
in emerging market countries compared to developed countries. Remember, though, that
the availability of local P E ratios is limited for emerging countries, so that the summary
statistics for measures of local growth opportunities are not directly comparable across the
two samples.
   Panel C presents correlations between the different unadjusted as well as adjusted mea-
sures of growth opportunities. In both cases, the correlation between LGO and W GO and
LGO and GGO is substantially higher for developed countries than for emerging market
countries. The correlation between GGO and W GO as well is high for all countries, con-
firming that changes in GGO are mainly driven by changes in the global P E ratios rather
than by slowly evolving industry weights. While not reported, the correlation between our
measure of exogenous growth opportunities and the alternative measure that uses value
added weights is similarly high for all countries.
   Given that developed countries should be more open than emerging countries, developed
countries are also likely to have experienced increased international integration over the
past 20 years. For the sample of developed countries, Figure 1 shows the evolution of
the average absolute value of LEGO, i.e. the distance between LGO and GGO. While
noisy, there appears to be a downward trend in the annual sample average, consistent with
increasing market integration. Still using only observations from developed countries, we run
a regression of the absolute value of LEGO onto a (country-specific) constant and a time
trend. We find a negative (-0.0076) and highly significant (standard error: 0.0018) trend
coefficient, confirming a reduction in the distance between LGO and GGO for our sample
of developed countries.


                                               9
    We expect local and global measures of growth opportunities to converge when countries
become more integrated, but we have no such prior with respect to GEGO (the difference
between GGO and the log of the world price to earnings ratio (W GO)). Figure 2 shows that
for developed as well as emerging market countries the absolute value of GEGO seems to
have decreased over time up until about 1998.
    One potential explanation is that differences in industrial composition across countries
have decreased over time. To explore this further, we measure the difference between a
country’s industrial composition and the world’s industrial composition. For each developed
country, we calculate the average absolute value of the differences between the country’s in-
dustry weights and the world’s industry weights for each year. Figure 3 shows that differences
between local and world industrial composition have decreased over time. For some countries
this process is more pronounced. For example, the industrial composition of the Austrian
economy has moved substantially closer to the world’s industrial composition. On the other
hand, the relative industrial composition of the U.S. has changed little. Given its economic
weight in the world economy, this is, of course, not surprising. Importantly, the graph shows
that on average a country’s industrial composition differs substantially from the world’s in-
dustrial composition. Under the null of market integration, cross-sectional variation in this
composition is the only factor that explains cross country growth differences.


3     Do Growth Opportunities Predict Growth?

3.1    Econometric framework

The first regressions we consider are

                        yi,t+k,k = αi,0 + αi,1,t LGO M Ai,t + ηi,t+k,k                   (10)

                        yi,t+k,k = αi,0 + αi,1,t GGO M Ai,t + ηi,t+k,k                   (11)

where yi,t+k,k is the k-year average growth rate of either real per capita gross domestic
product or investment for country i. We run similar experiments using LGOi,t and GGOi,t



                                             10
as the regressors.7 We follow the convention in the growth literature employing k = 5 to
minimize the influence of higher frequency business cycles in our sample. We maximize the
time-series content of our estimates by using overlapping five-year periods.
       We include country specific fixed effects, αi,0 , consistent with the model in Section 2, to
capture cross-sectional heterogeneity and potentially omitted variables. Regressions (10) and
(11) both test whether our growth opportunity measures indeed predict growth. However,
the GGO-measure should only predict growth in integrated markets. Therefore, the slope
coefficient αi,1,t is modelled as a linear function of various measures of openness, with the pa-
rameters constrained to be identical in the cross-section. We employ the pooled time-series,
cross-sectional (panel) Generalized Method of Moments estimator presented in Bekaert, Har-
vey, and Lundblad (2001). Standard errors are constructed to account for cross-sectional
heteroskedasticity and the overlapping nature of the growth shocks, ηi,t+k,k . This estimator
looks like an instrumental variable estimator but it reduces to pooled OLS under simplifying
assumptions on the weighting matrix.


3.2        Local versus (exogenous) global growth opportunities

We present estimates for αi,1,t in Table 4 for each of our three samples (fixed effects are
not reported) for both GDP and investment growth. In the table, we force αi,1,t to be an
identical time-invariant constant across all countries. In panel A, we present estimates for
regression (10), which explore the extent to which reported local market P E ratios house
information about country-specific growth opportunities, using both LGO and LGO M A.
Unfortunately, the time-series history on local market P E ratios is limited (see Appendix
Table A1); hence, we report estimates for an unbalanced panel, maximizing the sample
history for each country.
   7
       We also consider a risk-adjusted growth opportunities measure. We regress each global industry P E
ratio onto the conditional world market variance, estimated as a GARCH(1,1), and then take the intercept
and residual as the risk-adjusted P E ratio. Combining these adjusted global industry P E ratios with the
corresponding industry weights, we obtain a risk-adjusted growth opportunities measure for each country.
The evidence (not reported) is qualitatively unchanged.



                                                    11
   Overall, country-specific growth opportunities, as measured by local P E ratios, are infor-
mative about future economic activity. For example, the estimates for all countries suggest
that, on average, a one standard deviation increase in local growth opportunities, that is
an increase of 0.3541 in LGO M A, is associated with a 15 and 55 basis point increase in
annual output and investment growth, respectively. The estimated effect is somewhat more
pronounced for the developed markets than the general case (all countries), but in both cases
highly statistically significant.
   For the emerging markets, the association is positive, but weak economically and not
uniformly significant. There are many possible reasons for this apart from a true lack of
predictive information. First, we have fewer data points for emerging markets. Second, our
tests may have less power for emerging markets because other factors, such as political risk or
structural changes (market reforms for instance) may be relatively more important in driving
prices than growth opportunities. Finally, the stock market in these countries is generally
smaller and less representative of the total economy compared to developed markets.
   In panel B of Table 4, we present evidence on regression (11) with exogenous growth
opportunities. As robustness check, we also present the alternative measure of growth op-
portunities based on the value added weights. Recall that GGO and GGO M A reflect the
industrial composition within each country in accordance with the growth opportunities
available to those industries in the global market. In this case, we obtain estimates for a
full balanced panel across all three samples. Overall the global growth opportunity measure
appears to be a strong, robust, and significant predictor of future output and investment
growth in all samples. For example, the estimates for all countries suggest that, on aver-
age, a one standard deviation increase in global growth opportunities, that is an increase of
0.1866 in GGO M A, is associated with a 27 and 74 basis point increase in annual output
and investment growth, respectively. For the developed markets, the predictive power of the
global measure is slightly weaker than the local measure for the level measures but stronger
for the measures with a past moving average removed.
   For emerging markets, the predictive power of the global measure is significantly bet-
ter than the local measure, especially for investment growth. Except in the case of the


                                              12
GGO M A (VA) measure, the coefficients are always statistically significantly different from
zero. Consequently, even though emerging markets may be segmented from global capital
markets, local price information in emerging markets does a poorer job predicting future
growth opportunities than global price information. Interestingly, using value added infor-
mation about industrial composition rather than the industrial composition reflected in the
stock market is not helpful even though the two measures correlate quite highly for most
emerging markets. In Table 5 and future tables, we focus on the market capitalization based
measures of exogenous growth opportunities. The evidence for the value-added measures is
similar and is available upon request.


3.3    The effects of financial sector openness

Many of the countries in our sample have undergone regulatory reforms that may have im-
plications for the ability of industries to capitalize on the growth opportunities available to
them. In particular, we focus on the liberalization of the capital account, equity market,
and banking sector. Countries which are closed to foreign investors typically also restrict the
ability of their firms to raise capital abroad, preventing them from exploiting growth oppor-
tunities available to comparable industries in the global market. For example, an ADR issue
cannot happen efficiently as long as the domestic stock market is subject to foreign own-
ership restrictions. Consequently, we expect growth opportunities to more strongly predict
future growth in more financially open markets.

Capital account openness
   The first panel in Table 5 presents estimates of the interaction between general capital
account openness and exogenous growth opportunities in predicting future growth. The rela-
tion between growth and capital account liberalization is itself controversial. Rodrik (1998),
Edison et al. (2002) claim that there is no correlation between capital account liberaliza-
tion and growth prospects, whereas Edwards (2001), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2004),
and Quinn and Toyoda (2001) document a positive relationship. Arteta, Eichengreen and
Wyplosz (2003) conduct robustness experiments using different measures of openness and


                                              13
conclude that the relation between growth and capital account openness is fragile. We fo-
cus on our largest sample to maximize the cross-sectional variation in our various openness
measures.
   Our measures of capital account openness are based on the IMFs Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). The first is an indicator
variable that takes on a value of zero if the country has at least one restriction in the
restrictions on payments for the capital account transactions category. The second measure,
developed by Quinn (1997) and Quinn and Toyoda (2003), attempts to measure the degree
of capital account openness; the measure is scored from 0 to 4, in half integer units, with a 4
representing a fully open economy. We transform Quinn’s measure into a 0 to 1 scale. The
measure is available for 48 of the 50 countries in our broadest sample.
   For both the IMF and Quinn based measures of capital account openness, we find that the
coefficient on the interaction between GGO M A and the associated capital account openness
indicator is positive in all cases. However, the interaction coefficient is never statistically
significant at the 5% level.

Equity market liberalization
   In Table 5 (panel B), we explore the interaction effect between the exogenous growth
opportunity measure, GGO M A, with indicators of equity market liberalization.
   Our first measure, the official equity market liberalization indicator, is based on Bekaert
and Harvey’s (2002) detailed chronology of important financial, economic, and political
events in many developing countries. The variable takes the value of one when it is possible
for foreign portfolio investors to own the equity of a particular country and zero other-
wise. Industrialized countries, such as the United States, are assumed to be fully liberalized
throughout our sample. Our second measure uses data on foreign ownership restrictions to
measure the degree of equity market openness. Following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and
Warnock (2003), the measure is based upon the ratio of the market capitalization of the IFC
investable to the IFC global indices in each country. The IFC’s global stock index seeks to
represent the local stock market whereas the investable index corrects the market capital-


                                              14
ization for foreign ownership restrictions. Hence, a ratio of one means that all of the stocks
in the local market are available to foreigners. Accordingly, αi,1,t is a linear function of ei-
ther the 0/1 indicator associated with official equity market liberalization or the continuous
measure on the [0,1] interval capturing the degree of equity market openness.8
       In contrast to the evidence for general capital account liberalization presented above,
the link between growth opportunities and future output and investment growth is much
stronger in economies that permit a greater degree of equity investment.9 The interaction
coefficient is always statistically significant, both for the official equity market liberalization
indicator and the liberalization intensity. The constant term is still positive, but no longer
significant. This evidence suggests that there is a strong association between the ability to
exploit global growth opportunities and the degree of foreign investor access to the domestic
equity market.

Banking openness
       Finally, in Panel C of Table 5, we introduce a 0/1 indicator variable that captures periods
when foreign banks are allowed to enter the domestic market either through the establishment
of branches or subsidiaries or through the acquisition of local banks. Using a variety of
sources, we have been able to determine important regulatory changes affecting foreign banks
in 41 of our 50 countries over the past 23 years. The regression involving this new indicator
therefore reflects a slightly smaller sample. The foreign banking liberalization indicator is
equal to zero before and equal to one during and after the year of banking liberalization.
Different from recent studies that have explored the effect of the presence of foreign banks
onto the efficiency and stability of the local banking sector (e.g. Claessens, Demirgüç-Kunt,
and Huizinga (2001)), our indicator variable is related to the regulatory environment foreign
banks face with respect to establishing or expanding their operations in a local market.
Unless foreign banks are allowed to enter a local market, we consider a country as closed
   8
       As a robustness check, we included year fixed effects. These indicator variables are not significant and
do not alter the conclusions. These results are available on request.
   9
     Chari and Henry (2004) use firm-level data in 11 emerging markets and show that the growth rate in
the capital stock increases on average following equity market liberalizations.



                                                       15
with respect to foreign banks, even if some foreign banks are already present in that country.
We also construct a first sign indicator that changes from zero to one when a country takes a
substantial first steps to improve access for foreign banks. Appendix table A2 lists the year
of the banking liberalization for each of 41 countries.
   Similar to the equity market liberalization effect, there is a strong association between
the opening of the banking sector to foreign banks and the ability to exploit exogenous
growth opportunities. The interaction coefficients between both of the banking liberalization
indicators and growth opportunities are always positive and statistically significant.


3.4    Exogenous Growth Opportunities, Financial Development, Investor Pro-
       tection, and Political Risk

There are many other country characteristics that may effectively segment markets, or pre-
vent aligning growth opportunities with actual growth. First, we consider interaction effects
with three important measures of domestic financial development: the ratio of private credit
to GDP (banking development), equity market turnover and the ratio of equity market
capitalization to GDP (both measures of equity market development). A vast literature doc-
uments a significant relationship between domestic banking development (for example, King
and Levine (1993)) or stock market development (for example, Atje and Jovanovic (1989))
and economic growth. Table 6 (panel A) examines the role of the banking sector by adding
an interaction term with the private credit ratio to the regression. The coefficient on the
interaction with the private credit ratio enters positively for both output and investment
growth, and is significant at the 10% and 5% levels for each, respectively. In Table 6, we also
add, as additional interaction variables, equity market turnover (a measure of trading activ-
ity) and equity market capitalization scaled by GDP (a measure of the raw equity market
size relative to the overall economy). The results show that the coefficients on turnover and
size are actually negative in three of the four cases presented, but statistically insignificant
for both output and investment growth in all cases. Together, this evidence suggests that
domestic banking development is important for exploiting growth opportunities, but stock


                                              16
market development is not. This stands in contrast to the evidence presented above on stock
market openness.
       Interestingly, this finding directly confirms the results in Fisman and Love (2004). They
postulate that the relation between actual growth in an industry in a particular country
and its growth opportunities should be stronger depending on the level of financial devel-
opment in the country. They test this hypothesis without measuring growth opportunities
by investigating the correlation of industry growth rates across countries. They find that
countries have correlated intersectoral growth rates only if both countries have high private
bank credit to GDP ratios. Other measures of financial development do not yield significant
results.
       The Fisman-Love test assumes the existence of globally correlated shocks, but ignores the
presence of international capital flows. It is conceivable that international flows are the mech-
anism behind the correlation in cross-country sectoral growth rates not that these countries
simply have well functioning financial markets. Panel D provides some exploratory analysis
of this issue. We split up our observations into four groups. First, we sort observations
into below or above median financial development, using the private credit to GDP ratio,
then into financially open and closed using the official equity market openness indicator.
We regress GDP and investment growth on our measure of growth opportunities interacted
with an indicator variable for each of the four groups. The results overwhelmingly support
the idea that it is openness that drives the alignment of growth opportunities with growth,
not financial development. Even in market with poor financial development, the interaction
coefficient is highly significant as long as the country has a liberalized equity market. The
GDP growth interaction coefficients are at least twice as large for open versus closed equity
markets.10 Not surprisingly, a Wald test strongly rejects the equality of the open versus
closed coefficients, while it fails to reject the equality of the coefficients for low versus high
financial development.
       Second, La Porta et al. (1997) have stressed the importance of investor protection and,
more generally, the quality of institutions and the legal environment as sources for cross-
  10
       Note that these results are unchanged when the sorting is done first on financial development.


                                                       17
country differences in financial development. We can directly investigate the effect of investor
protection on the ability to exploit growth opportunities by interacting our growth oppor-
tunity measure with a measure of investor protection.
   One of the major advantages of our framework is the panel setup, but unfortunately most
measures of investor protection or the quality of (legal) institutions have no time dimension.
We therefore use two measures obtained from ICRG’s political risk ratings, Law and Order
and a broader measure of the Quality of Institutions that reflects corruption, law and order,
and bureaucratic quality. We also consider a 0/1 indicator that takes a value one after the
first insider trading prosecution in each country (see Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002)). Panel
B in Table 6 shows that investor protection itself does not seem to better align growth oppor-
tunities with growth. The highest t-statistic (1.70) occurs for the investment growth equation
in relation to Law and Order. Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) suggest that improvements in
investor protection have very different effects in open and closed economies. In particular,
entrepreneurs suffer less from an improvement in investor protection under perfect capital
mobility than under segmentation. Their analysis also predicts that entrepreneurs will be
more opposed to improvements in investor protection where capital markets are closed to
capital flows. Within our framework, their model would predict a significant interaction effect
of investor protection with growth opportunities in open economies. We repeat the analysis
over four sub-groups that we did for financial development for the Law and Order variable,
also in panel D of Table 6. We find that the marginal effect of improved Law and Order
in aligning growth opportunities with growth is insignificantly different from zero. Again,
openness is more important both economically and statistically. Note that investor protec-
tion is likely to be priced and reflected in country-specific price earnings ratios (see La Porta
et al. (1997) and Albuquerque and Wang (2004)). However, our analysis in Table 6 uses
an exogenous growth opportunities measure, so it is not influenced by any country-specific
factors.
   Finally, we note that the Law and Order measures are part of the ICRG’s political
risk rating. Political risk may effectively segment capital markets (see Bekaert (1995)).
It is well known that some institutional investors have guidelines that prohibit them from


                                               18
investing in the equity markets of certain risky countries. For example, CalPERS, a large U.S.
pension fund, has a Permissable Country Program, which explicitly weights political risk in
determining whether a county is a permissable investment. Similarly, high levels of political
risk may discourage foreign direct investment. In panel C, we consider the overall ICRG
political risk rating - a composite of twelve subindices ranging from political conditions,
the quality of institutions, socioeconomic conditions and conflict - and a measure of the
investment profile in each country. The Investment Profile reflects the risk of expropriation,
contract viability, payment delays, and the ability to repatriate profits. This measure is most
closely correlated with political risks relevant for FDI.
    The evidence suggests that high values for the political risk and the investment profile
indices (larger numbers denote improved conditions) are associated with a greater ability to
exploit exogenous growth opportunities. The overall positive coefficient of the political risk
rating is not due to the quality of institutions variable (in panel B), but rather to those aspects
of the legal and regulatory environment that directly relate to the stability and security of
inward investment. This analysis generally confirms the importance of international capital
flows in aligning growth opportunities with growth.


4     Growth Opportunities and Market Integration

4.1    Econometric framework

In Table 4, we presented evidence that exogenous growth opportunities predict future output
and investment growth. Table 5 shows that the degree of predictability increases with equity
market and banking sector openness. In this section, we link this predictability to tests of
market integration. First, we explore whether the differential between local and exogenous
growth opportunities predicts future growth in excess of world growth. Under full market
integration, this should not be the case. That is, we test the null of market integration.
Second, we explore whether the differential between exogenous and world average growth
opportunities predicts future growth. In integrated market, countries that contain high (low)
P E industries should growth at a faster (slower) rate than the rest of the world. In other

                                                19
words, we test the null of market segmentation. Lastly, we explore what factors contribute
to the ability of countries to take advantage of global growth opportunities. In particular,
we investigate interaction effects between excess exogenous growth opportunities and capital
account, equity market, and banking sector openness and liberalization.
   To explore these questions, the regressions we consider are

                   yi,t+k,k − yw,t+k,k = αi,0 + α1,t LEGO M Ai,t + ηi,t+k,k                 (12)

                   yi,t+k,k − yw,t+k,k = αi,0 + α1,t GEGO M Ai,t + ηi,t+k,k ,               (13)

where yi,t+k,k −yw,t+k,k is the k-year average growth rate of either real per capita gross domes-
tic product or investment for country i in excess of the “world” counterpart. LEGO M Ai,t
(= LGO M Ai,t −GGO M Ai,t ) is the difference between local and exogenous growth opportu-
nities, and GEGO M Ai,t (= GGO M Ai,t − W GO M At ) is the difference between exogenous
growth opportunities and the growth opportunities measure for the world market.


4.2     Tests of market integration and segmentation

We first present results constraining α1,t in equations (12) and (13) to be time-invariant
constants.


4.2.1     The null of market integration

In integrated markets, (risk-adjusted) differences between local and exogenous growth op-
portunities should contain no information about future excess growth. We present results
for regression (12) in panel A of Table 7. As before, the estimates for all countries and
the emerging markets are obtained for an unbalanced panel (maximizing data availability).
For these two samples, the observed relation between local excess growth opportunities and
excess output is not significant. The weak to insignificant predictive effects may be due to
the limited time-series availability of local market P E ratios.
   In sharp contrast, the predictive effects of local excess growth opportunities are sta-
tistically significant for the developed markets for which we have a full balanced sample.
This evidence suggests that, at least for this collection of countries, information contained

                                               20
in country-specific growth opportunities, as measured by the difference between local and
exogenous P E ratios, is informative about future growth. Hence, one interpretation of this
finding is that we reject the null hypothesis of market integration for the developed markets.
Here, our tests are consistent with the extant results on real quantity variables regarding
market integration, not the results obtained using price information, which are typically
favorable for the market integration hypothesis.
   Given that the local growth opportunity measure has little predictive power for economic
growth in emerging markets (see Table 4), our test results for emerging markets should not
be interpreted as being in favor of market integration. In general, the main challenge we
face in exploring market integration using local price earnings ratios is the limited sample
that is available for inference. In the next section, however, we explore market integration in
a different manner by evaluating whether excess growth opportunities measured using only
global price information, predict excess growth. One key advantage of this methodology is
that we obtain a full time series across all countries, increasing the power of our tests.


4.2.2     The null of market segmentation

In panel B of Table 7, we present evidence for the alternative regression (13) using exogenous
growth opportunities in excess of their world counterpart. In this regression, we explore the
degree to which country-specific industrial composition (relative to the world) predicts excess
output and investment growth (relative to the world). If a country has an industrial base
tilted towards high P E industries in the global market, it should grow faster than the world
average. That is, integrated countries can only grow faster than the world through an
industrial composition geared towards high growth opportunities.
   For the emerging markets, none of the coefficients are significant, and some are even nega-
tive. We fail to reject the null of market segmentation for emerging countries. Consequently,
even though we found strong predictive power of exogenous growth opportunities in the last
section, these countries are, on average, not fully exploiting the growth opportunities avail-
able from their particular industrial mix. This result suggests that linking the predictability
to the degree of openness across these markets may be fruitful, and we will do so in sec-

                                              21
tion 4.3. For developed markets (and the results are similar for all countries combined),
the coefficients are robustly positive, but we only reject the null of market segmentation in
some cases, mostly for investment growth. It is likely that dividing countries into developed
and emerging markets decreases the power of our tests because we mix financially open and
closed countries in both sub-samples. For example, according to the IMF measure, Denmark
had a closed capital account before 1988, whereas Malaysia had overall open capital markets
throughout the sample until the late 1990’s.


4.3    Exogenous growth opportunities and openness

We now re-estimate regressions (12) and (13), employing a collection of alternative openness
measures as interaction variables in αi,1,t . For this section, we focus on our largest sample
of 50 countries in order to maximize both the cross-sectional and time-series information in
our sample. Our conjecture is that more open economies should be better poised to exploit
global growth opportunities.
   Table 8 presents estimates of the interaction for both LEGO (left-hand side) and GEGO
(right-hand side) measures. The three panels correspond to different measures of openness
as in Table 5. We start the discussion with the LEGO measure. Here, we expect the
interaction effect to be negative. LEGO should not predict growth or investment when
markets are fully integrated. The interaction effect is always negative for both of our capital
account openness measures (panel A) and for the banking openness measures (panel C). This
is true for both investment and output growth, but only the investment growth results are
statistically significant. Also, for investment growth, the constant term and the interaction
term are of about the same magnitude and the constant term is significantly positive. Hence,
for open countries LEGO does not predict relative growth, but for segmented countries it
does. For the equity liberalization measure, there are no significant coefficients, and some
coefficients have the wrong sign.
   For the GEGO measure, we expect the interaction effect to be positive. GEGO should
predict relative growth for relatively open countries, but should not predict relative growth
for segmented countries. The results are qualitatively consistent with this hypothesis. The

                                               22
constant terms in all three panels are not statistically different from zero. The interaction
effects are invariably positive, again with stronger effects for investment growth. Unfor-
tunately, the coefficients often fail to be statistically significant. We only find statistical
significance for the equity market liberalization indicators in the growth regressions and for
the First Sign banking sector liberalization indicator for both GDP and investment growth.
    Nevertheless, the results go some way to help resolve the seemingly contradictory results
in Table 7. For the developed markets, we reject market integration, yet other tests suggested
a rejection of market segmentation. For our largest sample, the evidence presented in Table
8 points towards (at least for some of our tests) a greater likelihood of market integration
for countries that are more open. Such a mixed outcome is consistent with partial or time-
varying integration where the ability to capitalize on world growth opportunities depends
critically on country-specific factors. Our results show that our various measures of openness
help differentiate countries along this dimension, but we are likely still omitting important
factors.


5    Conclusions

Our research proposes a simple measure of country-specific growth opportunities based on
price to earnings (P E) ratios set in global stock markets. To do so, we combine information
about a country’s industrial composition and the growth opportunities contained in global
prices that each of these industries face. Importantly, we find that this measure of exogenous
growth opportunities predicts future output and investment growth, and that the degree of
predictability is positively associated with several measures of openness.
    Next, we formulate a test of market integration based on the idea that if these growth
opportunities are indeed globally priced and exploited, the difference between local and
global price-earnings ratios should not predict the relative growth performance of a country.
We present evidence that suggests a rejection of this hypothesis for developed countries but
the test lacks power for a wider sample of countries. Conversely, in integrated markets, the
difference in industrial composition relative to the world multiplied with world price earnings


                                              23
ratios should be a main driver of relative growth, as it should be the countries with the high
PE ratio industries that capture the highest growth rates. Even though we have more data
for this test, we find mixed evidence on the test of the null of market segmentation. For
emerging markets, we fail to reject the null of market segmentation.
   Of course, in reality the degree of integration varies across countries and across time. To
allow for the possibility of a time-varying, country-specific ability to exploit global growth
opportunities, we interact our measure of excess global growth opportunities with a number
of measures capturing varying degrees of openness such as capital account, equity market,
and banking sector liberalizations. Importantly, we find evidence that suggests a greater
likelihood of market integration in more open economies; however, the evidence is not entirely
uniform across openness measures and the relevant coefficients are not always statistically
significant.
   In future work, we plan to more accurately measure the variation in the degree of inte-
gration over time and its effect on the ability to exploit growth opportunities. For example,
every additional country opening its capital markets (allowing both inward and outward
investment) should enhance the overall ability to exploit global growth opportunities.
   Of course, there is a large list of factors that may effectively segment or help integrate
countries into the world economy. In our research, we investigate measures of financial
development, investor protection, and political risk. Banking development, as in Fisman and
Love (2004), shows a significant interaction effect with growth opportunities. Our results also
suggest that the existing literature is omitting a critically relevant variable. Financial market
openness seems a more important determinant of the ability to exploit growth opportunities
than is financial development. In future work, we plan to investigate whether international
capital in the form of FDI and portfolio flows indeed “follows” growth opportunities. This
research may usefully complement recent work by Baker, Foley, and Wurgler (2004), who
have argued that FDI is mostly driven by cheap capital in host countries.




                                               24
6   Appendix A: Price-Earnings Ratios and Growth Opportunities
We consider a simple present value model under the null of financial market integration. We
begin by defining log earnings growth, ∆ ln(EAt ), with EAt the earnings level, in country i,
industry j as:
                             ∆ ln(EAi,j,t ) = γi,j GOw,j,t−1 + ²i,j,t .                 (14)
Earnings growth is affected by world-wide growth opportunities in industry j, defined as
                                                                         2
GOw,j,t and an idiosyncratic noise term which we assume to be N (0, σi,j   ). In the solution
presented above, we assume γi,j = 1, but we provide the more general solution below. Growth
opportunities themselves follow a persistent stochastic process:

                               GOw,j,t = µj + ϕj GOw,j,t−1 + ²w,j,t .                       (15)
                          2
We assume ²w,j,t ∼ N (0, σw,j ). Under the hypothesis of market integration, the discount rate
for each industry in each country is simply a multiple of the world discount rate:

                                   δi,j,t = rf (1 − βi,j ) + βi,j δw,t .                    (16)

The constant term, with rf equal to the risk free rate, arises because the discount rates are
total not excess discount rates. An equation like (16) would follow from a logarithmic version
of the standard world CAPM. The world discount rate process follows:

                                    δw,t = dw + φw δw,t−1 + ηw,t ,                          (17)

with ηw,t ∼ N (0, s2w ). An important assumption is that under the null of market integration,
industries in different countries face the same discount rate; that is,

                                                   βi,j = βj .                              (18)

Suppose that each industry pays out all earnings, EAt , each period, then the valuation of
the industry under (14)-(17) is:
                                            ∞
                                            X                k−1
                                                             X
                            Vi,j,t = Et [       exp(−              δi,j,t+l )EAi,j,t+k ].   (19)
                                        k=1                  l=0

Given that we model earnings growth as in equation (14), the earnings process is non-
stationary. We must scale the current valuation by earnings, and impose a transversality
condition to obtain a solution:
                                        X∞   k−1
                                             X
                           Vi,j,t
             P Ei,j,t =           = Et [ exp( −δi,j,t+l + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+1+l ))]
                          EAi,j,t       k=1  l=0
                                        ∞
                                        X
                                   =            Qi,j,k,t .                                  (20)
                                        k=1




                                                        25
Note that for k = 1,

                 Qi,j,1,t = Et [exp(−δi,j,t + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+1 ))]
                                                                             1 2
                           = exp(−rf (1 − βi,j ) − βi,j δw,t + γi,j GOw,j,t − σi,j ).                      (21)
                                                                             2
Consequently, we conjecture

                         Qi,j,k,t = exp(ai,j,k + bi,j,k δw,t + ci,j,k GOw,j,t ).                           (22)

Although a full closed-form solution can be found, for our purposes it suffices to characterize
the recursive equations describing the ai,j,k , bi,j,k , and ci,j,k coefficients.
                             k
                             X
   Qi,j,k+1,t = Et [exp(           −δi,j,t+l + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+1+l ))]
                             l=0
                                                                    k−1
                                                                    X
              = Et [exp(−δi,j,t + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+1 )) · exp(                −δi,j,t+1+l + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+2+l ))]
                                                                    l=0
              = Et [exp(−δi,j,t + ∆ ln(EAi,j,t+1 ) + ai,j,k + bi,j,k δw,t+1 + ci,j,k GOw,j,t+1 )]. (23)

Consequently,

                           exp(ai,j,k+1 + bi,j,k+1 δw,t + ci,j,k+1 GOw,j,t )
         = exp{ai,j,k + bi,j,k dw + ci,j,k µj − rf (1 − βi,j ) − 12 (σi,j
                                                                      2
                                                                          + b2i,j,k s2w + c2i,j,k σw,j
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       )
                       +(γi,j + ci,j,k ϕj )GOw,j,t + (−βi,j + bi,j,k φw )δw,t }.                           (24)

Hence, matching coefficients, we find:
                                                                  1 2
      ai,j,k+1 = ai,j,k − rf (1 − βi,j ) + bi,j,k dw + ci,j,k µj − (σi,j + b2i,j,k s2w + c2i,j,k σw,j
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                      )    (25)
                                                                  2
      bi,j,k+1 = −βi,j + bi,j,k φw                                                                         (26)
      ci,j,k+1 = γi,j + ci,j,k ϕj .                                                                        (27)
                                                                                                           (28)

Because of the assumption (18), we can write bi,j,k+1 = bj,k+1 . Also, the country dependence
in growth opportunities hinges entirely on γi,j . We assume that in a fully integrated world

                                                 γi,j = γj = 1.                                            (29)

That is, earnings growth in a particular industry should not depend on the country in which
the industry is located. If that is the case, it is logical to assume that γj is 1 because growth
opportunities are industry specific. Bringing everything together, we find that the price
earnings ratio for a particular industry in a particular country can be written as:
                                        ∞
                                        X
                           P Ei,j,t =         exp(ai,j,k + bj,k δw,t + cj,k GOw,j,t )                      (30)
                                        k=1


                                                        26
    An improvement in growth opportunities revises price earnings ratios for the industry
upward everywhere in the world, and the change in the P E-ratio is larger when GOw,j,t is
more persistent. Similarly, a reduction in the world discount rate increases the P E-ratio with
the magnitude of the response depending upon the persistence of the discount rate process
and the beta of the industry. Equation (30) can be linearized around the mean values for
δw,t and GOw,j,t leading to the expression in the text (equation (4)).




                                              27
7        Appendix B: Constructing Measures of Growth Opportunities
Local Growth Opportunities
LGO as defined in (5) is approximately the log of the market P E ratio of a given country.
We collect P E ratios from Datastream for the last day of each month. Thirteen of our 50
countries are not covered by Datastream and we use P E ratios from IFC instead. For Italy,
Norway, Spain, and Sweden, we use data from MSCI to exploit the longer time series com-
pared to Datastream. In a few cases, we encounter negative P E ratios. We replace those
by the maximum P E ratio observed up to that point. The latter is in no case larger than
100. Table A1 reports for each country which data are used to construct LGO and in which
month the coverage begins.

Exogenous Global Growth Opportunities
GGO as defined in (6) is the log of the inner product of the vector of global industry P E
ratios and the vector of lagged country-specific industry weights. While Datastream is the
only source for the global industry P E ratios, we use different sources to derive country-
specific industry weights, in particular we use Datastream as well as IFC data to derive
an industry’s relative market capitalization, our principal measure of industry-weights, and
UNIDO data to derive an industry’s relative value added (VA), an alternative measure of
industry-weights. For each of these measures, technical appendices that describe how we
match the different industry classifications are available upon request.

Market capitalization based industry weights
For 21 out of the 50 countries in our sample we combine the market values for 35 industrial
sectors covered by Datastream with the corresponding global P E ratios for the same 35
industries.11 Note that the market capitalizations reflect information as of December 31 of
the previous year with respect to the information contained in the P E ratios.12
    For the remaining 29 countries, we derive industry weights from market capitalization
data reported by IFC. IFC employs the 2-digit SIC classification, with 82 industry groups.
To combine these industry weights with the global industry P E ratios from Datastream, we
link the 101 industrial sub-sectors from Datastream to the 82 SIC groups, obtaining global
PE ratios for each SIC group.13 Whenever more than one Datastream sub-sector is included
in an SIC group, we calculate the weighted average of the P E ratios of the entering sub-
    11
     Datastream uses the FTSE industry classification with 35 industrial sectors (level 3 in Datastream) and
101 sub-sectors (level 5 in Datastream). For a detailed description see “FTSE Global Classification System”,
available at http://www.ftse.com.
  12                                       0
     If t = May 1985 and GGOi,t = ln[IWi,t−1   P Ew,t ], the industry weights, IWi,t−1 , will reflect the industrial
composition in country i as of December 31, 1984, while the global industry P E ratios, P Ew,t , reflect
information as of May 31, 1985. The only exceptions to this rule are 1973, where the industry weights are
as of December 31, 1973, and cases where the Datastream country coverage starts after 1973. If Datastream
coverage for a specific country starts after 1973, we use the earliest available observation for the previous
years without observations. See Table A1 for details.
  13
     For the Datastream sub-sector “Mortgage Finance” we replace the P E ratio between December 1981
and February 1983 by the P E ratio of the industrial sector “Spc. and Other Finance” (after adjusting its
level appropriately), as the original P E ratio takes on extreme values of up to 1,976.


                                                        28
sectors using the sub-sectors’ market values as of December 31 of the same year. Industry
weights again reflect information as of December 31 of the previous year with respect to the
information contained in the P E ratios.14

Value added (VA) based industry weights
As an alternative to the market capitalization based weights, we also derive industry weights
from an industry’s relative value added. We obtain annual value added data for 28 manufac-
turing industries, classified according to the 3-digit ISIC (rev. 2), from the UNIDO Industrial
Statistics Database starting in 1973. Since the UNIDO database contains information only
on the manufacturing sector, industry weights are calculated relative to the value added of
the manufacturing sector. To combine these industry weights with the global industry P E
ratios from Datastream, we link the 101 industrial sub-sectors from Datastream to the 28
ISIC manufacturing industries, obtaining global PE ratios for each ISIC group. Whenever
more than one Datastream sub-sector is included in an ISIC group, we calculate the weighted
average of the P E ratios of the entering sub-sectors using the sub-sectors’ market values as
of December 31 of the same year. Industry weights again reflect information as of December
31 of the previous year with respect to the information contained in the P E ratios.15

World Growth Opportunities
W GO as defined in (8) is approximately the log of the P E ratio of the world market. The
world market P E ratio for the last of each month is collected from January 1973 until De-
cember 2002 from Datastream.

Measures of Excess Growth Opportunities
For the construction of LEGO we use the market capitalization based measure of global
growth opportunities, GGO. We construct GEGO by subtracting W GO from GGO.

Moving Average Correction
By subtracting a 60-month moving average from each original series we obtain adjusted series
which we denote by the extension “ M A”. For example, LGO M A is calculated as:
                                                                t−1
                                                           1 X
                              LGO M Ai,t = LGOi,t −                  LGOi,s                             (31)
                                                           60 s=t−60

GGO M A,GGO M A(V A), LEGO M A, GEGO M A and GEGO M A(V A) are calculated
analogously.

  14
     The only exceptions to this rule are the years 1973 through 1975, where the industry weights are as
of December 31, 1975, cases where IFC country coverage starts after 1975, and values for 2001 where the
industry weights are as of December 31, 2000. If IFC coverage for a specific country starts after 1975, we
use the earliest available observation for the previous years without observations. See Table A1 for details.
  15
     The only exceptions to this rule are cases where UNIDO country coverage starts after 1973, and values
for 1999 through 2001 where the industry weights are same as in 1998. If UNIDO coverage for a specific
country starts after 1973, we again use the earliest available observation for the previous years without
observations. See Table A1 for details.

                                                     29
  8    References


Albuquerque, R. and N. Wang, 2004, Investor Protection and Asset Pricing, unpublished work-
  ing paper, University of Rochester.
Allayannis, G., G.W. Brown, L.F. Klapper, 2003, Capital structure and financial risk: Evidence
   from foreign debt use in East Asia, Journal of Finance 58, 2667–2710.
Almeida, H., D. Wolfenzon, 2004, The effect of external finance on the equilibrium allocation
  of capital. Unpublished working paper, New York University.
Arteta, C., B. Eichengreen and C. Wyplosz, 2003, When Does Capital Account Liberalization
  Help More than it Hurts? in Elhanan Helpman and Efraim Sadka, eds.,Economic Policy in
  the International Economy, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Atje, R., and B. Jovanovic, 1989, Stock Markets and Development, European Economic Review
  37, 632-640.
Baker, M., C. F. Foley, J. Wurgler, 2004, The stock market and investment: Evidence from
  FDI flows, Unpublished working paper, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Baxter, M. and U. J. Jermann, 1997. The International Diversification Puzzle is Worse Than
  You Think. American Economic Review, 87:1, pp. 170-180.
Bekaert, G., 1995, Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity Markets,
  World Bank Economic Review 9, 75-107.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying World Market Integration, Journal of Fi-
  nance 50, 403-444.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal
  of Finance 55, 565-614.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2002, Chronology of Important Economic, Financial and Political
  Events in Emerging Markets, http://www.duke.edu/∼charvey/chronology.htm
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2001, Emerging Equity Markets and Economic
  Development, Journal of Development Economics 66, 465-504.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2004, Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth,
  Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Bhattacharya, U. and H. Daouk, 2002, The World Price of Insider Trading, Journal of Finance
  57, 75-108.
Booth, L., Aivazian, V., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2001, Capital structure in devel-
  oping countries. Journal of Finance 56, 87–130.
Chari, A. and P. B. Henry, 2004, Is the Invisible Hand Discerning or Indiscriminate? Investment

                                               30
  and Stock Prices in the Aftermath of Capital Account Liberalizations, Working paper 10318,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Claessens, S., Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga, 2001, How Does Foreign Entry Affect
  Domestic Banking Markets?, Journal of Banking and Finance 25, 891 - 911.
Edison, H., R. Levine, L. Ricci and T. Slot, 2002, International Financial Integration and
  Economic Growth, Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 749–776.
Edison, H. and F. Warnock, 2002, A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls,
  Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 81-104.
Edwards, S., 2001, Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
  Different, Unpublished working paper, UCLA.
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, 1980, Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows,
   Economic Journal, June, 314-29.
Fisman, R. and I. Love, 2003, Financial Development and Growth Revisited, working paper,
   Cambridge, MA.
Fisman, R. and I. Love, 2004, Financial development and Intersector Allocation: A New Ap-
   proach, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
French, K. R. and J. M. Poterba. 1991. International Diversification and International Equity
   Markets. American Economic Review, 81:2, pp.222-26.
Gupta, N. and K. Yuan, 2004. On the growth effect of stock market liberalizations. Unpublished
  working paper, University of Michigan.
Harvey, C. R., 1991, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111-157.
Helliwell, J., 1998, How Much do National Borders Matter? Washington, D.C.: Brookings
  Institution.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993, Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1997, Legal Determinants of
  External Finance, Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny, 2000, Investor Protection and
  Corporate Governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-28.
Levine, R., 2004, Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, working paper.
Lewis, K. 1999, Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, Vol. XXXVII pp. 571-608.
McCallum, J., 1995, National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns. Ameri-
  can Economic Review 85 (June): 615-623.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff, 2000, Perspectives on OECD Economic Integration: Implications
  for U.S. Current Account Adjustment, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Global Economic

                                               31
  Integration: Opportunities and Challenges. March 2001, pp. 169-208.
Quinn, D., 1997, The Correlates of Changes in International Financial Regulation, American
  Political Science Review 91, 531–551.
Quinn, D. and A. M. Toyoda, 2001, How and Where Capital Account Liberalization Leads to
  Growth, Unpublished working paper, Georgetown University.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
  Review 88, 559-586.
Rodrik, D., 1998, Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility? Unpublished working paper.
Shleifer, A. and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets,” Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 66, 3-27.
Smith, C. W. Jr., and R.L. Watts, 1992, The investment opportunity set and corporate financ-
  ing, dividend, and compensation policies. Journal of Financial Economics 32, 263–292.
Stiglitz, J. E., 2000, Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth and Instability, World
   Development 25, 1075-1086.
Tesar, L. and I. Werner. 1995. Home Bias and High Turnover. Journal of International Money
  and Finance, 14:4, pp. 467-92.
Wurgler, J., 2000, Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 58, 187-214.




                                              32
Table 1
Predictive Power of Growth Opportunity Measures in Integrated and Segmented Markets

                                                                                          Predicting Economic Growth
Definition                                                                 Market Integration                      Market Segmentation
LGO is a local measure of country-specific growth                    LGO predicts economic growth independently from the degree of market
opportunities. LGO is the weighted sum of a country's                                           integration.
industry PE ratios. The weights are the relative capitalization
of industries within the country. It is expressed in logs.

GGO is a global measure of growth opportunities, i.e.             GGO predicts economic growth,           GGO does not predict economic
country-specific growth opportunities implied by the global       since LGO and GGO move closely          growth, since global prices are not
market. GGO is the weighted sum of global industry PE             together.                               relevant for local markets.
ratios. The weights are determined by relative market
capitalization. It is expressed in logs.


LEGO is a local measure of country-specific growth                LEGO does not predict economic          LEGO predicts economic growth in
opportunities in excess of world growth opportunities. LEGO       growth in excess of world growth        excess of world economic growth.
is the difference between LGO and GGO.                            since it is zero or constant.           Local and global prices contain
                                                                                                          different information.

GEGO is a global measure of country-specific growth               GEGO predicts economic growth in        GEGO does not predict economic
opportunities in excess of world growth opportunities. GEGO       excess of world economic growth.        growth, since global prices are not
is the difference between GGO and the log of the world            Differences in industry composition     relevant for local markets.
market PE ratio (WGO). GEGO is different from zero when a         are the only factors leading to
country's industry composition differs from the world's           differences in economic growth.
industry composition.

For each growth opportunity measure we state its ability to predict economic growth under the two opposing assumptions of market integration and
segmentation.
Table 2
Description of the Variables
All data are employed at the annual frequency.

                       Variable                                                                    Description
LGO and LGO_MA                                    LGO and LGO_MA are local measures of country-specific growth opportunities. LGO is the log of a
                                                  country's market PE ratio. LGO_MA is LGO less a 60-month moving average. For a subset of 17
                                                  developed countries, both variables are available from 1980 through 2002. For the other countries, starting
                                                  points vary. For details see Appendix B. Source: Datastream, S&P Emerging Markets Data Base, MSCI.


GGO and GGO_MA                                    GGO and GGO_MA are global measures of country-specific growth opportunities. GGO is the log of the
                                                  inner product of the vector of global industry PE ratios and the vector of country-specific industry weights.
                                                  Country-specific industry weights are determine by relative market capitalization. We also investigate an
                                                  alternative set of weights based on the relative value added (VA) of the industries in a country. GGO_MA
                                                  is GGO less a 60-month moving average. Available for all 50 countries from 1980 through 2002. See
                                                  Appendix B for details. Source: Datastream, S&P Emerging Markets Data Base, UNIDO Industrial
                                                  Statistics Database
LEGO and LEGO_MA                                  LEGO and LEGO_MA are local measures of country-specific growth opportunities in excess of world
                                                  growth opportunities. LEGO is the difference between LGO and GGO. LEGO_MA is LEGO less a 60-
                                                  month moving average. For sample II (17 countries) both variables are available from 1980 through 2002.
                                                  For other countries, starting points vary. See Appendix B for details. Source: Datastream, S&P Emerging
                                                  Markets Data Base, MSCI.

GEGO and GEGO_MA                                  GEGO and GEGO_MA are global measures of country-specific growth opportunities in excess of world
                                                  growth opportunities. GEGO is the difference between GGO and WGO, the log of the world market price
                                                  to earnings ratio. GEGO_MA is GEGO less a 60-month moving average. Available for all 50 countries
                                                  from 1980 through 2002. See Appendix B for details. Source: Datastream, S&P Emerging Markets Data
                                                  Base, UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database

Gross domestic product (GDP) growth               Growth of real per capita gross domestic product. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2002.
                                                  Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.

Investment growth                                 Growth of real per capita gross fixed capital formation, which includes land improvements (fences, ditches,
                                                  drains, and so on), plant, machinery, and equipment purchases; and the construction of roads, railways, and
                                                  the like, including schools, offices, hospitals, private residential dwellings, and commercial and industrial
                                                  buildings. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2002. Source: World Bank Development
                                                  Indicators CD-ROM.

                                                                                             Measures of Openness

IMF Capital account liberalization indicator      We measure capital account openness by employing the the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange
                                                  Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). This publication reports six categories of
                                                  information. The capital account liberalization indicator takes on value of zero if the country has at least
                                                  one restriction in the "restrictions on payments for the capital account transaction" category.


Quinn Capital account liberalization indicator    Quinn’s capital account openness measure is also created from the text of the annual volume published by
                                                  the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Rather
                                                  than the indicator constructed by the IMF that takes a 1 if any restriction is in place, Quinn’s openness
                                                  measure is scored 0-4, in half integer units, with 4 representing a fully open economy. The measure hence
                                                  facilitates a more nuanced view of capital account openness, and is available for 48 countries in our study.
                                                  We transform the measure into a 0 to 1 scale.


Official equity market liberalization indicator   Corresponding to a date of formal regulatory change after which foreign investors officially have the
                                                  opportunity to invest in domestic equity securities. Official Liberalization dates are based on Bekaert and
                                                  Harvey (2002) A Chronology of Important Financial, Economic and Political Events in Emerging
                                                  Markets, http://www.duke.edu/~charvey/chronology.htm. This chronology is based on over 50 different
                                                  source materials. A condensed version of the chronology, along with the selection of dates for a number of
                                                  countries appears in Bekaert and Harvey (2000). We have extended their official liberalization dates to
                                                  include Japan, New Zealand, and Spain. For the liberalizing countries, the associated official liberalization
                                                  indicator takes a value of one when the equity market is officially liberalized and thereafter, and zero
                                                  otherwise. For the remaining countries, fully segmented countries are assumed to have an indicator value
                                                  of zero, and fully liberalized countries are assumed to have an indicator value of one. These dates appear
                                                  in Appendix Table A2.
Table 2
(Continued)
                          Variable                                                                  Description

Intensity equity market liberalization indicator   Following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), the intensity measure is based on the ratio of
                                                   the market capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the IFC Investable index to those that
                                                   comprise the IFC Global index for each country. The IFC Global index, subject to some exclusion
                                                   restrictions, is designed to represent the overall market portfolio for each country, whereas the IFC
                                                   Investable index is designed to represent a portfolio of domestic equities that are available to foreign
                                                   investors. A ratio of one means that all of the stocks are available to foreign investors. Fully segmented
                                                   countries have an intensity measure of zero, and fully liberalized countries have an intensity measure of
                                                   one.


Foreign banking liberalization indicator           Using a variety of sources (e.g. National Treatment Study, Fitch Ratings Country Reports, interviews with
                                                   local regulatory bodies), we determine when foreign banks gain access to the domestic banking market
                                                   through the establishment of branches or subsidiaries or through the acquisition of local banks. The Foreign
                                                   banking liberalization indicator is equal to zero before and equal to one during and after the year of
                                                   banking liberalization. We also construct a First Sign indicator that changes from zero to one when a
                                                   country takes substantial first steps to improve access for foreign banks. Both indicator variables are
                                                   available for 41 countries. Banking liberalization dates appear in Appendix Table A2.


                                                                                    Financial Development and Political Risk

Private credit/GDP                                 Private credit divided by gross domestic product. Credit to private sector refers to financial resources
                                                   provided to the private sector, such as through loans, purchases of non-equity securities, and trade credits
                                                   and other accounts receivable that establish a claim for repayment. Available for all countries from 1980
                                                   through 2002. Source: World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM.


Equity market turnover                             The ratio of equity market value traded to the market capitalization. The data are available for 50
                                                   countries from 1980 through 2002. Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's
                                                   Emerging Stock Markets Factbook.

Equity market size                                 The ratio of equity market value capitalization to GDP. The data are available for 50 countries from 1980
                                                   through 2002. Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock Markets
                                                   Factbook.

Quality of Institutions                            The sum of the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) Political Risk (ICRGP) subcomponents:
                                                   Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucratic Quality.

Law and Order                                      ICRG political risk sub-component. PRS assesses Law and Order separately, with each sub-component
                                                   comprising zero to three points. The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality
                                                   of the legal system, while the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of the law.
                                                   Thus, a country can enjoy a high rating (3.0) in terms of its judicial system, but a low rating (1.0) if the law
                                                   is ignored for a political aim.


Insider trading law indicator                      Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) document the first prosecution of insider trading laws. The indicator
                                                   variable takes the value of one following the the insider trading law's first prosecution.


Political risk rating                              The value of the the Political Risk Service (PRS) Group’s political risk rating indicator which ranges
                                                   between 0 (high risk) and 100 (low risk). The risk rating is a combination of 12 subcomponents. The data
                                                   are available from 1984 through 2002. For each country, we backfill the 1984 value to 1980. Source:
                                                   Various issues of the International Country Risk Guide.

Investment Profile                                 ICRG political risk sub-component (12% weight). This is a measure of the government’s attitude to inward
                                                   investment. The investment profile is determined by PRS's assessment of three sub-components: (i) risk of
                                                   expropriation or contract viability; (ii) payment delays; and (iii) repatriation of profits. Each sub-
                                                   component is scored on a scale from zero (very high risk) to four (very low risk).
Table 3
Summary Statistics: LGO, GGO, LEGO, and GEGO
1980 - 2002 - Annual Frequency

Panel A: Measures of Growth Opportunities
                                         Mean                                               Standard Deviation
                                            LGO         GGO         LEGO       GEGO             LGO         GGO         LEGO         GEGO
Sample Country
          World                               2.902       -           -           -               0.298       -            -           -
     I    Sample I: All Countries             2.720       2.932      -0.339       0.030           0.583        0.295       0.522        0.150
    II    Sample II: Developed                2.794       2.945      -0.208       0.044           0.518        0.288       0.369        0.128
   III    Sample III: Emerging                2.601       2.911      -0.494       0.009           0.617        0.298       0.599        0.152


Panel B: Measures of Growth Opportunities with MA-Adjustment
                                         Mean                                               Standard Deviation
                                            LGO_        GGO_       LEGO_       GEGO_           LGO_         GGO_        LEGO_       GEGO_
Sample Country                               MA          MA         MA          MA              MA           MA          MA          MA

          World                               0.082       -           -           -               0.177       -            -           -
     I    Sample I: All Countries              0.036      0.071      -0.016      -0.011           0.396        0.198       0.381        0.102
    II    Sample II: Developed                 0.057      0.072      -0.016      -0.010           0.281        0.192       0.239        0.090
   III    Sample III: Emerging                -0.004      0.071      -0.023      -0.011           0.506        0.200       0.519        0.105


Panel C: Correlations between Measures of Growth Opportunities
                                         Growth Opportunities                               Growth Opportunities with MA-Adjustment
                                            LGO,        LGO,        GGO,                       LGO,         LGO,        GGO,
Sample Country                              WGO         GGO         WGO                        WGO          GGO         WGO


     I   Sample I: All Countries                 0.252        0.298        0.870                        0.273      0.323        0.857
    II   Sample II: Developed                    0.498        0.560        0.903                        0.484      0.545        0.882
   III   Sample III: Emerging                    0.097        0.103        0.866                        0.048      0.117        0.852
Table 3 presents summary statistics for our unadjusted and moving-average adjusted growth opportunity measures, averaged over different
country groups. Data are not available for all years. For a definition of the different measures for growth opportunities, LGO, WGO, and GGO,
including the growth opportunities measures with the MA-Adjustment, see Appendix B.
Table 4
Growth Predictability
Annual Average Real GDP and Investment Growth (Five-year horizon)
1980-2002

Panel A: Local Growth Opportunities
                                                  GDP growth                                                      Investment growth
                                All Countries      Developed         Emerging                     All Countries       Developed        Emerging
LGO                                0.0026            0.0072           0.0017                         0.0071             0.0256          0.0001
                                  (0.0004)          (0.0013)         (0.0006)                       (0.0017)           (0.0044)        (0.0042)

LGO_MA                              0.0043           0.0097            0.0040                         0.0154           0.0279            0.0118
                                   (0.0001)         (0.0018)          (0.0125)                       (0.0040)         (0.0062)          (0.0075)

Panel B: Exogenous (Implied) Global Growth Opportunities
                                           GDP growth                                                             Investment growth
                             All Countries  Developed                Emerging                     All Countries       Developed        Emerging
GGO                             0.0070        0.0033                  0.0131                         0.0408             0.0211          0.0704
                               (0.0019)      (0.0026)                (0.0026)                       (0.0060)           (0.0085)        (0.0080)

GGO_MA                              0.0142           0.0163            0.0106                         0.0397           0.0489            0.0223
                                   (0.0023)         (0.0031)          (0.0035)                       (0.0071)         (0.0102)          (0.0112)

GGO (VA)                            0.0081           0.0061            0.0117                         0.0347           0.0252            0.0552
                                   (0.0017)         (0.0023)          (0.0027)                       (0.0055)         (0.0072)          (0.0089)

GGO_MA (VA)                         0.0101           0.0114            0.0056                         0.0235           0.0345            0.0052
                                   (0.0018)         (0.0024)          (0.0030)                       (0.0056)         (0.0075)          (0.0088)


The samples included reflect 50 (all), 17 (developed), and 30 (emerging) countries detailed in the data appendix. The dependent variables are either
the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product or investment. We include in the regressions, but do not report, fixed effect
We report the coefficient on the lagged growth opportunities measure. In Panel A, we measure local growth opportunities. For the full sample and
the emerging markets, these regressions are unbalanced based on data availability. In Panel B, we measure exogenous growth opportunities. We
also report evidence for the alternative value added (VA) industry weights. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a
correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors in parentheses account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 5
Exogenous Growth Opportunities and Openness
Annual Average Real GDP and Investment Growth (Five-year horizon)
50 countries: 1980-2002

Panel A: Capital Account Openness                                  Panel B: Equity Market Openness                                 Panel C: Banking Sector Openness
                                       GDP        Investment                                              GDP       Investment                                            GDP       Investment
GGO_MA                                0.0123        0.0325         GGO_MA                                0.0061       0.0143       GGO_MA                                0.0074       0.0171
                                     (0.0029)      (0.0084)                                             (0.0037)     (0.0120)                                           (0.0042)     (0.0116)
GGO_MA*Capital Account                                             GGO_MA*Official Equity Market                                   GGO_MA*Banking Sector
Openness (IMF)                        0.0032         0.0183        Liberalization                        0.0122       0.0372       Liberalization                        0.0118        0.0419
                                     (0.0044)       (0.0137)                                            (0.0044)     (0.0141)                                           (0.0048)      (0.0145)


GGO_MA                                0.0060         0.0167        GGO_MA                                0.0063       0.0118       GGO_MA                                0.0072        0.0071
                                     (0.0053)       (0.0171)                                            (0.0037)     (0.0113)                                           (0.0049)      (0.0130)
GGO_MA*Capital Account                                             GGO_MA*Equity Market Degree                                     GGO_MA*Banking Sector
Degree of Openness (Quinn)            0.0105         0.0343        of Openness                           0.0127       0.0439       Liberalization (First Sign)           0.0107        0.0475
                                     (0.0074)       (0.0242)                                            (0.0045)     (0.0142)                                           (0.0053)      (0.0147)


The sample includes 50 developed and emerging countries detailed in the data appendix. The dependent variables are either the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product
or investment. We include in the regressions, but do not report, fixed effects. We measure exogenous growth opportunities as GGO_MA. We report the coefficient on the growth opportunities
measure and interaction terms with 1) a 0/1 indicator of capital account openness from the IMF, 2) a continuous measure of the degree of capital account openness from Quinn (only 48 countries are
available), 3) official equity market liberalization from Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2004), 4) the degree of equity market openness (investability), and 5) two indicators of banking sector
liberalization -- opening the banking sector to foreign banks (given data limitations, this regression covers only 41 countries). The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a
correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors in parentheses account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 6
Exogenous Growth Opportunities, Financial Development, Investor Protection, and Political Risk
Annual Average Real GDP and Investment Growth (Five-year horizon)
50 countries: 1980-2002

Panel A: Financial Development                                      Panel B: Investor Protection                                      Panel C: Political Risk
                                             GDP      Investment                                                GDP      Investment                                        GDP      Investment
GGO_MA                                      0.0067      0.0114      GGO_MA                                     0.0079      0.0070     GGO_MA                              -0.0064     -0.0212
                                           (0.0042)    (0.0126)                                               (0.0060)    (0.0203)                                       (0.0091)    (0.0291)

GGO_MA*Private Credit                       0.0116      0.0408      GGO_MA*Law and Order (ICRG)                0.0084      0.0429     GGO_MA*Political Risk (ICRG)        0.0289      0.0850
                                           (0.0060)    (0.0166)                                               (0.0075)    (0.0252)                                       (0.0124)    (0.0394)

GGO_MA                                      0.0167      0.0488      GGO_MA                                     0.0096      0.0133     GGO_MA                              0.0002      -0.2092
                                           (0.0027)    (0.0089)                                               (0.0074)    (0.0230)                                       (0.0071)    (0.0231)

GGO_MA*Equity Market Turnover               -0.0084     -0.0307     GGO_MA*Quality of Institutions (ICRG)      0.0060      0.0350     GGO_MA*Investment Profile (ICRG)    0.0226      0.0968
                                           (0.0053)    (0.0191)                                               (0.0093)    (0.0291)                                       (0.0115)    (0.0366)

GGO_MA                                      0.0142      0.0378      GGO_MA                                     0.0143      0.0402
                                           (0.0027)    (0.0082)                                               (0.0023)    (0.0072)

GGO_MA*Equity Market Size                   -0.0021     0.0054      GGO_MA*Insider Trading Prosecution         -0.0016     -0.0026
                                           (0.0064)    (0.0194)                                               (0.0057)    (0.0183)

Panel D: Openness, Financial Development, and Law and Order
                                            GDP      Investment                                                GDP       Investment

Low Private Credit/Closed Equity Market     0.0063      0.0074      Low Law and Order/Closed Equity Market     0.0062      0.0134
                                           (0.0041)    (0.0124)                                               (0.0038)    (0.0122)


Low Private Credit/Open Equity Market       0.0220      0.0537      Low Law and Order/Open Equity Market       0.0173      0.0367
                                           (0.0040)    (0.0142)                                               (0.0058)    (0.0177)


High Private Credit/Closed Equity Market    0.0063      0.0374      High Law and Order/Closed Equity Market    0.0073      0.0167
                                           (0.0066)    (0.0262)                                               (0.0187)    (0.0522)


High Private Credit/Open Equity Market      0.0152      0.0489      High Law and Order/Open Equity Market      0.0183      0.0544
                                           (0.0029)    (0.0089)                                               (0.0026)    (0.0086)
Wald Tests:                                                         Wald Tests:
 Closed versus Open                        15.17***    10.17***      Closed versus Open                        6.10**       1.47
 Low versus High Private Credit             1.60        2.56         Low versus High Law and Order              0.02        0.40
The sample includes 50 developed and emerging countries detailed in the data appendix. The dependent variables are either the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross
domestic product or investment. We include in the regressions, but do not report, fixed effects. We measure exogenous growth opportunities as GGO_MA. We report the coefficient
on the growth opportunities measure and interaction terms with financial development (Panel A): 1) the ratio of private credit to GDP, 2) equity market turnover, 3) the ratio of equity
market capitalization to GDP; Investor Protection (Panel B): 1) the ICRG law and order subcomponent, 2) the ICRG quality of institutions subcomponent, and 3) the insider trading
prosecution indicator; and Political Risk (Panel C): 1) the composite ICRG political risk rating and 2) the ICRG investment profile subcomponent. In Panel D, we interact the growth
opportunities measure with four indicators constructed by grouping all country-years into one of four boxes. The interaction variables are as follows: an indicator that takes a value of
one when the variable (private credit or law and order) is below the median and the equity market is closed, and zero otherwise; an indicator that takes the value of one when the
variable is below the median and the equity market is open, and zero otherwise; an indicator that takes the value of one of the variable is above the median and the equity market is
closed, and zero otherwise; and finally, and indicator that takes the value of one when the variable is above the median and the equity market is open, and zero otherwise. We include
chi-squared statistics for two sets of Wald tests: 1) the first evaluates closed versus open equity markets by jointly testing whether the first and second and the third and fourth
coefficients are equivalent; 2) the second evaluates low versus high levels of either the private credit or law and order measures by jointly testing whether the first and third and second
and fourth coefficients are equal. *** and ** indicate significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction
for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors in parentheses account for the overlapping nature of the data.
Table 7
Exploiting Growth Opportunities
Annual Average Excess Real GDP and Investment Growth (Five-year horizon)
1980-2002

Panel A: Local vs. Implied Global Growth Opportunities
                                            Excess GDP growth                                                Excess Investment growth
                              All Countries     Developed     Emerging                            All Countries     Developed       Emerging
LEGO                             0.0011           0.0099       -0.0004                               0.0002           0.0255          -0.0011
                                (0.0018)         (0.0014)     (0.0009)                              (0.0060)         (0.0046)        (0.0046)

LEGO_MA                             0.0006            0.0063          -0.0017                         0.0050           0.0114            0.0066
                                   (0.0007)          (0.0016)         (0.0013)                       (0.0034)         (0.0053)          (0.0090)

Panel B: Excess Exogenous (Implied) Global Growth Opportunities
                                           Excess GDP growth                                                 Excess Investment growth
                             All Countries     Developed     Emerging                             All Countries     Developed       Emerging
GEGO                            0.0021           0.0039       -0.0004                                0.0151           0.0246          -0.0066
                               (0.0027)         (0.0038)     (0.0042)                               (0.0080)         (0.0105)        (0.0139)

GEGO_MA                             0.0064            0.0075           0.0007                         0.0192           0.0225            0.0076
                                   (0.0032)          (0.0045)         (0.0055)                       (0.0091)         (0.0121)          (0.0164)

The samples included reflect 50 (all), 17 (developed), and 30 (emerging) countries detailed in the data appendix. The dependent variables are either
the 5-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product or investment in excess of the total world counterpart. We include in the
regressions, but do not report, fixed effects. In Panel A, we measure excess local growth opportunities as LEGO, the difference between local and
exogenous growth opportunities (LGO-GGO). For the full sample and the emerging markets, these regressions are unbalanced based on data
availability. In Panel B, we measure excess exogenous growth opportunities as GEGO, the difference between exogenous and total world growth
opportunities (GGO-WGO). We report the coefficient on the lagged growth opportunities measure. The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM
estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors in parentheses account for the overlapping nature of the
data.
Table 8
Exploiting Growth Opportunities and Market Integration
Annual Average Excess Real GDP and Investment Growth (Five-year horizon)
Sample I (50 countries): 1980-2002

Panel A: Capital Account Openness
                                            GDP         Investment                                                    GDP         Investment
LEGO_MA                                    0.0019         0.0160         GEGO_MA                                     0.0032         0.0044
                                          (0.0013)       (0.0033)                                                   (0.0041)       (0.0124)

LEGO_MA*Capital Account                                                  GEGO_MA*Capital Account
Openness (IMF)                             -0.0019        -0.0189        Openness (IMF)                              0.0080         0.0324
                                          (0.0016)       (0.0056)                                                   (0.0065)       (0.0183)

LEGO_MA                                    0.0056         0.0502         GEGO_MA                                     -0.0051        -0.0153
                                          (0.0034)       (0.0146)                                                   (0.0086)       (0.0275)

LEGO_MA*Capital Account Degree                                           GEGO_MA*Capital Account Degree
of Openness (Quinn)                        -0.0051        -0.0530        of Openness (Quinn)                         0.0181         0.0481
                                          (0.0039)       (0.0174)                                                   (0.0122)       (0.0363)

Panel B: Equity Market Openness
LEGO_MA                                    -0.0029        -0.0165        GEGO_MA                                     -0.0059        -0.0001
                                          (0.0081)       (0.0248)                                                   (0.0058)       (0.0177)

LEGO_MA*Official Equity Market                                           GEGO_MA*Official Equity Market
Liberalization                             0.0040         0.0227         Liberalization                              0.0196         0.0278
                                          (0.0082)       (0.0250)                                                   (0.0069)       (0.0206)

LEGO_MA                                    -0.0003        0.0194         GEGO_MA                                     -0.0029        -0.0035
                                          (0.0033)       (0.0147)                                                   (0.0060)       (0.0203)

LEGO_MA*Equity Market Degree of                                          GEGO_MA*Equity Market Degree of
Openness                                   0.0015         -0.0158        Openness                                    0.0160         0.0319
                                          (0.0036)       (0.0156)                                                   (0.0074)       (0.0242)

Panel C: Banking Sector Openness
LEGO_MA                                    0.0023         0.0172         GEGO_MA                                     0.0005         0.0031
                                          (0.0020)       (0.0107)                                                   (0.0065)       (0.0172)

LEGO_MA*Banking Sector                                                   GEGO_MA*Banking Sector
Liberalization                             -0.0009        -0.0182        Liberalization                              0.0121         0.0252
                                          (0.0023)       (0.0040)                                                   (0.0075)       (0.0208)

LEGO_MA                                    0.0028         0.0342         GEGO_MA                                     -0.0088        -0.0286
                                          (0.0038)       (0.0121)                                                   (0.0076)       (0.0200)

LEGO_MA*Banking Sector                                                   GEGO_MA*Banking Sector
Liberalization (First Sign)                -0.0007        -0.0294        Liberalization (First Sign)                 0.0221         0.0616
                                          (0.0040)       (0.0127)                                                   (0.0084)       (0.0227)
This sample includes 50 developed and emerging countries detailed in the data appendix. The dependent variables are either the 5-year
average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product or investment in excess of the total world counterpart. We include in the
regressions, but do not report, fixed effects. We measure excess exogenous growth opportunities as GEGO_MA, the difference between
exogenous and total world growth opportunities (GGO_MA-WGO_MA). We report the coefficient on the growth opportunities measure and
interaction terms with 1) a 0/1 indicator of capital account openness from the IMF, 2) a continuous measure of the degree of capital account
openness from Quinn (only 48 countries are available), 3) official equity market liberalization from Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2004),
4) the degree of equity market openness (investability), and 5) two indicators of banking sector liberalalization -- opening the banking sector
to foreign banks (give data limitations, this regression covers only 41 countries).
The weighting matrix we employ in our GMM estimation provides a correction for cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. All standard errors in
parentheses account for the overlapping nature of the data.
  Figure 1: Sample Average of Abs. Value of LEGO ():
  Developed Countries
  1980-2002


 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

   0
       1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

 The graph shows the cross-sectional average of the December value of the absolute
 value of LEGO for each year between 1980 and 2002.




Figure 2: Sample Average of Absolute Value of GEGO:
Developed Countries (), Emerging Countries (S) 1980-2002

0.25


 0.2


0.15


 0.1


0.05


  0
       1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002

 For each sample, the graph shows the cross-sectional average of the absolute value of
 GEGO for each year between 1980 and 2002.
Figure 3: Average Absolute Difference btw. Local and Global
Industry Weights: Developed Countries (S),
Austria (z), USA () - 1980 - 2002
 0.06

 0.05

 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0.00
        1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002


 For each country, the average absolute value of the differences between the country-
 specific industry weights (based on relative market capitalization) and the world
 industry weights is calculated across all 35 industries each year. For the sample of
 developed countries, the graph shows the average value across countries.
Appendix Table A1
Sample Composition and Data Sources



Sample Composition                         LGO: Sources and Availability of PE                    GGO: Sources and Availability of Industry Weights (IW)

                                             Datastream:           IFC:            MSCI:             Datastream:             IFC:               UNIDO:
Sample Country                     Code     available since   available since   available since    Annual IW start in   Annual IW start in   Annual IW start in

     -       World                   -        Jan-73                                                       -                    -                    -

I, III       Argentina             ARG        Jul-91                                                                         1984                 1983
I, II        Australia             AUS        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, II        Austria               AUT        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Bangladesh            BGD                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, II        Belgium               BEL        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Brazil                BRA        May-99                                                                         1983                 1990
I, II        Canada                CAN        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Chile                 CHL        Jul-89                                                                         1975                 1973
I, III       Colombia              COL        Feb-93                                                                         1984                 1973
I, III       Cote d'Ivoire         CIV                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, II        Denmark               DNK        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Egypt                 EGY                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I            Finland               FIN        Mar-88                                                    1988                                      1973
I, II        France                FRA        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, II        Germany               DEU        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Greece                GRC        Jan-90                                                                         1975                 1973
I, III       India                 IND        Jan-90                                                                         1975                 1973
I, III       Indonesia             IDN        Jan-91                                                                         1989                 1973
I, II        Ireland               IRL        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Israel                ISR        Jan-93                                                                         1997                 1973
I            Italy                 ITA                                            Apr-84                1973                                      1973
I, III       Jamaica               JAM                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, II        Japan                 JPN        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Jordan                JOR                           Jul-86                                                      1979                 1973
I, III       Kenya                 KEN                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, III       Korea, South          KOR        Jan-88                                                                         1975                 1973
I, III       Malaysia              MYS        Jan-86                                                                         1984                 1973
I, III       Mexico                MEX        Jul-90                                                                         1975                 1973
I, III       Morocco               MAR                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, II        Netherlands           NLD        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I            New Zealand           NZL        Jan-88                                                    1988                                      1973
I, III       Nigeria               NGA                          Sep-86                                                       1984                 1973
I, II        Norway                NOR                                             Jan-73               1980                                      1973
I, III       Pakistan              PAK                          Apr-86                                                       1984                 1973
I, III       Philippines           PHL        Sep-87                                                                         1984                 1973
I, III       Portugal              PRT        Jan-90                                                                         1986                 1973
I, II        Singapore             SGP        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, II, III   South Africa          ZAF        Jan-73                                                    1992                                      1973
I            Spain                 ESP                                             Jan-80               1987                                      1973
I, III       Sri Lanka             LKA                           Jan-93                                                      1992                 1973
I, II        Sweden                SWE                                             Jan-73               1982                                      1973
I, II        Switzerland           CHE        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1986
I, III       Thailand              THA        Jan-87                                                                         1976                 1973
I, III       Trinidad and Tobago   TTO                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, III       Tunisia               TUN                           Jan-96                                                      1996                 1973
I, III       Turkey                TUR        Apr-90                                                                         1986                 1973
I, II        United Kingdom        GBR        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, II        United States         USA        Jan-73                                                    1973                                      1973
I, III       Venezuela             VEN        Mar-92                                                                         1984                 1973
I, III       Zimbabwe              ZWE                           Jan-86                                                      1975                 1973
For the construction of LGO, market PE ratios from Datastream (preferred source), IFC, and MSCI are used. The table shows which source is used and the
first month for which data are available. For the construction of GGO, industry weights (IW) are obtained from IFC (preferred source) and Datastream. The
table reports which source is used and since which year market values are available. For the construction of GGO (VA), industry weights (IW) are obtained
from UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database. The table reports since which year market values are available.
Appendix Table A2
Dating Liberalization
                                        Official Equity Market               Banking Liberalization               Banking Liberalization
Country                                  Liberalization Year                          Year                          "First Sign" Year

Argentina (ARG)                                  1989                           1980 - 1983, 1994                    1980 - 1983, 1994
Bangladesh (BGD)                                 1991                                   n/a                                  n/a
Brazil (BRA)                                     1991                                  1995                                 1995
Chile (CHL)                                      1992                                  1998                                 1998
Colombia (COL)                                   1991                                  1990                                 1990
Cote d'Voire (CIV)                               1995                                   n/a                                  n/a
Egypt (EGY)                                      1992                                  1993                                 1993
Greece (GRC)                                     1987                                  1992                                 1987
India (IND)                                      1992                                 closed                                1992
Indonesia (IDN)                                  1989                                  1999                                 1988
Israel (ISR)                                     1993                                  open                                 open
Jamaica (JAM)                                    1991                                   n/a                                  n/a
Japan (JPN)                                      1983                                  1985                                 1985
Jordan (JOR)                                     1995                                   n/a                                  n/a
Kenya (KEN)                                      1995                                  open                                 open
Korea (KOR)                                      1992                                  1998                                 1982
Malaysia (MYS)                                   1988                                 closed                               closed
Mexico (MEX)                                     1989                                  1994                                 1991
Morocco (MAR)                                    1988                                   n/a                                  n/a
New Zealand (NZL)                                1987                                  1987                                 1987
Nigeria (NGA)                                    1995                                   n/a                                  n/a
Pakistan (PAK)                                   1991                                 closed                                1994
Philippines (PHL)                                1991                                  2000                                 1994
Portugal (PRT)                                   1986                                  1984                                 1984
South Africa (ZAF)                               1996                                  open                                 open
Spain (ESP)                                      1985                                  open                                 open
Sri Lanka (LKA)                                  1991                                  1998                                 1988
Thailand (THA)                                   1987                                 closed                                1997
Trinidad & Tobago (TTO)                          1997                                   n/a                                  n/a
Tunisia (TUN)                                    1995                                   n/a                                  n/a
Turkey (TUR)                                     1989                                  open                                 open
Venezuela (VEN)                                  1990                                  1994                                 1994
Zimbabwe (ZWE)                                   1993                                   n/a                                  n/a



The official equity market liberalization dates are based on Bekaert and Harvey (2002). Banking Liberalization dates and "First Sign" dates are
defined in Table 2. Note that foreign banks could not enter the Argentinean banking market between 1984 and 1993. n/a indicates information for
the country is not available. All other countries are considered fully liberalized from 1980-2002.
