                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    TAYLOR RULES AND THE DEUTSCHMARK-DOLLAR REAL EXCHANGE RATE

                                             Charles Engel
                                            Kenneth D. West

                                         Working Paper 10995
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10995


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support, Jeffrey Frankel, Hélène Rey, Paul Evans,
and participants in various seminars for helpful comments, and Emmanuele Bobbio, Shiu-Sheng Chen, Akito
Matsumoto and Yu Yuan for research assistance. This paper was revised while West was a Houblon-Norman
Fellow at the Bank of England. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Charles Engel and Kenneth D. West. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Taylor Rules and the Deutschmark-Dollar Real Exchange Rate
Charles Engel and Kenneth D. West
NBER Working Paper No. 10995
December 2004
JEL No. F41, E52

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the link between an interest rate rule for monetary policy and the behavior of the real

exchange rate. The interest rate rule, in conjunction with some standard assumptions, implies that

the deviation of the real exchange rate from its steady state depends on the present value of a

weighted sum of inflation and output gap differentials. The weights are functions of the parameters

of the interest rate rule. An initial look at German data yields some support for the model.

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

Kenneth D. West
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
kdwest@facstaff.wisc.edu
                                            1. INTRODUCTION

        This paper explores the link between an interest rate rule for monetary policy and the behavior

of the real exchange rate.

        A large body of research has studied the connection between monetary policy or interest rates on

the one hand and exchange rates on the other. The vintage monetary model of the exchange rate takes

the money supply as the indicator of policy. (See Frankel and Rose (1995) for a survey.) Some recent

literature (Bergin (2003)) also assumes exogenous monetary policy, while estimating a general

equilibrium sticky-price open economy macroeconomic model. Yet an ongoing literature has argued,

persuasively in our view, that recent monetary policy can be better modeled as taking the interest rate as

the instrument of policy, with policy described by a feedback rule. The empirical literature for the

United States includes Taylor (1993) as a relatively early contribution, English et al. (2002) as a recent

study. Open economy interest rate rules that include exchange rates have been studied quantitatively

(e.g., Clarida et al. (1998), Meredith and Ma (2002)) and in terms of welfare properties (e.g., Ball

(1999), Clarida et al. (2001), Svensson (2000), and Kollman (2002)). These papers do not, however,

consider the positive effects of interest rate rules on the exchange rate.

        At least four strands of literature do specifically analyze real or nominal exchange rates in a

framework that treats the interest rate - exchange rate interaction in detail. One is the literature on

identified VARs. Kim (2002), who includes an exchange rate in his interest rate equation, is an example.

A second strand of the literature tests or examines interest parity, in a relatively unstructured way,

decomposing real exchange rate movements into components that can be linked to interest rates and

those that cannot. Examples include Campbell and Clarida (1987), Edison and Pauls (1993) and Baxter

(1994). A third strand of the literature develops general equilibrium sticky price models, and uses

calibration. Examples include Benigno (1999) and Benigno and Benigno (2001). The papers in these

three strands typically, though not always, find a statistically or quantitatively strong connection between



                                                      1
interest rates and exchange rates. This encourages us to study the connection. We use an approach that is

shared by a fourth strand of the literature.

        This strand is a long-standing one that models the exchange rate as a present value. Traditional

econometric techniques are used, and the present value is estimated using atheoretical forecasting

equations. Examples include Woo (1985), Frankel and Meese (1987) and West (1987). In terms of

mechanics, our empirical approach is similar to that of the present value literature, though this literature

has yet to consider Taylor rules.

        Several of the papers cited above have added terms in exchange rates to otherwise standard

Taylor rules (e.g., Clarida et al. (1998), Benigno (1999). We, too, take this approach, adding the

deviation of the real exchange rate from its steady state value to a Taylor rule that also includes standard

terms in inflation and output. We do so with the aim of evaluating the effect such a term has on time

series properties of aggregate variables, including in particular exchange rates. We show that in

conjunction with interest parity, this modified rule delivers a relation between current and expected real

exchange rates on the one hand and inflation and output on the other.

        Our empirical work solves this relationship forward, expressing the real exchange rate as the

present value of the difference between home and foreign output gaps and inflation rates. The discount

factor depends on the weight that the real exchange rate receives in the Taylor rule. The weights on

output and inflation are those of the Taylor rule. We attempt to gauge the congruence between the

variable implied by this present value and the actual Deutschmark-dollar real exchange rate, 1979-1998.

We focus on Germany because Clarida et al. (1998) found that the real exchange rate entered an interest

rate rule for Germany with a coefficient that is statistically significant, albeit small.

        To construct this present value–what we call a “model-based” real exchange rate–we compute

forecasts of German-U.S. inflation and output gaps differentials from an unconstrained vector

autoregression and impose rather than estimate Taylor-rule coefficients. We generate a model-based



                                                       2
nominal exchange rate by adding actual inflation to changes in the model-based real exchange rate.

        We find that the model-based exchange rates display two well known properties of actual

exchange rates. First, for both nominal and real model based rates, autocorrelations of the growth rates

are quite close to zero. In this sense, they follow processes not too far from random walks. Second, the

correlation between changes in nominal and real model based rates is nearly one. For the model-based

real exchange rate, this follows because discounting a sum of highly persistent series (in our case, output

and annual inflation) produces a series far more variable than the series that are being discounted. So

constructing the model based nominal exchange rate by adding inflation does little to change the

behavior of the series.

        We also compare the implied time series of the model-based real exchange rate with that of the

actual series. Here the results are more modest. The correlation between levels of the two variables is

about 0.3, between growth rates is about 0.1. The correlation between model-based and actual changes

in nominal exchange rates is also about 0.1. Some investigation suggests that the 0.3 figure results

because this is essentially the correlation between the linear combination of inflation and output that

enters the Taylor rule on the one hand, and the real exchange rate on the other.

        These correlations admittedly are not particularly large. And whatever success our approach

does achieve empirically comes after making many simplifying, and admittedly debatable, assumptions.

These include among others: model-consistent (rational) expectations; expectations that are

homogeneous across participants in exchange rate markets and monetary policy makers; stable regimes

(no bumps from reunification, no bumps–even in 1998–from the prospective introduction of the euro).

Hence we recognize that these results should be interpreted with caution.

        Section two describes our model. Section three outlines data, econometric model and estimation

technique. Section four presents basic results. Section five presents additional results and discussion.

Section 6 concludes. An Appendix outlines a stylized sticky price general equilibrium model similar to



                                                     3
that in Galí and Monacelli (1999). The paper occasionally references the Appendix when interpreting

results.



                                                          2. MODEL

           We use a two country model. Let “h” denote the home country (Germany, in our empirical

work), “*” the foreign country (the U.S., in our empirical work.) Also, define:


(2.1)      iht = interest rate in home country, i*t = interest rate in foreign country, it = iht -i*t is the difference

                      between home and foreign interest rates; all interest rates expressed at annual rates

           yht , y*t , yt=yht -y*t : deviation of log output from trend;

           pht , p*t , pt=pht -p*t : log price levels;

           Bht , B*t , Bt=Bht - B*t : inflation (first difference of log consumer price level [CPI]);

            h     *         h    *
           umt , umt , umt=umt -umt , : shock to monetary policy rule;

           st: log nominal exchange rate (e.g., DM/$, when Germany is the home country);

           qt=st-(pht -p*t ) / st-pt : log real exchange rate;

           Et: mathematical expectations conditional on a period t information set.


For convenience, we will generally omit the qualifier “difference” when referring to differences between

home and foreign variables: yt and Bt will be called plain old “output” and “inflation.” For clarity, this

section omits factors of 12 necessary in certain equations to convert monthly to annual rates. These are

inserted in the next section and in the empirical work.

           The monetary rules in the foreign and home countries are:


(2.2)      i*t = (BEtB*t+1 + (yy*t + umt
                                      *
                                         ,

(2.3)      iht = (qqt + (BEtBht+1 + (yyht + umt
                                             h
                                                .




                                                                 4
We omit constant and trend terms here and throughout. Use of expected inflation and current output

slightly simplifies some of our calculations below (relative to use of expected output along with expected

inflation, or current inflation and current output), but seems unlikely to have important qualitative

effects.1

            Equation (2.2) is a standard Taylor rule, assumed in our empirical work to apply to the U.S..

Equation (2.3) is a Taylor rule with the real exchange rate included. This equation is assumed in our

empirical work to apply to Germany. The assumption that the two countries have the same monetary

policy parameters (B and (y is for convenience; empirical work reported below briefly experiments with

distinct parameters, finding that results with homogenous parameters are representative. We assume

(B>1, (y>0, and (q>0.2

            With (q>0, the monetary authority is assumed to raise interest rates when the real exchange rate

is above (the currency is depreciated relative to) its long-run level. (Recall that since we are omitting

constants and trends, we write equation (2.3) in a form that gives the long-run level as zero.) We take

this as a reasonable description of monetary policy in some open economies.3 Perhaps the most pertinent

reference is Clarida et al. (1998), who find that a term in the real exchange rate is statistically significant
                                                             ^
in Taylor rules estimated for Germany and Japan, with (q.0.1.

            More generally, we take (2.3) to be a specific form of a Taylor rule that includes a term of the

form

                    -
(2.4)       (q(st - st)


                                               -
where st is the nominal exchange rate and st is a target for st. In (2.3), the target is (pht -p*t )+constant,
                                                                                                             -
where the constant has been omitted from (2.3) for simplicity. In Cho and West (2003), the target st

followed an unobserved random walk. The Taylor rules for Italy, France and the U. K. that were
                                                                      -
estimated by Clarida et al. (1998) fall into this framework with st set to central parity within the ERM.



                                                         5
        Subtract (2.2) from (2.3), obtaining


(2.5)   it = (qqt + (BEtBt+1 + (yyt + umt.


Next, write uncovered interest parity as


(2.6)   it = Etst+1-st.


Upon subtracting the expected value of next period’s inflation from both sides of (2.6), and using the

definition of qt, we obtain


(2.7)   it - EtBt+1 = Etqt+1-qt.


Use (2.7) to substitute out for it on the left hand side of (2.5). The result may be written


(2.8)   qt = bEtqt+1 + bEt(1-(B)Bt+1 - b(yyt - bumt.


In (2.8), b = 1/(1+(q), 0<b<1.

        We note that if we add an exogenous risk premium shock to (2.6), then (2.8) still results but with

umt redefined to be the difference between the monetary policy shock and the risk premium shock. (That

is, if we call the risk premium shock udt, rewriting (2.6) as it = Etst+1-st+udt, and rename the monetary
                 ~                              ~
policy shock to umt, then (2.8) holds with umt=umt-udt). One can therefore interpret umt as incorporating

such shocks. The effects of a risk premium shock are the opposite of those of a monetary policy shock.

        After once again suppressing a risk premium shock, we observe that by combining the Taylor

rule with uncovered interest parity we have a relationship that is rather richer than uncovered interest

parity. To test uncovered interest parity, one needs a model for the exchange rate. Often such a model is

supplied in what might be called nonparametric form, with minimal assumptions made about the

exchange rate. An example is when one tests or estimates interest parity under rational expectations by



                                                       6
replacing expectations with realizations, but one does not spell out the process followed by the exchange

rate. See Lewis (1995). Another example is when one models qt as the expected present discounted

value of real interest differentials (e.g., Campbell and Clarida (1987)). Our empirical work not only

assumes model-consistent (rational) expectations, but also maintains an additional set of assumptions in

the form of the Taylor rule. We expect additional assumptions to on balance be helpful if they are

consistent with the data. And in our view, the empirical results are consistent with this expectation.

        In our empirical work, we do not estimate a Taylor rule. Instead, relying on (2.8), we focus on

the relationship between qt on the one hand and yt and Bt on the other. Equation (2.8) contains three

variables that are endogenous in general equilibrium (qt, Bt, and yt). Our empirical work does not rely on

any particular set of structural equations or restrictions to close the model. Rather, we use atheoretical

forecasting equations, as described in the next section. But for intuition, it is helpful to work through a

specific structural model. In the Appendix, we combine (2.8) with: (1)a market clearing condition

relating the output gap to the real exchange rate and, called the IS curve for convenience, and (2)a price

adjustment equation (Phillips curve) that relates inflation and output. These three equations determine

equilibrium output, the real exchange rate and prices/inflation. The nominal exchange rate is determined

via )st=)qt+Bt.

        The Appendix system has the following properties in terms of responses to shocks:

•A positive monetary policy shock (umt8–i.e., an exogenous monetary tightening) causes the real and

nominal exchange rates qt and st to fall (i.e., appreciation). Inflation Bt and output yt also fall. The

response of exchange rates is consistent with interest parity. The response of inflation and output is

consistent with conventional closed economy models.

•Consider a positive Phillips curve shock that, given output and expected inflation, raises inflation

transitorily. A real appreciation will result. This follows from the combination of interest parity and the

parameter restriction (B>1 in the Taylor rule (2.5). With (B>1, incipient increases in inflation cause the



                                                      7
real interest rate to increase. From interest parity, the real exchange rate falls. Output falls as well.

•Consider a positive real shock to the IS curve that, given the real exchange rate qt, raises output yt.

Then in equilibrium, output rises, the real exchange rate falls and the inflation rate of home produced

goods rises relative to that foreign produced goods. The impact on Bt (home inflation Bht relative to

foreign inflation B*t ), however, is ambiguous: inflation of home relative to foreign goods rises (pushing Bt

up), while the real exchange rate falls (pushing Bt down). But we can say that Bt unambiguously falls for

a sufficiently large interest rate response to output (y. For in this case, the rise in output will cause an

increase in interest rates sufficiently large to dampen inflation.

          This discussion of the Appendix model is intended to give intuition to how a Taylor rule affects

propagation. In our empirical work, we do not attempt to identify and trace through the effects of

structural shocks. Instead, we aim to compare certain properties of data generated according to (2.8) and

the actual German -U. S. data.



                 3. DATA, EMPIRICAL MODEL AND ECONOMETRIC TECHNIQUE

A, Data

          In our empirical work, Germany is the home country, U.S. the foreign country. We focus on

Germany because Clarida et al. (1998) found that a Taylor rule, with a real exchange rate term included,

well characterizes German monetary policy. We use monthly data; apart from lags, our sample runs

from 1979:10 to 1998:12. The start of the sample is chosen to coincide with the beginning of the

Volcker regime shift, the end with the introduction of the euro.

          Data were obtained from the International Financial Statistics CD-ROM and from the web site of

the Bundesbank. Output is measured as the log of seasonally adjusted industrial production (IFS series

66..c), prices as the log of the CPI (series 64), inflation as the first differences of log prices, interest rates

by a money market rate (series 60b), exchange rate as the log of the end of month rate (series ae). (Use



                                                        8
of monthly average exchange rates in preliminary work led to little difference in results.) Following

Clarida et al. (1998), the output gap yt was constructed as the residual from quadratically detrended

output. U.S. and German output were detrended separately, before the output gap differential was

constructed. Output, prices and exchange rates were multiplied by 100 so differences are interpretable as

percentage changes.

        The IFS data combine data for West Germany (1979-1990) and unified Germany (1991-1998).

We obtained a continuous series for West German industrial production and CPI from the Bundesbank.

To smooth a break in the price and output levels between 1990:12 and 1991:1, we proceeded as follows.

We assumed that West German inflation and growth rates of output in 1991:1 (the first year of

reunification) also applied to Germany as a whole, and used that ratio to scale up the level of post-1990

data on German output and price level. Thus growth rates of inflation and output match those for West

Germany through 1991:1, Germany as a whole afterwards. The scaling still affects our empirical results,

because we use the level rather than change of output (quadratically detrended) and the price level

figures into the real exchange rate. One final adjustment was to smooth out a one month fall and then

rise of over 10% in industrial production in 1984:6 that was present in both IFS and Bundesbank data.

We simply set the 1984:6 figure to the average 1984:5 and 1984:7. (We observed this downward spike

in an initial plot of the data. If the spike is genuine rather than a data error, it presumably reflects a strike

known to be transitory and our smoothing likely makes our VAR forecasts more reasonable.)

        Figure 1 plots the data. The real exchange rate has been adjusted to have a mean of 50. The

strong appreciation of the dollar in the early 1980s is apparent. Initially, inflation in the U.S. was higher

than that in Germany. The output gap in U.S. relative to Germany peaked in the early 1990s, and

fluctuated a good deal both before and after.

B. Empirical Model and Econometric Technique

        In accordance with Clarida et al. (1998), we assume that expected annual inflation Et(p*t+12-p*t )



                                                       9
and Et(pht+12-pht ) appear in the monetary policy rules (2.2) and (2.3). Equation (2.5) becomes


(2.5)N   it = (qqt + (BEt(pt+12-pt) + (yyt + umt.


As well, we calibrate Taylor rule parameters on the conventional assumption that annualized interests

rates appear on the left hand side. With it measured at annual rates, and monthly data used throughout,

uncovered interest parity (2.6) is (it/12) = Etst+1-st, implying that in real terms


(2.7)N   (it/12) - EtBt+1 = Etqt+1-qt.


Upon combining (2.5)N and (2.7)N and rearranging, we get


(2.8)N   qt = bEtqt+1 + (12+(q)-1[12EtBt+1 - (BEt(pt+12-pt) - (yyt - umt].


where b has now been redefined as b=12/(12+(q). Upon imposing the terminal condition that qt is

non-explosive, the solution to (2.8)N may be written


(3.1)    qt = (12+(q)-134j =0bjEt[12Bt+j+1   - (B(pt+j+12-pt+j) - (yyt+j - umt+j].

                                                                                      ^
         We aim to construct a “model-based” or “fitted” real exchange rate, call it qt, and compare its

properties with those of the actual exchange rate qt. We proceed by imposing values for (q, (B and (y,

setting b=12/(12+(q), and computing forecasts of monthly inflation and output gaps with a vector

autoregression (VAR). This autoregression relies on a vector, call it zt, that includes the interest rate

along with monthly inflation and the output gap: zt = (Bt,yt,it)N. Thus, in making the forecasts, we allow

for the possibility that past interest rates help predict future inflation and output gaps. We do not,

however, allow for a direct effect from the shock umt. We omit this shock because of lack of an

independent time series for it. Our intuition is that this omission biases the results against our model.

         Let n denote the order of the vector autoregression, let Zt denote the (3n×1) vector that results



                                                          10
when the VAR is written in companion form as a vector AR(1), ZtN / (zt zt-1 ... zt-n+1). It is
                               ^
straightforward to show that qt is linear in Zt,


         ^
(3.2)    qt = (12+(q)-134j =0bjE[12Bt+j+1   - (B(pt+j+12-pt+j) - (yyt+j | Zt ] = (say) cqNZt,


where cq is a (3n×1) vector that is mapped from b, (B, (y and the estimates of the VAR parameters. As

long as inflation and output gap differentials are mean reverting, so, too, is q^ t.
                                                                           ^      ^
        Define a “model based” nominal exchange rate change as )st / )qt+Bt. We use cq and the VAR
                                                  ^       ^        ^
parameters to compute autocorrelations of qt, )qt and )st as well as their cross-correlations with Bt, and

yt. We compare these to the corresponding values for qt, )qt and )st Finally, we construct time series
   ^                               ^          ^       ^
for qt from (3.2) and then for )qt and )st (/)qt+Bt), and compute their correlation with qt, )qt and )st.

        For inference about the correlation between model based and actual qt, )qt and )st, we construct

95 percent confidence intervals from the percentile method of a nonparametric bootstrap. For inference
              ^
about corr(qt,qt) and corr()q^ t,)qt), we proceed as follows.
                                          ^
1. We estimate a bivariate VAR(4) in (qt,qt)N. We use Kilian’s (1998) procedure to estimate the bias in

the least squares estimator of the coefficients of the VAR. (There is a downward bias because the data

are highly positively serially correlated.)

2. We generate 1000 artificial samples, each of size 227 (227 because that is the number of monthly

observations running from 1980:2 to 1998:12). In each of the 1000 repetitions, we:

a. Generate a sample using bias-adjusted VAR coefficients and sampling with replacement from the

residuals of the bias-adjusted VAR. We use the actual and model based data, 1979:10-1980:1, for initial

conditions.

b. Estimate the VAR on the generated sample.

c. Compute the two correlations.

3. Finally, we sort the 1000 values of each of the statistics. We construct 95 percent confidence intervals



                                                              11
by reporting the 25th smallest and 25th largest statistics (25 = 2.5 percent of 1000).

        To construct a confidence interval for the correlation between )s^ t and )st, we used a bivariate

VAR(1) in ()s^ t,)st)N, omitting the Kilian (1998) bias adjustment and setting the lag length to 1 because

()s^ t,)st)N shows almost no serial correlation.



                                     4. BASIC EMPIRICAL RESULTS
                       ^
        To construct qt, we set the lag length of the vector autoregression to 4 (n=4), and used the

following parameters: (q=0.1 (Yb..99), (B=1.75, (y=0.25. The value for the exchange rate parameter (q

is roughly that estimated for Germany by Clarida et al. (1998). The values for the inflation and output

gap differentials are roughly those estimated for Germany by Clarida et al. (1998) and those estimated

for the U.S. by a number of authors, including Rudebusch (2002) and English et al. (2003).

        Panel A of Table 1 has autocorrelations of model-based data in columns (2)-(4), with figures for

actual data in columns (5) to (9). Begin with the actual data. The exchange rate pattern is familiar. The

real exchange rate is highly autocorrelated (D1=0.98 [column (5), row(1)]). Growth rates of the real and

nominal exchange rates are approximately serially uncorrelated (columns (6) and (7)). (Indeed, there is a

considerable body of evidence dating back to Meese and Rogoff (1983) that the “approximately” can be

dropped for nominal exchange rates.) The output gap is highly serially correlated (column (9); monthly

inflation less so (column (8)).

        Good news for the model is that the model-based exchange rates display properties similar to

those of the actual exchange rate data. See columns (2) through (4) in panel A. The first order serial

correlation coefficient of q^ t is 0.97 (column (2)). The growth rates of the model’s real and nominal

exchange rates are essentially serially uncorrelated (see columns (3) and (4)). Now, as stated in equation

(3.2), q^ t is a linear combination of the VAR variables, which include Bt and yt. As argued in the next
                                     ^
section, high serial correlation of qt (column (2)) reflects high serial correlation of the output gap and



                                                     12
annual inflation; low serial correlation of )q^ t and )s^ t reflects the fact that q^ t is constructed as a present

value with a discount factor near 1.

          Panel B presents data on cross-correlations. It is well-known that real and nominal exchange

rates are highly correlated with one another. Indeed, in our data, when rounded to two digits, the

correlation is 1.00 (row (3), column (7)). The high correlation between real and nominal exchange rates

is also captured by the model, with a figure that also rounds to 1.00 (row (3), column (2)). The high

correlation results because )q^ t is much more variable than Bt, so movements in )s^ t (/)q^ t+Bt) are

dominated by movements in )q^ t. More generally, cross-correlations of q^ t, )q^ t and )s^ t are very similar to

those of qt, )qt and )st.

          On the other hand, the model is less successful in reproducing the correlations between the real

exchange rate on the one hand and the output gap and inflation on the other. We see in panel B that q^ t

and yt are sharply negatively correlated–specifically, -0.98 (row (5), column (1)), which is rather

different than the correlation between qt and yt of -0.37 (row (5), column (6)). The correlation between

q^ t and Bt (-0.07) is also below that of qt and Bt (0.04). According to the model sketched in the Appendix,

the negative correlation between output and the real exchange rate indicates that real shocks have played

an important role. The positive correlation between inflation and the real exchange rate indicates a role

for monetary policy or risk premium shocks. (See the bullet points and the closing paragraphs of section

2 above.) That we did not have data to directly account for the effects of such shocks might therefore

partly explain the negative correlation between q^ t and Bt and the far too negative correlation between q^ t

and yt.

          Panel C presents the correlations between actual and model-based exchange rates. These are

0.32 for the real exchange rate, 0.09 and 0.10 for growth rates of real and nominal exchange rates

respectively. Figure 2 plots the model-based and actual real exchange rate series. The two series have

been scaled to have the same mean and standard deviation.4 That the two series track each other is



                                                         13
apparent, with a better match at the beginning and end than at the middle of the sample.

        The predicted real exchange rate from the model matches relatively well during the period of the

great appreciation of the dollar in the late 1970s and early 1980s. In that period, the U.S. raised interest

rates (relative to those in Germany and other industrialized countries) to combat high inflation. This

tight U.S. monetary policy has frequently been cited as a cause of the dollar's strength. Although the

U.S. may not have been closely following a Taylor rule in that period, the high U.S. relative interest

rates that arose in response to high U.S. inflation captures the essence of one element of our model.5

        The model does not capture the continuing appreciation of the dollar in late 1984 and early

1985. The appreciation of the dollar in 1984 has frequently been labeled a "bubble". (See Frankel

(1994).) In 1985, U.S. interest rates began to decline gradually, contributing to the fall in the dollar.

        The model also does not well match the data around reunification (1989-92). And this despite

the fact that this is a period in which the Taylor rule for the U.S. fits unusually well (e.g., Fig. 2 on

p1051 of Clarida et al. (1998)). During this period, output gaps and inflation were increasing rapidly in

Germany relative to the U.S., but, nonetheless, and in contradiction to our model, the Deutschmark

appreciated (i.e., fell) modestly rather than dramatically. One possible explanation is that special

events–specifically, reunification, and ongoing stresses in the EMS–offset the forces that our model

incorporates. (See Clarida and Gertler (1997).) But in later periods, our model-based series seems

broadly similar to the actual series. During this period, German growth lagged U.S. growth. U.S.

interest rates rose relative to German rates. Our fitted model captures the strong appreciation of the

dollar over this period.

        In light of the long history of difficulty in modeling exchange rates, our gut sense is that match

between model and data is respectable though not overwhelming. We acknowledge, however, that the

relevant standard is not clear-cut and there is much movement in actual exchange rates not captured in

our model-based series.



                                                      14
                     5. ADDITIONAL EMPIRICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

        Table 2 presents results under some alternative specifications. All such alternatives are identical

to the baseline specifications whose results are presented in Table 1, apart from the variation described in

panel A. Alternative specification a raises the coefficients on expected inflation and output ((B=2.0,

(y=0.5 rather than (B=1.75, (y=0.25). Specification b uses West German data on prices and output

throughout. (Recall that the baseline uses West German data up to 1990:12, data for unified Germany

after 1990:12.) It may be seen in panel B of Table 2 that these variations yield little change in the

behavior of the model’s exchange rates.

        Specifications c, d, and e vary the VAR used to forecast future inflation and output.

Specification c uses six rather than four lags, specification d drops the interest rate i from the VAR, and

specification e adds commodity price inflation to the VAR. There is little change in results.

        Specifications f and g use VARs in which U.S. data on inflation and output are add to the VAR.

(Since B and y are simply the difference between German and U.S. variables, results for these

specifications would be identical were the VAR to replace B and y with German inflation and output.)

Specification f keeps Taylor rule parameters the same in both countries while specification h allows them

to differ. The parameters in specification g are chosen to be roughly consistent with those estimated by

Clarida et al. (1998): in the German Taylor rule, the weights on expected inflation and output are (Bh =1.3,

(hy=0.3; in the U.S. Taylor rule, the weights are (B* =2.0, (*y=0.2. One would expect this to result in a

better fit. And indeed it does. While most moments remain unchanged, the correlation between qt and q^ t

climbs to nearly 0.5.

          In our view, the improvement from the baseline is doubly reassuring: More information in the

VAR and allowance for separate Taylor rule coefficients improves model fit. As well, the simplified

baseline approach of a smaller dimension VAR and identical Taylor rule parameters yields qualitatively



                                                      15
similar results.

         Specification h uses a Hodrick-Prescott filter rather than a quadratic time trend to construct the

output gap. Relative to baseline, this results in a modest fall in corr()q^ t,)s^ t) and a rise in all three

correlations between model-based and actual data.

         That the alternative specifications in Table 2 give similar results perhaps reflects the following

mechanics. First, the high correlation between qt and q^ t reflects the high correlation between the

exchange rate and the linear combination of variables in the Taylor rule. Specifically, the correlation

between qt and E[12Bt+1 -1.75(pt+12-pt) - 0.25yt | Zt] is 0.43 (not reported in any table). Note that this

correlation is higher than the (absolute value) of the correlation of yt and qt (=-0.37) or between Bt and qt

(=0.04) (Table 1B, column (6), rows (5) and (4)). The correlation is also larger than the 0.09 correlation

between annual inflation pt-pt-12 and qt (not reported in any table).

         Second, the low autocorrelations of )q^ t reflect the fact that discounting a persistent series

(output and inflation, in our model) with a discount factor near one tends to produces a series (q^ t) with

random-walk like characteristics. This result is developed at length in Engel and West (2004b). We will

limit ourselves here to stressing that the result follows even when the persistent series do not themselves

display random walk like behavior.

         Third, the high correlation between )q^ t and )s^ t reflects the fact that discounting a persistent

series tends to produce a series that is more variable than the series being discounted. Indeed, not only q^ t

but also )q^ t is notably more variable than Bt, by a factor of about seven in the baseline specification.

Since )s^ t is constructed by summing )q^ t and Bt, )s^ t is dominated by movements in )qt and the high

correlation follows.6

         More importantly, at an economic rather than mechanical level, the consistency between model

and actual data reported in Tables 1 and 2 reflects two things: a Taylor rule well describes monetary

policy, and the mark tends to strengthen relative to the dollar when German interest rates rise relative to



                                                        16
U.S. rates. Our model can therefore account for the finding that when German inflation and output are

relatively high, the mark tends to appreciate. It is a notable feature of our model that it captures the

correlation in the data that high German inflation is associated with a strong mark. Traditional monetary

models (Frankel (1979) or Engel and Frankel (1984), for example) have tended to predict the

opposite–that high inflation is associated with a weak currency.



                                             6. CONCLUSION

        We view our study as a promising initial approach to investigating the empirical implications of

Taylor rules for exchange rate behavior. Our model reproduces many significant features of the real and

nominal dollar/DM exchange rates: both are very persistent, with differences that are nearly serially

uncorrelated; both are very volatile; differences of the two are highly correlated. We had less success in

reproducing the correlations of exchange rates with output and inflation, perhaps because our empirical

work omitted shocks to the Taylor rule itself and to interest parity. Finally, the model-based real and

nominal exchange rates we construct from functions of VAR forecasts of output and inflation are

correlated with the actual real and nominal exchange rates. The correlation is modest, but perhaps is

acceptable by industry standards.

        Our empirical model takes the time-series process for inflation and output as given. A priority

for future work is to explicitly interpret these variables in terms of behavioral equations. One advantage

of doing so is that we would be able to measure the Taylor-rule shocks. In order to improve the fit for

exchange rates, the structural model would probably need to do a good job explaining inflation and

output as well.

        The focus of much of the existing quantitative literature on Taylor rules in open economics is on

optimality properties of different rules. We believe there is promise in further exploration of the

implications of such models for the empirical behavior of exchange rates.



                                                     17
                                                     APPENDIX

        This Appendix outlines the model used to discuss impulse responses at the end of section 2 of

the paper.

        Our New Keynesian open economy model is similar to the ones in Benigno (1999), McCallum

and Nelson (1999), and, especially, Galí and Monacelli (2002). We imagine a two country world. Each

of the countries produces one good and consumes two. The foreign country is large, in the sense that its

aggregate price level and consumption is indistinguishable from the price and consumption of the good it

produces. The home country, by contrast, is small. The price of the home country’s domestically

produced good is pdt, of the imported good is pft. Corresponding inflation rates are Bdt and Bft.

Preferences are logarithmic in a Cobb-Douglas aggregate over the two goods. In the Cobb-Douglas

aggregate, the weight on the home produced good is 1-", on the foreign produced good ". From familiar

logic, then, the aggregate inflation rate Bht obeys


(A.1)   Bht = (1-")Bdt + "Bft.


For the foreign country, " . 1. Otherwise, all parameters are identical in the two countries. The law of

one price holds, so


(A.2)   Bft = )st + B*t .


        Adjustment of prices of the domestically produced good takes place according to


(A.3)   Bdt = $EtBdt+1 + 6yht + uhct, B*t = $EtB*t+1 + 6y*t + u*ct.


In (A.3), 0<$<1, and 6>0, and uhct and u*ct are cost shocks . We note that such cost shocks are absent in

the model of Galí and Monacelli (2002); we allow them for empirical relevance and consistency with the

broader literature on open economy macroeconomics. Thus,



                                                           18
         Bdt -B*t = $Et(Bdt+1-B*t+1) + 6(yht -y*t ) + uhct-u*ct

which, for notational simplicity, we write as

         B         B                    B
(A.4)    Bt = $EtBt+1 + 6yt + uct, Bt /Bdt-B*t , yt=yht -y*t , uct/uhct-u*ct.


         The output gap differential yt is linearly related to the real exchange rate and an exogenous

disturbance


(A.5)    yt = 2qt + uyt,


with 2>0. Equation (A.5) can be motivated from first principles, as in Galí and Monacelli (2002), in

which 2=1/(1-"), for " defined in (A.1), and uyt is the difference between home and foreign productivity

shocks. Alternatively, it can be taken as a textbook IS curve in an open economy. (To prevent

confusion, we note that (A.5) and the rest of our model is consistent with an open-economy dynamic IS

curve relating expected output growth to a real interest rate; see Galí and Monacelli (2002).)

         For analytical convenience, we assume that the Taylor rule involves one period ahead rather than

12 period ahead expected inflation, and that all variables are measured at monthly rates. Then, if we

follow the logic in the text, we see that interest parity and Taylor rules lead to


(A.6)    (1+(q)qt = Etqt+1 + Et(1-(B)Bt+1 - (yyt - umt


where, as in the text, qt/st-pht +p*t is the real exchange rate, Bt/Bht -B*t is the inflation differential, and umt is

the exogenous monetary policy shock.
                                                                         B
         Identities (A.1), (A.2) and )qt/)st-Bht +B*t imply that Bt and Bt are related via

         B       α                    α
(A.7)    Bt +        )qt / Bdt-B*t +     )q = Bht -B*t / Bt.
                1− α                 1− α t


Use (A.5) to substitute out for yt in (A.4) and (A.6). Use (A.7) led one period to substitute out for Bt+1 in


                                                              19
(A.6). Upon defining

                            (1 − γ π )α   (1 − αγ π )
        ( =(q+(y2, 0 / 1+               =
                              1− α          1− α


                                                                                  B
one may write the two resulting stochastic equations in the two variables qt and Bt as

            B       B
(A.8a) $EtBt+1 - Bt + 62qt = -6uyt - uct,
                B
(A.8b) (1-(B)EtBt+1 + 0Etqt+1 - ((+0)qt = umt +(yuyt.


Use (A.8a) and (A.8a) led one period to substitute out for qt and Etqt+1 in (A.8b). The result is a second
                                        B
order stochastic difference equation in Bt. Given restrictions on parameters, the difference equation has a
                                 B
unique stationary solution, with Bt the present value of future shocks. (We do not write the restrictions

because they are not particularly enlightening. But we do note that there can be a unique stationary

solution even if (q=0.) This solution can be put into (A.8a) to solve for qt. The other variables in the

system, including Bt and yt, can then be constructed.

        Some closing notes:

1. The discussion in the text of signs of the impulse response functions in section 2 presumes: (a)The

shocks umt, uyt and uct follow stationary AR(1) processes with positive parameters, and (b)"(B<1, a

condition consistent with our small country assumption.

2. While this model with AR(1) shocks is certainly too simple to reproduce all of the serial correlation

and second moments, it is consistent with some notable features of the data. This includes higher first

order autocorrelations in qt and yt than in Bt, along with very high correlation between )st and )qt.

        The model’s persistence properties are to a certain extent exogenous–when the shocks follow

AR(1) processes, the endogenous variables are linear in those shocks. (Thus this model shares the

property of many New Keynesian models of generating little endogenous persistence. For example, to

generate plausible persistence in real exchange rates, Benigno (1999) requires that a lag of the interest


                                                        20
appear in the monetary rule with a large coefficient. While we have not checked the details, it appears

that such a lag would also generate persistence in our model.) But if the IS or monetary policy shocks

are persistent and volatile while the Phillips curve shock is not, the properties described in the previous

paragraph will result if, as well, the Phillips curve is flat and the share of imports is not too large. Low
                         B            B
serial correlation in Bt follows when Bt is not very responsive to the output gap, and Phillips curve
                                                                                            B
shocks have low serial correlation. CPI inflation Bt will behave much like PPI inflation Bt when import

shares are low. Further, high serial correlation in relative output and the real exchange rate will be

reproduced in the model when Taylor rule shocks and IS shocks are highly serially correlated and

volatile, for such shocks will dominate the behavior of yt and qt when inflation is not persistent. As well,

there will be high correlation between innovations to real and nominal exchange rates since neither series

will be much affected by inflation.

3. Increasing the weight (q put on the real exchange rate in the monetary rule decreases the variance of

the real exchange rate. In particular, in the limit, as (q64, the variance of qt goes to zero, while those of

yt and Bt stay finite.

4. The model can be generalized easily to the case in which the foreign country consumes a nontrivial

amount of the home country good. Assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function for consumption, in which

the foreign residents put a weight of g on foreign goods (i.e., the goods produced in the foreign country).
                                                                 B
Equations (A8.a) and (A8.b), which describe the dynamics of Bt and qt, still hold, except 0 is now
                                                                                            B
defined as: 0 = 1 + [(1-(B)(1+"-g)/(g-")]. Equation (A.7), relating relative PPI inflation Bt to relative CPI
                             B
inflation Bt becomes: Bt + [(1+"-g)/(g-")]= Bt.




                                                     21
                                                 FOOTNOTES

1. Of course, the details of the solution will be different when actual rather than expected inflation
appears in the monetary rule, and, since conditions for stability and uniqueness are different in the two
cases, it is possible that qualitative characteristics of the solution will be radically different. The
statement in the text merely means that for a range of parameters, nothing central turns on the use of
expected rather than actual inflation.


2. The Appendix relaxes these conditions, in particular allowing (q=0.


3. Here and throughout, we abstract from operational difficulties in identifying the long run level of the
real exchange rate, just as we abstract from the raft of other practical problems involved with
implementing a monetary policy rule (e.g., data availability).


4. The standard deviation of q^ t is about one-fourth that of qt: as is common in empirical work, the fitted
exchange rate is much less variable than the actual exchange rate. See Engel and West (2004a) on
accounting for variability in exchange rates.


5. By one measure, our results are sensitive to inclusion of the period from the late 1970's and early
1980's. We e-estimated from scratch (detrending regressions to construct the output gap, as well as the
VARs), starting the sample in 1982:10. Correlations between actual and fitted changes in real and
nominal exchange rates remain essentially unchanged. But the correlation between the levels of qt and q^ t
falls dramatically, to 0.02.


6. These mechanics continue to apply when we set the weight on the real exchange rate in the Taylor rule
((q) to a very small value such as 0.01, implying a discount factor nearer to 1: Consistent with the first
and second point, corr(q^ t,qt) stays high (it falls slightly to 0.30) and autocorrelations of )q^ t’s stay near
zero in absolute value. Consistent with the third point, the variances of q^ t and )q^ t rise, as does
corr()q^ t,)st) (to 0.95). On the other hand, and consistent with the discussion in the text, when we push (q
upwards to the implausibly high value of 1000, implying a discount factor near zero, only the first result
continues to apply. The value of corr(q^ t,qt) stays high (in fact it rises modestly to 0.43). But q^ t is no
longer random walk like (first order autocorrelation of )q^ t is -0.49). And the variances of q^ t and )q^ t fall,
as does corr()q^ t,)s^ t) (to 0.34).




                                                        22
                                                REFERENCES

Ball, Laurence, 1999, “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” 127-144 in John B. Taylor (ed.) Monetary
Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Baxter, Marianne, 1994, “Real Exchange Rates and Real Interest Differentials: Have We Missed the
Business-Cycle Relationship?” Journal of Monetary Economics 33, 5-37.

Benigno, Gianluca, 1999, “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy Rules,” manuscript,
London School of Economics.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, 2001, “Monetary Policy Rules and the Exchange Rate,”
CEPR Discussion Paper # 2897.

Bergin, Paul, 2003, “Putting the 'New Open Economy Macroeconomics' to a Test,” Journal of
International Economics 60, 3-34.

Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida, 1987, “The Dollar and Real Interest Rates,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 27, 103-139.

Cho, Dongchul and Kenneth D. West, 2003, “Interest Rates and Exchange Rates in the Korean,
Philippine and Thai Exchange Rate Crisis,” 11-30 in M. Dooley and J. Frankel (eds) Managing
Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler, 1997, “How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy,” 353-406
in C. Romer and D. Romer (eds) Reducing Inflation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler, 1998, “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
International Evidence,” European Economic Review 42, 1033-1068.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler, 2001, “Optimal Monetary Policy Rule in Open versus
Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic Review 91, 248-252.

Edison, Hali and Dianne Pauls. 1993, “A Re-assessment of the Relationship between Real Exchange
Rates and Real Interest Rates: 1974-1990,” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 165-87.

Engel, Charles, and Jeffrey Frankel, 1984, “Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements: An
Answer from the Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics 13, 31-39.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West, 2004a, “Accounting for Exchange Rate Variability in
Present-Value Models When the Discount Factor is Near One,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 119-125.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West, 2004b, “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals,” forthcoming,
Journal of Political Economy.

English, William B., William R. Nelson and Brian P. Sack, 2003, “Interpreting the Significance of the
Lagged Interest Rate in the Monetary Policy Rule,” Contributions in Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (2003)

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1979, “On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real Interest
Differentials,” American Economic Review 69, 610-622.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1994, "Exchange Rate Policy," in Martin Feldstein, ed., American Economic Policy
in the 1980s (Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press).

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Richard Meese, 1987, "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?" NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1987, 117-153.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose, 1995, “Empirical Research in Nominal Exchange Rates,”
1689-1730 in G. Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3 (North-
Holland, Amsterdam).

Galí, Jordi and Monacelli, Tommaso, 2002, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small
Open Economy,” manuscript, Boston College.

Kilian, Lutz, 1998, "Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions," Review of
Economics and Statistics 80, 218-230.

Kim, Soyoung, 2002, "Exchange Rate Stabilization in the ERM: Identifying European Monetary Policy
Reactions," Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 413-434.

Kollmann, Robert, 2002, "Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: Effects on Welfare and
Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 989-1015.

Lewis, Karen K., 1995, “Puzzles in International Financial Markets,” 1913-1972 in G. Grossman and K.
Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3 (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

McCallum, Bennett T. and Edward Nelson, 1999, “Nominal Income Targeting in an Optimizing Open
Economy Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 553-578.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do
They Fit Out of Sample?” Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

Meredith, Guy and Yu Ma, 2002, “The Forward Premium Puzzle Revisited,” IMF Working Paper 02/28.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2002, “Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and Monetary Policy
Inertia,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 1161-87.

Svensson, Lars E. O., 2000, “Open Economy Inflation Targeting,” Journal of International Economics
50, 155-183.

Taylor, John B., 1993, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules In Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

West, Kenneth D., 1987, "A Standard Monetary Model and the Variability of the Deutschemark-Dollar
Exchange Rate," Journal of International Economics 23, 57-76.

Woo, Wing T., 1985, "The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination under Rational
Expectations: The Dollar-Deutschmark Rate," Journal of International Economics 18, 1-16.
                                                           Table 1

                                      Moments of Model-Based and Actual Data

                                                  A. Autocorrelations
                 Model-based series                                                        Data
(1)              (2)       (3)             (4)                                     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)    (9)
Lag              q^ t            ^
                                )qt
                                             ^
                                           )st                                     qt      )qt     )st     Bt     yt
1               0.97          -0.03       0.02                                    0.98    0.05    0.06    0.36   0.94
2               0.93           0.00       0.03                                    0.96    0.06    0.04    0.12   0.92
3               0.90          -0.02       0.02                                    0.94    0.04    0.04    0.21   0.90

                                                 B. Cross-correlations
                 Model-based series (actual B and y)                                               Data
                 (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)               (5)                      (6)     (7)    (8)     (9)   (10)

                 q^ t            ^
                                )qt
                                             ^
                                           )st       Bt      yt                             qt     )qt    )st     Bt    yt
      ^
(1)qt          1.00                                                                qt      1.00
(2))q^ t       0.13           1.00                                                )qt      0.07    1.00
(3))^st        0.09           0.94       1.00                                     )st      0.07    1.00 1.00
(4)Bt         -0.07          0.10        0.44       1.00                           Bt      0.04   -0.08 0.02     1.00
(5)yt         -0.98          -0.18      -0.11       0.14     1.00                  yt     -0.37   -0.03 -0.01    0.14 1.00


                            C. Correlations Between Actual and Model-Based Exchange Rate Series

            corr(q^ t,qt)                corr()q^ t,)qt)                corr()^st,)st)
                0.32                          0.09                              0.10
           (-0.49,0.82)                  (-0.05,0.22)                      (-0.03,0.23)

Notes:

1. Variable definitions: q=real exchange rate (DM/$), s=nominal exchange rate, B=inflation differential
(CPI, U.S. - Germany), y=output gap differential (industrial production, U.S. - Germany, constructed by
quadratic detrending). All data are monthly. The sample period is 1979:10 - 1998:12. West German
data are used 1979-1990, with price and output levels adjusted post-1990 to smooth the break in the
series caused by reunification. See text for details.

2. A “^” over a variable indicates that it was constructed according to the model described in the paper.
See equation (3.2). Parameters of the monetary policy rule: (q=0.1, (B=1.75, (y=0.25. In constructing
q^ t, a fourth order VAR in (B,y,i) was used to construct the present value defined in the text, where
i=U.S.-German interest differential.

3. In Panel C, 95 percent bootstrap confidence intervals are in parentheses.
                                                     Table 2

                                     Results of Alternative Specifications

                   A. Description of How Alternative Specifications Vary from Baseline

Mnemonic and Description
a    (B=2.0, (y=0.5
b    West German data
c    sixth order VAR in (B,y,i) used to forecast (B,y)
d    fourth order VAR in (B,y) used to forecast (B,y)
e    fourth order VAR in (B,y,i,commodity price inflation) used to forecast (B,y)\
f    fourth order VAR in (B,y,Bh,yh,i) used to forecast (B,y,Bh,yh)
                                                                     h h                            h h
g    (Bh =1.3, (hy=0.3, (B* =2.0, (*y=0.2; fourth order VAR in (B,y,B ,y ,i) used to forecast (B,y,B ,y )
h    Hodrick-Prescott detrending


                          B. Summary of Results Under Alternative Specifications
   (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)           (5)                    (6)       (7)      (8)
                 -------D1------------       --------------cross-correlation---------------
Mnemonic         q^ t       ^
                          )qt       )st
                                       ^
                                            ()q^ t,)s^ t) (q^ t,qt) ()q^ t,)qt) ()s^ t,)st)

Baseline         0.97     -0.03    0.02              0.94      0.32    0.09     0.10
a                0.97     -0.02    0.00              0.98      0.32    0.09     0.11
b                0.97     -0.02    0.02              0.94      0.32    0.06     0.08
c                0.96     -0.02    0.03              0.94      0.36    0.10     0.11
d                0.97     -0.04    0.01              0.94      0.38    0.10     0.11
e                0.97     -0.03    0.02              0.94      0.32    0.08     0.09
f                0.98     0.03     0.08              0.88      0.47    0.08     0.08
g                0.98     0.01     0.07              0.87      0.49    0.11     0.11
h                0.96     -0.07    -0.06             0.78      0.42    0.20     0.20


Notes:

1. The parameters, data, sample period and VAR variables for the baseline specification are reported in
the notes to Table 1. The alternative specifications differ from the baseline only in the indicated fashion.

2. The panel B figures for the baseline specification are repeated from Table 1.

3. In panel B, D1 is the first order autocorrelation coefficient.
         Figure 1: Real Exchange Rate q, Annualized Output Gap y, and Annualized Inflation B



  120
                                                                                                                                                                            Y
  100
                                                                                                                                                                            Q
   80                                                                                                                                                                       PI

   60

   40

   20

     0

   -20
         Oct-79

                  Oct-80

                           Oct-81

                                    Oct-82

                                             Oct-83

                                                       Oct-84

                                                                 Oct-85

                                                                           Oct-86

                                                                                     Oct-87

                                                                                               Oct-88

                                                                                                         Oct-89

                                                                                                                   Oct-90

                                                                                                                             Oct-91

                                                                                                                                        Oct-92

                                                                                                                                                   Oct-93

                                                                                                                                                              Oct-94

                                                                                                                                                                         Oct-95

                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct-96

                                                                                                                                                                                                Oct-97

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct-98
Note: y and B are the difference between German and U.S. output gap (log industrial production,
deviation from quadratic trend) and German and U.S. inflation (log CPI, annualized); q is the log real
exchange rate, with a larger value indicating depreciation of the Deutschemark relative to the dollar, and
with the mean arbitrarily chosen to make the figure readable.



                                                                    ^
                              Figure 2: Actual (q) and Model-Based (q) Real Exchange Rates



  120
                                                                                                                                                                                         Q
  100
                                                                                                                                                                                         QHAT
   80

   60

   40

   20

     0
         Oct-79

                  Oct-80

                           Oct-81

                                    Oct-82

                                              Oct-83

                                                        Oct-84

                                                                  Oct-85

                                                                            Oct-86

                                                                                      Oct-87

                                                                                                Oct-88

                                                                                                          Oct-89

                                                                                                                    Oct-90

                                                                                                                               Oct-91

                                                                                                                                          Oct-92

                                                                                                                                                     Oct-93

                                                                                                                                                                Oct-94

                                                                                                                                                                           Oct-95

                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct-96

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct-97

                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-98




Note: q^ is the fitted value of the real exchange rate from the baseline specification presented in Table 1,
scaled to have the same mean and standard deviation as the actual real exchange rate q.
