NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW NEXUS A10NG TRADE, INDUSTRIAL,
AND EXCHANGE—RATE POLICIES

J.

David

Richardson

Working Paper No. 1099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge M& 02138

March 1983

I am indebted to Robert E. Baldwin, Robert Cornell, Rachel
McCulloch, Clas Wihlborg, and John Williamson for many insightful
comments and corrections. They should be implicated in any appreciation but not in any dismay. I also gratefully acknowledge the
support of the National Science Foundation Grant PRA—81l61459 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity in the World Economy. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1099
March 1983

The New Nexus Among Trade, Industrial,
and Exchange—Rate Policies

ABSTRACT

This paper explores the new interconnections between real and financial
policies that affect international transactions. Among other conclusions
are the following. (1) In a world of spatially mobile capital and reasonably accurate expectations, trends in international competitiveness and

financial asset yields are tightly linked. Volatility in one causes
volatility in the other. Policies that affect one affect the other.
Financial policy influences real exchange rates and alters the pressures

for trade and industrial policy. Trade and industrial policy causes
overshooting of financial variables, and alters the pressures for financial
policy.

(2) ny

failure

to make real and financial policy stable, credible,

systematic, and predictable generates volatile and costly signals to re--

allocate resources. The problems with this are unpredictability more
than inefficiency and resource disorder more than resource mis—order.
(3) Stable, credible, systematic, and transparent exchange—rate policy
can allay resource disorder by limiting deviations around economic trends.
Economic trends can be enhanced in the presence of well—defined market
imperfections by stable, credible, systematic, and transparent trade and

industrial policies. (4) To reduce the likelihood of global resource
disorder, real and financial policy options may involve retreating from

multilateralism and from unrealistically binding rules. Sensible and
timely alternatives seem to be aggressive bilateral peacemaking, non—

inclusive coalition formation, and the formulation of credible ?conventionst
to govern government policy, both real and financial.
J. David Richardson
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison

Madison, Wisconsin 53706
(608)

263—3867/3876

CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION

1

2. POLITICAL—ECONOMIC POLICY PARALLELS AND PROPOSALS

6

3. PURE ANALYTICAL APPROACHES AND THEIR LIMITATIONS

13

4. SOME IMPACTS OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY TURBULENCE ON
TRADE/INDUSTRIAL POLICY

18

5. SOME IMPACTS OF TRADE/INDUSTRIAL POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY TURBULENCE

30

REFERENCES

36

1. INTRODUCTION

Interconnections among policies influencing trade, industrial structure,

international payments, and exchange rates have long been a focus of development

economics.1 By contrast, these interconnections seem rarely addressed in
developed—country analysis. This is presumably because they have been judged
unimportant or quantitatively insignificant. Present trends in trade and
payments policy, however, have generated new interest in these interconnections,

and several recent papers have explored them (for example, Blackhurst and Tumlir
(1980), Bergsten and Williamson (1982), and McCulloch (1982)).

This paper is also devoted to exploring these interconnections. Its title
is a variation on Cooper's (1971) counterpart. Cooper's paper stands as a
prescient exception to the usual dichotomous treatment of "real" policy and
exchange—rate policy in developed countries.

One of Cooper's principal observations was that the absence of an adequate
adjustment mechanism for international payments tempted nations to adopt distor—

tionary trade and investment policies. These distortions were then justified on
balance—of—payments or aggregate—employment grounds. Cooper's treatment of this
observation was eloquent, but the observation predates his paper, and has
enjoyed a continuing popularity as an argument for exchange—rate flexibility,
for example:

...Flexible exchange rates eliminate the balance—
of—payments motive for tariffs and should therefore
facilitate further rounds of negotiations to lower
trade barriers ((Dudley 1981, p. 264), ascribing the
view to Richard Blackhurst).

LFor example, all the mid—197O's work on trade and exchange—rate regimes
coordinated and summarized by Bhagwati and Krueger. See also Krueger (1978,
1981).

2

The great advantage of a floating exchange rate system
was to have been that the adjustment would take place
automatically through currency appreciations and
depreciations, removing the need for otherwise undesirable trade and capital controls, and allowing
governments to concentrate their policies on domestic
economic needs. Thus if the adjustment process is
working well, trade measures for balance of payments
purposes are unnecessary and undesirable. (Frank,
Pearson, and Riedel (1979, p. 15)).

One of the major arguments for a flexible exchange
rate system... is that it makes the case for free trade
clear and simple. If you have a flexible rate and you
reduce tariffs, movements in the exchange rate will
automatically protect you against having any adverse
balance of payments effects, and therefore you are
not exporting or importing unemployment (Friedman
(1969, p. 118)).

Today's payments adjustment is arguably as inadequate as when Cooper

wrote.2

The characteristics of inadequacy have changed, but not the fact,

nor the source. Inadequacy now appears most dramatically as exchange—rate
volatility. It used to appear most dramatically as balance—of—payments crises (official—reserve volatility). Exchange rates are still misaligned for

long periods in the view of many commentators. And the sources of misalignment and volatility are still both government initiative and

private specula-

tive response. Distortionary trade and investment policies that used to be
defended on balance—of—payments grounds are now defended by reference to
today's increasingly sharp swings in international competitiveness, real
exchange rates, and current account balances.
On reflection, it may not be so surprising that pressures for aggressive
trade and industrial policy are ultimately invariant to exchange—rate systems.

2Nor did Cooper imply, unlike Friedman and the others quoted, that
broadly floating exchange rates would be more adequate. Cooper held out
preferably for a system of gliding parities with presumptive indicators, or even
for a system of flexible uniform taxes and subsidies on trade.

3

Over long enough periods of time ratios of wages, profits, and prices ——
sector relative to another and in one nation relative to another ——

are

in

one

quite

insensitive to exchange rates and monetary fluctuations. These non—monetary
ratios are ultimately the real source of protectionist pressure. The monetary
level of wages, profits, and prices doesn't really matter much. No worker,
manager, shareholder, or creditor sees much inequity or need for government protection when his or her wages and income rise as fast as prices, and when
foreign wages, prices, and incomes rise at the same rate.

But over shorter periods of time, exchange—rate fluctuations can cause real
adjustment and injury ——

in

much the same way as monetary policy does. And when

exchange rate fluctuations are recurrent, sharp, and unpredictable, they can
lead to recurrent, sharp, and undesirable signals to reallocate resources

(see, for example, Artus (1982, p. 6)). Unanticipated exchange—rate volatility has all the unfortunate features of unpredictable monetary policy. Both
can send false, misleading, and wasteful price signals to economic decision—

makers. Thus exchange rates are not irrelevant for trade policy even though
they may be neutral in their long—run effects. Changes in the level or even
the trend of an exchange rate may be innocuous; changes in its variance or
predictability are not.

Nor are trade and industrial policies irrelevant for exchange—rate and

payments adjustment. Industrial policies aim at far more than just sectoral—
share targets. They also aim at temporal targets that are important deter-

minants of exchange rates and international payments. Among such
determinants are growth rates (Influenced by industrial policies toward
research and development activities and "high—technology" industry) and the

end—use production mix between consumption goods, capital goods, and education (C and parts of I and G in the familiar national—accounts breakdown).

4

Trade policies in practice, although not necessarily in principle, often aim

for the same goals. Of course their more narrow concern is with exports,
imports, and foreign investment, all of which have obvious

exchange—rate/payments effects. Both trade and industrial policies involve
fiscal policy, debt management, and international transfer of rents, all of
which in turn influence exchange rates, payments, and international indebtedness.

Little effort will be made below to differentiate trade policies from
industrial policies, following Corden (1980, p. 167) and Blackhurst (1981, p.

361). Blackhurst argues that as governments become increasingly interventionist, much industrial policy is just a veil for trade policy. Conversely,
the most potent political arguments for trade policy have almost always been

industrial (maintenance of sectoral production and employment). As global
markets for products become more and more integrated, it is harder to
distinguish any unique motivation for one policy compared to the other.

Indeed in the U.S., trade policy (which "we have always had") is essentially
the stalking horse for industrial policy (which "we don't have," because of

philosophical objections). We will use the terms trade policy and industrial
policy interchangeably below.

In practice, some of the most important links between industrial policies

and exchange—rate adjustment are one part politics and one part economics. In
principle there need not be any links at all, political or economic. We discuss
some practical political/economic connections in Section 2, and the conceivable

absence of any connections in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 are less sweeping.
Section 4 is a compilation of ways that international monetary turbulence

influences trade and industrial policies. Section 5 reverses the causation. It

5

sketches ways that trade and industrial policies influence exchange rates and
international payments.

There are a number of conclusions in the paper. (1) In a world of spatially mobile capital and reasonably accurate expectations, trends in international competitiveness and financial asset yields are tightly linked.

Volatility in one causes volatility in the other. Policies that affect one
affect the other. Financial policy influences real exchange rates and alters
the pressures for trade and industrial policy. Trade and industrial policy
causes overshooting of financial variables, and alters the pressures for

financial policy. (2) Whatever the other goals of real and financial policy,
any failure to make them stable, credible, systematic, and predictable genera-

tes volatile and costly signals to reallocate resources. The problems with
this are unpredictability more than inefficiency and resource disorder more

than resource mis—order. The solution is to "re—order" resource allocation,
not necessarily to reallocate resources. (3) Stable, credible, systematic,
nt1

rrnnrnr

deviations

rn1 1'v

1 1v rpnhir' disnrdr by 1 1 ml fin
0

around economic trends. Economic trends can be enhanced in the

presence of well—defined market imperfections by stable, credible, systematic,

and transparent trade and industrial policies. (4) To reduce the likelihood
of global resource disorder, real and financial policy options may involve

retreating from multilateralism and from unrealistically binding rules. But
these should not be replaced by the vacuum of policy anarchy. More sensisble
and timely replacements seem to be aggressive bilateral peacemaking, non—
inclusive coalition formation, and the formulation of credible "conventions"
to govern government policy, both real and financial.

6

2. POLITICAL/ECONOMIC POLICY PARALLELS AND PROPOSALS

One of the most fundamental parallels between exchange—rate policies and
industrial policies over the past 15 years is their common trend toward laisser—

faire ordering of interchange among governments. A familiar American image may
help to understand this parallel. "Frontier justice" has seemed increasingly to
order both trade and exchange—rate policy. Under frontier justice, if a govern-

ment can "get away with it," it should "do it." Strong governments survive
prosperously; weak governments, tenuously.

The economic problem with frontier justice is unpredictability. More
organized systems of justice regularize economic exchange, establishing boundaries for what qualify as voluntary transactions, rules governing the

exploitation of market advantage, and sanctions to guarantee the enforcement

of contracts. Frontier justice, by contrast, can destabilize economic
exchange, becoming an irritant to the market rather than its lubricant.

Another way to describe frontier justice among governments is to call it

policy anarchy and aggression. Tendencies toward such are always present, of
course. And it may be unduly alarmist to forecast increasing realization of
them. Yet some of the constraints that check policy aggression have become

looser. U.S. hegemony3 has waned since 1945, however one defines it. And
undesirable though it was in some ways, it clearly checked the scope for
policy aggression, much as the frontier sheriff or U.S. marshall checked the

scope for frontier justice. U.S. Influence was, roughtly speaking, once sufficient to make other nations "fall into line" in trade policy, exchange—

3See Gilpin (1977), Keohane (1980), Kindleberger (1981), and Krasner
(1976) for extended discussions of hegemony and international economics.

7

rate policy, and the international institutions that oversee them, but the

U.S. seems currently less able and less willing to play that role. The awkward question this raises is: what happens on the frontier when the citizenry grows stronger and when the sheriff not only grows weaker, but begins

to act just like everyone else? The problem facing both trade policy and
exchange—rate policy is how to avoid frontier justice in inter—government
relations —— how to re—order policy interchange.

Increasingly aggressive industrial and exchange—rate policies are to be
feared more for their potential to disorder resource allocation than to

mis—order it. To put the problem starkly, the law of the jungle (pure
laisser faire) seems increasingly to dictate policy interchange among govern-

ments. Yet this is as haphazard a way of ordering policy transactions as it
is of ordering market transactions. Even most conservative economists have
in mind some particular legal structure of common—law conventions when they

favor "free" markets and liberal trade policy. The threat that presently
confronts both industrial and exchange—rate policy is that longstanding legal
structures and conventions governing government behavior will be abandoned.

Anarchy could conceivably begin to rule among governments. Uncertainty at
best and chaos at worst could be the consequence for international trade and

investment. The danger of the worst case can be appreciated by considering
what happens to everyday commerce during civil disorder, when legal systems
crumble and vigilante—isin waxes strong.

Some recent history of this threat is easy to document. Policy initiatives
to minimize its future likelihood are more difficult to conceive.

Two events play an important historical role. One was an aggressive
exchange—rate initiative that encouraged aggressive trade—policy initiatives.

8

The second was an aggressive trade—policy initiative that reinforced the

earlier abandonment of conventions governing exchange—rate adjustment. The
first was the unilateral abrogation by the U.S. of its commitment to gold—

dollar convertibility in 1971. This was coupled with a swashbuckling
"invitation for the rest of the world to adjust their exchange—rate parities. And both were enforced by an aggressive application of trade policy in
the form of the infamous ten percent import surcharge. The second event, or
set of events, was the mammoth multiplication of world oil prices in 1973—74

and 1979—80. This amounted economically to a repeated application of
beggar—our—neighbor export taxes by OPEC governments. Many of the implied
revenues from these export taxes were recycled successfully. Those that were
not caused transfer problems in much the same way that reparations payments

did. The important role of oil as an input caused stagflation problems. Only
some of the resulting structural and supply stresses could be alleviated by

conventional aggregate demand policies; others were made worse. Sovereign
governments naturally chose different macroeconomic policy mixes to reflect

different menus of relief and endurance. These different policy responses
often necessitated sovereign exchange—rate management.

The crucial question for policy is whether there are any sensible alternatives to the mutually devolving vortexes of aggressive trade and exchange—

rate initiatives. It is easier to describe first what seems to be unlikely or
undesirable alternatives. One is a return to hegemonic policy leadership in
the fashion of the frontier sheriff. This seems out of the question for any
government, barring a massive military realignment that might emerge from

world war. Also out of the question is an extensive (that is, global) set of
new "rules" governing trade or monetary relations. Examples of such include
the return to a gold—based adjustable—peg system, and an exhaustive "ordering"

9

of global industrial and commodities markets. Such initiatives are at worst
unappealing, and at best premature ——

in

the same way that the U.S.

Constitution was premature before a decade's experience with the more loosely

binding, less inclusive Articles of Confederation. Finally, oft—repeated
exhortations to "more policy coordination" are only a pretender to a solution.

They beg the fundamental question of why such largesse would be in the narrow

national interest of aggressive governments. Policy coordination is a safe
haven only in the eyes of commentators without any stake in policy aggression.
Blackhurst (1981, p. 369 passim) has addressed the fundamental question.

He references the national benefits of a return toward "conventions" in

governmental policy initiatives. Blackhurst seems to have in mind conventions
that would at least order, but not bind, trade and exchange—rate policy.

Governments themselves should be the constituents. Mutually agreed conventions protect governments from each other and also from domestic political

constituents in narrow pursuit of trade and exchange—rate policies that serve
their special interest at the expense of other constituents.

There are two Important practIcal challenges In any such return toward con-

ventions. One is to avoid over—ambitious promulgation of "rules" which, when
broken, breed the now—familiar unpredictability, uncertainty, and incredu—
lousness that disorders resource allocation. The second is to keep. the resource
and time costs of negotiation in check.

In these lights it seems timely to consider reinforcing recent retreats from

commercial and financial multilateralism. Multilateralism may currently be
too ambitious and too costly to maintain. Bilateralism, trilateralism,
quadrilaterialism, and so on, may be cheaper, more promising, and the most

predictable route toward a new multilateralism. Initially, after all, the
GATT, IMF, and World Bank were upheld by small, non—exhaustive groups of

10

nations. In the light of another metaphor, small neighborhood gangs may take
on the obligations of turf—sharing agreements only after a conclusive

demonstration of neighborhood peace and predictability that stems from
agreement within the "exclusive club" of larger gangs.

What this may suggest practically is aggressive bilateral peacemaking ——

the

formation of mutually advantageous coalitions with like—minded governments.

For example, the U.S. and Japan seem likely partners for a bilateral but
possibly non—MFN trade agreement that would order trade along lines that are

held closely In common. A successful U.S.—Japan trade agreement might then
encourage other trade—policy combattants to sue for peace. Or for example,
the U.S. seems currently in a position to bargain for European trade—policy
concessions in return for a recommitment on its part to exchange—market inter-

vention. U.S. intervention can be argued to have at the very worst innocuous
effects on microecononiic allocation and macroeconomic prosperity. At best it

might purge the economic system of large unanticipated exchange—rate
variations that may be mistaken for resource—allocational signals. The case
for stable, predIctable monetary policy to avoid resource—allocaionaj. mista-

kes and disorder ought to apply with equal force to stable, predictable
exchange—rate management.

The general goal of any return toward convention in government policy
interchange is to re—order resource allocation, or perhaps more accurately to

allay the imminence of disorder. Stability, credibility, and

predictability

are crucial pre—requisltes for both new trade policy and new exchange—rate
policy (Krueger (1981, p. 91), Grossman and Richardson (1982, pp. 20—27),

Artus (1982, pp. 10—11)). Stable, credible, and transparent trade policy is
able to influence trends in resource allocation.

Stable, credible, and

11

transparent exchange—rate policy is able to influence deviations around

those trends. Ideal trends with minimal divergences are the obvious targets.
Trend mistakes are costly not only for the usual reasons, because resources
are continuously less productive than they would be in the "right" place, but
also because irreversible human and physical investment is often wasted, and

because retraining and retooling costs are ultimately unavoidable. Divergence
mistakes are costly not only because of human aversion to risk, but also
because temporary competitive imbalances can generate empty shelves and
storage lots in one location, excessive inventories in another, and resource—
diverting arbitrage that transfers goods from the latter location to the

former. The three respective resource allocational costs associated with
divergence mistakes are waste from rationing, waste from excessive

stockpiles,4 and waste from unnecessary transportation and redistribution.
In a peculiar way, the goals of stability, credibility, and predictability
amount to making trade and exchange—rate policy more endogenous and less exoge-

nous. Endogenous policy in this context simply means systematic policy. Policy

L

LJ.L.I. l..-.i-311

C1
l1
LX±IJ1

aLJ.LL £D

.-.-

DUL.

1._.t11 1
LI. WL.L.L

governed by conventions and behavior that are stable, self—enforcing, and

4Stockpiles are costly both to maintain, and in a growing economy, to build
up at steady—state growth rates. Inventories can be excessive in the sense
that they waste resources on maintenance, and in the sense that they force regular incremental additions to stockpiles that could otherwise be consumed.

12

readily apparent to economic decisionmakers.5 Exogenous policy in this
context, typical though It is In standard economic analysis, amounts to
arbitrary, unsystematic, and unpredictable policy.

51n addItIon to the resource—allocatlonal benefits of stable, credible,
and transparent policy that are sketched above, Richardson (1982) and Grossman
and Richardson (1982, p. 24) observe Its potential for generating a kind of
"leading adjustment" to policy. Leading adjustment has the virtue of being
controlled by expected prices, costs, and profits. All of these are flexible
and able to contribute to market clearing. None of them seem likely to be
distorted in any systematic or undesirable way. Thus resource—allocational
"adjustment costs" associated with policy that can be forecast and that is
transparent may in general be minimal. There appear, however, to be two
Important situations In which this generalization may be misleading. Market
power on the part of sector—specIfic factors (e.g., a strong union in an
Import—sensitive industry) may lead them to exploit systematically transparent
policy to take further advantage of their monopoly position (e.g., to raise
wages unduly). And foreign policy authorities in retaliatory response may
exploit systematically transparent policy to take advantage of any market
power they have. Gaming situations such as these, however, suggest only
that stable, credible, and predictable policy response should be developed
to deal with domestic market power and foreign policy retaliation.

13

3. PURE ANALYTICAL APPROACHES AND THEIR LIMITATIONS

A familiar position in "pure" analytic approaches to trade and industrial
policies is that exchange rates and payments adjustment are red herrings.

In the most familiar general—equilibrium models exchange rates are ignored and

payments adjustment is taken for granted. Exchange rates and ignored because
they are assumed to be the relative price of two moneys, both of which are

"veils" having no real effects. Money does not matter, and neither do exchange

rates. They are all "neutral". An exogenous change in their value has no ultimate impact on production or consumption, and therefore no ultimate impact on

trade or industrial policy. Trade or industrial policy may by contrast, have
some impact on exchange rates and monetary variables, but the 'real' consequences of these "real" policies will be invariant to their monetary consequences.

This seems to be what Blackhurst and Tumlir (1980, pp. 3, 13) have in mind when
they remark, "The economic value of trade liberalization is not affected by
increased variability of nominal exchange rates... exchange rate fluctuations in

no way reduce the importance of efforts to liberalize world trade."6 This is
also the regime chartacterized by Corden (1980, p. 174) as having a vertical
long—run Phillips curve.

As to payments adjustment in pure analytic approaches to trade and
industrial policies, it is implicitly assumed to be maintained automatically.

The automatic maintenance mechanisms are exchange—rate flexibility, stabilizing
official or private trade in assets (as under the gold standard), or a com—

6For a strongly dissenting view, based on less familiar general—equilibrium
models, see Chipman (1978, 1980).

14

bination of all.7 Trade and industrial policies obviously cannot cause
exchange—rate or payments "problems" under such assumptions. For that matter,
nothing else can either.

So under conventional analytic approaches it makes about as much sense to
write a paper on "Industrial Policy, Floating Exchange Rates, and Payments
Adjustment," as on "Industrial Policy, Variable Tides, and Shoreline

Adjustment." Purity rejoices and Dichotomy reigns supreme.
Fortunately for the mandate of this paper, one need only add a few elements
of reality to draw richer conclusions about the interaction of trade and

exchange—rate policies. Some of these conclusions bear extended discussion and
are treated in Sections 4 and 5 of the paper. Other conclusions are very
general and will be treated quickly in this section.

To start, analysts agree in general that "money can matter" to real econo-

mic decisions for as long as some market failure persists. For example,
domestic wages and prices may adjust sluggishly to clear markets. Exchange
rates will matter for real decisions during such wage—price sluggishness.

Temporary but persistent undervaluation (relative to a currency's ultimate
equilibrium value) should encourage exports and protect domestic import competitors, leading Corden to dub it "exchange—rate protection" (Corden (1978)).

Temporary but persistent overvaluation can lead to increased pressures for
compensatory protectionist policy by injured tradeables producers (Bergsten
and Williamson (1982)).

7it may be surprising to some general—equilibrium trade theorists to
learn that they too are macroeconomists, always implicitly writing down a
rudimentary and convenient macroeconomic structure on which their "real"
analysis is based.

15

Furthermore, exchange—rate misalignments may be sharper, more frequent, and
more enduring the more that wage—price sluggishness stands in the way of market

clearing. The reason is that the exchange rate and other flexible variables
must "do the work" of sluggish prices. Excess supplies and demands spill over
Into unrationed markets like the foreign exchange market, causing greater

unpredictability in flexible prices there. Trade and industrial policies may even
aggravate this spillover unpredictability of exchange rates (or of official
reserves, or of exchange control adjustments) if they administratively ration

suppliers and demanders. Administrative rationing is of course one tool of
production quotas, import licensing, voluntary export restraints, and man-

datory performance requirements. The counterpart to the policy—induced
rationing is increased spillovers of frustrated supplies and demands into

unrationed markets. And among these unrationed markets are prominently the
international markets that include and are mediated by the foreign exchange
market.

Distortions other than wage—price sluggishness can also make exchange
rates and money "matter." Take for example intertemporal and capital—market
imperfections that set practical limits to the losses consistent with any

firm's continued survival. With such imperfections, an increase in unanticipated exchange—rate volatility may cause increased incidence of financial

insolvency for firms that are still viable in terms of underlying trends. If
insolvency is a boon, implying only a transfer of ownership and a shaking Out
of the least viable operations in the still viable firm, then there is no

cause for alarm. But if insolvency is a bane, implying waste of resources
through indivisibility or immobility, then greater frequency, amplitude, and
unpredictability of exchange—rate deviations around their trend is an impor—

16

tant problem. Even governments can become "insolvent" due to the same
capital—market imperfections. Increased incipient exchange—rate volatility
can exhaust not only owned official reserves but borrowed official reserves as

well. This leaves a government with no recourse except to abandon the foreign
exchange market entirely or to apply strict distortionary controls. Financial
crises then do have real effects, as illustrated most recently in the Mexican
dilemma .

Market failure is at the core of each of these illustrations of substantive
interaction between trade—industrial policies and financial/exchange—rate poli-

cies. The first illustrations rest on the failure of markets to clear at a
moment in time. The second rests on the failure of markets to clear over time.
In general, market failure in one domain can provide a presumptive case for

remedial action in some other domain, albeit of a second—best kind. For
example, real distortions in the inter—temporal trade carried out in global
capital markets can be reduced greatly by stable international banking and

financial arrangements. What imperfections remain in the global capital market
may provide economIcally sensible grounds for infant Industry protection

(Baldwin (1969)). They may also provide grounds for industrial policy aimed at
avoiding the resource waste associated with "unemployed" immobile capital, or
associated with missing insurance markets that cause irreversible human investment decisions (Grossman and Richardson (1982, pp. 7—8, 22—23), Eaton and

Grossman (1981)). Predatory trade and industrial policy provide another

example. Such policies in one country create market distortions in others. The
ideal retaliatory response (or threat) may lie in exchange—rate manipulation, in
some other financial intervention, or in completely unrelated domains rather

than in the threatened markets themselves. This is because the retaliatory

17

response must be credible to be effective. It must therefore emanate from sectors or activities where the injured country has a strong market position rather
than a vulnerable one.

We turn In the next two sections to more detailed conclusions about the
interaction of trade, industrial, and exchange—rate policies.

18

III. SOME IMPACTS OF INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY TURBULENCE ON
TRADE/INDUSTRIAL POLICY

The confluence of increasing capital mobility and increasing recourse to
floating exchange rates can be argued to have brought unique pressures to bear
on, trade and. i.ndustrial policy.

Increasing spatial capital mobility can be an independent source of

financial shocks to the "real" international economy. It can also create a
sounding board transmitting real and financial shocks in one region into rever-

berations in others. Financial markets tend to reflect "news" faster than goods
markets or factor markets. And some bits of "news" encourage significant portfolio reallocations across boundaries and currency denominations.

That is where exchange—rate systems enter. When pegged exchange—rate
systems are credible and work, international asset—market fluctuations have corn—

paratively minor effects on competitive and comparative advantage. But when
pegged—rate systems fail, then fluid fInancIal capItal may force exchange rates
to oscillate markedly around trends consistent with "real—trade fundamentals',

distorting and destabilizing real trade patterns. It is useful to recall some
familiar features of exchange—rate systems in order to illustrate these points.
Under credible and successful pegged—rate systems, official reserves

absorb a large portion of the fluctuations in mobile international financial

19

capital.8 That is to say, official reserves are volatile. Money stocks are
potentially volatile as well, depending on the importance of official reserves

in the monetary base and the potential for sterilization. By comparison,
exchange rates and current account balances are not volatile, although they
may exhibit secular trends, for example, parities may creep or glide by small

increments over time. Exchange rates and current—account balances may also
exhibit "misalignment" (Bergsten and Williamson (1982)) ——

protracted

periods

of departure from normal or long—run values. During such periods, official
reserve stocks may exhibit secular trends as well as volatility.
Under floating and conservative intervention systems, exchange rates

absorb a large portion of the fluctuations in mobile international financial

capital. That is to say, exchange rates are volatile. Their volatility
induces accommodating adjustments in trade flows or other capital flows.

Adjustment of trade flows takes place for familiar reasons. Adjustment of

8Two problems are often saId to confront any regular and significant government intervention in today's foreign exchange markets. One is that official
reserves are inadequate to cope with the massive cross—boundary portfolio
reallocations. The second is that no matter how large official reserves were,
rational expectations of the government's intervention, based on knowledge of
its policy reaction behavior, would cause the Intervention to be ineffective.
It is rarely observed that both of these problems are caused in turn by a fundamentally deeper problem: the incredulousness with which the market greets
government exchange—rate targets and commitments. Suppose that governments
were really believed in their exchange—rate commitments, and that they really
took policy action consistent with those beliefs in order to ratify them.
Then the payments mechanism would work much as it did under the gold standard,
although not necessarily with fixed exchange rates. Massive portfolio reallocation might indeed take place. And the government's policy reactions
would be indeed transparent to rational forecasters. But any massive capital
movements based on rational expectations would themselves stabilize the
exchange rate around the government's credible target. Little actual intervention would be necessary. By contrast, if the target is incredible, no
amount of government intervention will succeed. The real problem is thus the
stability and credibility of government financial policy, as discussed in
Section 2.

20
capital flows takes place because of exchange—rate related capital gains or
losses, and because of the reversal of speculative asset positions as exchange

rates change. Exchange rates are almost certainly more volatile than under

aggressive and credible intervention. Exchange rates may also exhibit secular
trends, and official resistance to the exchange—rate trends will create trends

in official reserves. Otherwise official reserves are relatively stable.
There is obviously a trade—off across exchange—rate systems between official

reserve volatility and exchange—rate volatility. The former has little direct

influence on trade and industrial policy; the latter, much. 9

It can be

argued that the strongest political pressure for protection emanates from spe-

cific sectors of the economy. Each industry views itself as having very
little influence over exchange rates. (Corden (1980, p.176) suggests that

industries think of their movement as "acts of God".) Yet industries are
painfully aware of exchange—rate influences on them. Depreciation and appreciation due to asset market flux cause ebbs and flows in competitiveness, cash

flow, and long—term economic viability)0 To the extent that there are inter—
temporal capital—market dstort1ons that set limits to the maximum losses
consistent with any firms' survival, unanticipated exchange—rate volaltility
may heighten corporate, sectoral and ultimately collective political pressure

9By contrast, official—reserve swings have considerable direct influences
on financial markets themselves, altering money supplies, bond stocks, and
asset prices. These may have indirect effects on trade and industrial policy,
but rarely any important immediate influence.

10Deardorff and Stern (1982) empirically estimate some of the sectoral
U.S. effects of dollar appreciation. Marsden and Hollander (1981) show for
Australia how flux in the nominal exchange rate overwhelmingly accounts
for flux in sector—by—sector International
competitiveness.

21

for protection, especially of a quantitative kind. Quantitative trade and
industrial policies shrink the variance of international competitiveness, as

well as changing its mean. Tariffs (more accurately ad valorem tariffs)
affect only the mean.11 The impetus for these sectoral protectionist
pressures is of course the fluctuations in a sector's "real" exchange rate,

the ratio of foreign to domestic commodity prices in comparable currency

units.12
This argument suggests only that pressures for government intervention in

trade and production will be greater given volatile exchange rates. It does
not suggest that international trade will be discouraged by floating.

The argument is thus consistent with the oft—quoted failure to find convincing
correlation between exchange—rate volatility and international trade (Hooper

and Kohlhagen (1978), referenced for example by Levich (1981, p.15) and Artus
and Young (1979, p.682)). The explanation for this consistency is that
current trade and industrial policies are as likely to be pro—trade—biased as

anti—trade—biased. Examples of pro—trade biased industrial policies include:
export performance requirements, indirect export subsidies, export tax relief,
concessionary export financing, disguised encouragements to dump, and official
cultivation of scale—intensive and technology—intensive industry that necessi-

tates reliance on international markets. Increased export promotion and

11This may be a reason to expect relatively more recourse to quantitative
protection under floating exchange rates, and relatively less resource to
tariffs, than would be typical under pegged rates.
12

Some define real exchange rates as domestic ratios of tradeables prices to
non—tradeables prices (e.g. Neary and Purvis (1981)). Most of the observations
in this section have straightforward correspondents in this conception as long
as tradeables prices follow exchange rates more closely or quickly than non—
tradeables prices.

22

"export protection" move global production and trade patterns toward their
free—trade norms, and potentially even past them.13

Of course some exchange—rate variation is welcomed by interventionist

interests. For short periods of time, governments can sometimes protect tra—
d'eab•l'es producers by discretionary leaning toward currency depreciation. This
is. a.oompli.shed euphemistically by "replenishing depleted official reserves" or

"building them up 'for a rainy day'". Corden (1978) and a number of subsequent
writers have described this as "exchange—rate protection".

It is limited in

scope by the credibility of the government's exchange—rate targets. Incredible
targets generate ineffective intervention and no exchange—rate protection, as

described in note 8. And even with scope, the effectiveness of exchange—rate
protection is limited in time to the period during which wages, prices and other

nominal magnitudes remain sluggish. Exchange—rate protection is not a viable
policy, for example, where wages are indexed fully and quickly to prices, and
where commodity arbitrage causes prices to adjust rapidly to exchange rates.
An extension of the idea of exchange—rate protectIon has been recommended

by several recent commentators. It is to use official—reserve intervention
on both sides of the market to stabilize average (aggregate) real exchange
rates around their trends. The idea has some appeal as a means of avoiding
the unanticipated real exchange—rate divergences that destabilize and distort

13Other explanations for the failure to find much discernible impact of
exchange—rate variation on international trade or investment include: (1)
possible encouragements to trade based on foreign direct investment, vertically
to avoid input—price variation, and horizontally to exploit arbitrage of the
produce—where—cheap, market—where—dear variety (Artus (1982, pp. 6, 8),
McCulloch (1982, pp.10—li)); (2) the large proportion of modern international
trade and investment carried out by genuinely multinational corporations with
no strong currency habitat, so that exchange—rate variation becomes less
important to their real decisions.

23

resource allocation. What this proposal comes close to in a world with spatially mobile financial capital and with reasonably accurate forecasting of
expected inflation, is simultaneous stabilization of the average "real" interest

rate differential. When nominal interest parity, Fisherian interest parity,
and mean forecast accuracy all hold, the average (aggregate) time trend in
real exchange rates is approximately equal to the average international difference in real interest rates:1

(1)

ep+pf rdrf

where
represents the time rate of change of any exchange rate
(domestic currency price of foreign currency);
pf represent average domestic and foreign infla—
ton rates for goods;
—

+ Pf =
d
real exchange

a measure of the average time rate of change of
rates;

rd, rf represent measures of domestic and foreign "real"
interest rates.

Thus to stabilize real exchange rates around their trend is to stabilize inter-

national differences in real interest rates. This requires intervention policy
aimed at moderating asset—market shocks and stochastic variation both at home

and abroad. It is notable that from the left side of the equation such policy
would look like trade or industrial policy, but from the right side it looks

like financial policy. With spatially mobile capital, the two are closely
linked. That is an important charateristic of today's international economy.
The band of approximation around "equation" (1) is narrower the closer the

14"Real" interest rates are thought of as the difference between nominal
interest rates and reasonably accurate forecasts of inflation. Nominal
interest rates differ internationally under spatial financial capital mobility
by reasonably accurate forecasts of the trend movement in exchange rates.

24

spatial links between financial capital markets and the tighter the accuracy

of economic forecasts. When it is reasonably accurate, "equation" (1) serves
several purposes. It demonstrates the linkage between what is usually considered a concern of financial policy ——

the divergence of real interest rates

from global levels —— and what is usually considered a concern of
industrial/trade policy ——

trends in international competitiveness. It also

demonstrates that small, financially open nations may have on the one hand little

policy control over real exchange rates (so that the real—exchange—rate
targetting suggested above would be infeasible) and on the other hand little

need for such policy control. The volatility of real exchange rates for such
countries may be quite small, and their mean value may approximate purchasing—

power—parity norms, since international arbitrage seems likely to minimize

divergences of home real interest rates from dominating global levels. Such
"real—interest arbitrage" might be most likely where multinational corporate
presence is prominent in the small, financially open country.
Equation (1) serves also to demonstrate how important trade issues can arise
from the inter—temporal considerations associated with real interest rates.

Divergences between home and foreign real interest rates may be as significant
an influence on trade as trade policy itself, especially in a
Trends in and shocks to real interest rates can change the

growing economy.

commodity composition

of trade because they alter real exchange rates, with subsequent shifts in the

margin of comparative advantage among goods.15
The most widely appreciated illustration of this is of course the
"overshooting" phenomenon, summarized and surveyed by Schadler (1977) and

15Trends in real interest rates can even change international competitiveness within sectors such as autos and capital goods, because capitalization of borrowing costs accentuates the dollar value of natural price
differentials.

25

Levich (1981)).

The sequence of overshooting linkages between financial and real variables

is familiar. The sequence begins with an unanticipated shock to a financial
variable (Dornbusch (1976), Kouri (1976)) or to a real variable (Neary and

Purvis (1981)). Unanticipated shocks include announcements of future developments (Wilson (1979)), which once announced become anticipated future develop-

ments, and unexpected revisions of previous announcements. All these unanticipated shocks cause rapid adjustment of financial variables ——

asset

valuations, interest rates, and nominal exchange rates. The rapid ajustment of
financial variables then becomes itself a shock, to which some real variables

respond rapidly at first and subsequently with slow unwinding. Most important
for trade and industrial policy are the ways that real interest rates and nominal exchange rates affect trends in international competitiveness, as revealed

in equation (1). Unanticipated changes in the level of a monetary stock, for
example, cause oppositely signed changes in real interest rates (rd); unantIcIpated changes in the rate of monetary expansion cause similarly signed

changes in the rate of currency depreciation ()

Both cause sudden movement of

real exchange rates and competitiveness, with subsequent slow unwinding.
Some aspects of overshooting linkages are less familiar than those just

discussed. First, real exchange rates really overshoot in response to
monetary/financial turbulence. Virtually any temporary divergence of real
exchange rates from their real norms should be classified as overshooting if it

is caused by a monetary shock. That is because the ultimate equilibrium values
of real exchange rates, like all price ratios, are relatively insensitive to
monetary variables.

26

Second, monetary policy innovations are not the only shocks that cause

overshooting in real exchange rates and sectoral competitiveness. Overshooting
is just as readily a result of unanticipated shocks to money demand (Artus
and Young (1979, p.670), Levich (1981, p.25)) and to stock equilibrium In

other financial markets. Among such unfamiliar causes of overshooting are
bank and brokerage failures, unexpected features of default and rescheduling

arrangements, unforeseen beginnings and ends to "bubbles," unpredictable out—
workings of international "currency substitutability," and unanticipated portfolio shifts among official—reserve assets of different maturity and currency
denomination.16

Third, real shocks themselves can cause financial—market reactions that feed
back in turn on the real economy, in the form of overshooting and volatility.

Examples include unexpected business failures, animal spirits in capital formation, and exogenous resource—price shocks that change the capital value of

resource ownership.17 Even unanticipated cyclical movements in real output can
cause financial—market reactions and subsequent overshooting. Unforeseen
recessionary shocks reduce the stock demand for liquid assets and real interest

rates. These will in turn cause over—depreciation of domestic money and even
larger over—depreciation of the real exchange rate. With no further shocks, the
nominal exchange rate would gradually return part way toward its former value

and the real exchange rate would return all the way)8 Unforeseen expansionary
16See Roosa et al. (1982) and Multiple Reserve Currency Study Group (1982) for
other ramifications of multiple—currency holdings of official reserves.
17Exatnples abound in the literature on the "Dutch disease." References abound
in, for example, Corden and Neary (1982) and Neary (1982).

18Therein lies a possible contributing explanation for the well—known hypersensitivity of the trade balance to cyclical fluctuation. A nation's trade
balance may vary counter—cyclically not only for the usual reasons, but also
because its international competitive position varies in an exaggerated
counter—cyclical way due to overshooting.

27

shocks will have, of course, symmetrically opposite influences.

Given the large inventory of sources for overshooting, it is no wonder that
concern has mounted over the recent volatility of exchange rates and real

interest rates. Proposals abound for improved exchange—rate management and
increased policy stabilization of interest rates, especially on the part of
governments in the largest financial markets.

The concern becomes even more credible when each source of overshooting is
seen not as an isolated, unique event, but realistically as a set of recurring,

unforeseeable stochastic impulses. Financial variables will then overshoot
unpredictably on both sides of equilibrium. Induced overshooting and volatility
of "real" variables may be even more pronounced. Equilibrium may be less a
position of rest and more an entrepot for real exchange rates, international competitiveness, and relative prices of tradeables to non—tradeables or capital

goods to consumer goods. This is a disquieting scenario. Stable equilibria are
always assumed to constrain the economic system at its extremes, tugging it back

most aggressively when it was furthest away. But equilibria have also usually
been conceived as dwelling places. It is not clear what happens in an economy
with so much recurrent volatility that equilibrium becomes just a transit point.

The most dangerous potential answer is unpredictibility and disorder in resource

allocation. Inefficiency and distortions might increase too, but seem by comparison much less threatening.
Some commentators on overshooting have observed how pervasive it is among
all economic markets, and how deep are its historical roots in economic analysis

(for example, Levich (1981), Neary and Purvis (1981)). The implicit or explicit message is that exchange—rate volatility is similar to the volatility in

all asset prices, and we should worry no more about one than the other. While

28

the description of exchange rates as asset prices is undeniable, the prescription to treat them the same as other asset prices seems dubious.

Exchange

rate volatility seems on the face of it to affect more industrial decisions
more dramatically and more immediately than volatility in prices of equities,

bonds, or commodities futures. Variation in other asset prices seems to have
its most important effects on future resource allocation and investment.19
Variation in exchange rates seems to have important current as well as future
effects.

The most compelling reason why volatility in exchange rates has comparatively

more scope for pernicious real mischief is that exchange rates are relative

prices of media of exchange, not just stores of value. When the relative price
of exchange media vary, so will the terms of any real transaction requiring
those exchange media to be bartered.2°

Almost all current (as well as

future) international transactions involve such a barter. There is no medium
of exchange for the national media, no super—medium.

The point is that foreign exchange markets serve more purposes than just

those served by all asset markets. This makes price variation in the former
more important than price variation in the latter. Foreign exchange (spot
claims in foreign money) is different from other financial assets for exactly

the same reasons (whatever they are) that money (whatever it is!) is different

19

For example, variation in the ratio of the market value of capital to its
replacement value ("Tobin's q") has its most important effects on the future
capital stock, through cumulative effects on current investment.

20The terms of the real transactions may admittedly be only temporarily altered,
as discussed above and in section 4. The period during which this happens is
influenced again by the duration of sluggishness in the adjustments of wages,
prices, and expectations.

29

from other financial assets. Public interest in stock markets and futures
markets would understandably and properly rise if legal tender were to be
re—defined as contracts for pork bellies or baskets of ownership certificates to
Dow—Jones Industrials. Concern over pork bellies and the Dow—Jones average might

become fit fare for every family's dinner conversation. Opposition would spring
up immediately to the capricious signals for resource allocation that were
generated by the vagaries of pricing on Wall Street and In the pits of the

Chicago Mercantile Exchange. "That's all very well for speculative financial
instruments," people might be heard to say, "but this stuff bouncing around from
hour to hour is legal tender!"

This discussion has been aimed at documenting the ways that international
monetary turbulence elicits sympathetic real turbulence and pressures on trade

and industrial policy. The last section of the paper reverses the causation.
The chief implication of this section for international monetary policy is that

its credibility and predictability be enhanced. To do this successfully
requires increased credibility and predictability of domestic monetary policy.

And to do this successfully requires some change in monetary targets and technical procedures (to enhance predictability), but more importantly an improve-

ment in the systematic will, transparency, and endogeneity that govern monetary

control. Given them, any one of a number of international monetary reforms might
succeed well.21 Without them, all seem likely to fail.

21See Bergsten and Williamson (1982, pp. 23ff.) for a number of suggestions,
including unsterilized pegging, management of intervention by reference rates,
and capital controls, including real—interest equalization taxes.

30

5. SOME IMPACTS OF TRADE/INDUSTRIAL
POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY TURBULENCE
It is obvious that trade and industrial policies aim at sectoral targets.

They attempt to influence the commodity composition of output and trade. It is
less obvious that trade and industrial policies aim at temporal targets. They
attempt to influence current—account balances, capital formation, and growth

rates. To achieve their sectoral and temporal targets, trade and industrial
policy inevitably employ not only budget—balancing taxes and subsidies but also
fiscal, monetary, and debt management policies.

Exchange rates and international payments are sensitive to both sectoral and
temporal targets of real policy, but especially so to the temporal targets.

These targets and their corresponding instruments influence levels, trends, and
volatility of exchange rates, official reserves, and payments balances on
current and capital account.

The Importance of temporal targets in trade and industrial policy Is docu-

mented, for example, in Mutti (1982, pp. 9—15). Government capital subsidies to
industry range from 2 to 10 times as large as government operatIng subsidies in

major countries. Without exception, industrial subsidies generate benefits on
balance to employment of capital. Or, for example, government export promotion
is typically a sectoral policy carried out by temporal tools. These include con—

cessionary loans, loan guarantees, and sometimes even equity participation. It
is no surprise therefore that such hybrid sectoral—temporal policies have hybrid

consequences. Does export promotion really strengthen a currency and bolster

reserves? The usual affirmative answer rests on sectoral incidence alone. A
definitive anser must also rest on the policy's temporal Incidence —— how the
export promotion is financed.

31

The effect of industrial policies on levels and trends of financial

variables is almost always conditional. One important condition is the type of

industrial policy being considered. Two types are often distinguished. One is
a "pick the winners" or "positive—adjustment" policy; the other is a "protect
the injured" or "defensive" policy (e.g., Corden (1980), Blackhurst (1981)).

Many commentators identify export—development policies with the first type and

import substitution with the second (e.g. Krueger (1981)). But there are
enough counter—examples of successful import replacement and of threatened
export sectors clamoring for protection to make the usual identification
dubious, especially on the margin.
A successful "positive adjustment" policy should strengthen a country's

currency. One of the most familiar reasons for its success is being able to
overcome inter—temporal capital—market imperfections. These imperfections may
be associated with imperfect information, with risk that exceeds corporate—
insurer or creditor ability to bear, and other causes of market failure.
Over time the wisdom of a successful "pick the winners" policy will become

apprecIated in the Integrated global capital market. For as long as this
learning takes, financial investors, some of them foreign, will be adding

assets to their portfolios that carry a stake in the winners' winnings. So
will domestic investors, foregoing some foreign investments that they might

otherwise have made. Those who add the assets earliest realize the largest
capital gains over the period of information diffusion. They also tend to be
the best informed and/or most daring investors. When information about the
successful policy is sufficiently diffuse, extraordinary capital gains cease.

Only normal returns will be made from then on. But divestment will not
thereby be encouraged and none will normally take place. The important implication for this paper is that investors will end up holding an indefinitely

32
larger stock of claims than otherwise on the country that picked the winners.
Increased stock demand for selected domestic assets will then lead to

arbitrage among the country's other assets. Arbitrage will cause almost all
asset prices to be higher than otherwise, too.

Among these other asset prices

is the foreign—exchange_market value of local currency.
Thus the ultimate monetary effect of a successful "pick the winners" strategy is an indefinitely stronger currency and/or an indefinitely more favorable

tend in official reserves. During the period of information diffusion the
exchange—rate and official—reserve effects will be quantitatively even more

marked. This is definitionally overshooting, and must take place because transitional capital—account surpluses must be somehow financed during this

period.22 The transitional impacts will of course be tempered if the winner
industries are biased toward exports or import

replacement. Incipient current—

account surpluses would be financed by even greater transitional official
reserve absorption, or else they would be reversed by even greater transitional

exchange—rate appreciation. Such appreciation would have to create the current
deficit necessary to fund the transitional capital Inflow.

A "defensive" industrial policy has exactly the same effects if it avoids
temporary insolvency and capital losses in firms that are viable in the long run.
But a "defensive" policy that delays the demise of non—viable enterprise has
exactly the opposite effects. So does an unsucessfuj. "pick the winners" policy,

in which losers are mistakenly identified as winners. Industrial policies in

these last two cases result in a permanently weaker currency and/or less
favorable trend in official reserves. In the transition period during which
the global capital market gradually develops its bleak assessment of the
22The details these transitional and steady—state conclusions are sketched in
a
number of recent papers by Jeffrey Sachs and by William H. Branson.

33

government's policy, depreciation and official—reserve losses will be even

greater than ultimately. The reasoning is symmetric to that sketched above.
It can readily be seen that raw industrial policies, whether sucessful or
not, cause overshooting of exchange rates and of trends in official reserves.
In this sense they may contribute to exchange—rate and payments volatility as

well as influencing levels and steady—state trends. Yet industrial policies are
not developed exogenously in a vacuum. Some are conscious attempts to vitiate
structural adjustments that are themselves unanticipated real shocks, and that

themselves cause overshooting. The international monetary system may be made
less turbulent, not more, by these trade and industrial policies. Examples
include policies that attempt to offset oil—price shocks, real—wage
aggression, and stagflationary influences of social policies (such as higher
payroll taxes, environmental standards, and occupational safety and health
mandates).

To argue matters another way, the chief cause of international monetary turbulence during the past decade may well have been the unanticipated stagfla—
tionary shocks described above, coupled with the unanticipatable government

policy responses to them under apparently new rules of the game. Trade and
industrial policies that are consciously counter—stagflationary should then

reduce international monetary turbulence. Examples include supply—side policies
aimed at stimulating modernization, research and development, and capital for-

mation at the expense of consumer—goods production. Many such industrial policies are, however, unfunded, and lead to larger government budget deficits.

Crowding out may then remove much of their intended counter—stagflationary
influence.

Even worse, many industrial policies are themselves stagflationary.

They are more clearly described as counter—productive. By affording

34
ever larger measures of protection to firms and workers in inefficient and

declining industries, they reduce productivity growth in exactly the same way

as technological regress. Worst of all, they often create opportunities to
earn rents and unconditional windfall gains on the privileged position that

industrial policy provides. Resource diversion away from normal economic
activity is the consequence. Resources are devoted instead to "rent—seeking"
(Krueger (1974)), lobbying (Brock and Magee (1981)), and suing the government

for (industrial) injury. Counter—productive industrial policies like these
will be catalysts for international monetary turbulence rather than cures for
it.

One conclusion is that for trade and industrial policies to alleviate international monetary turbulence, they must be motivated by economic dollars and

sense. They must be either consistent with private—market assessments or per-

suasively corrective of them. Policies motivated by

anything else——by politics,

national prestige, or irrational attachment to romantic industry (e.g.,
"high—tech")—.-will destabilize international trade and payments (Grossman and

Richardson (1982, p. 22)). Markets have an inexorable way of disciplinIng poli-

ticians, nationalists, and romantics. But a concomitant of discipline is turbulence.

Finally, It may seem doubtful that the international monetary impacts of
trade and industrial policy are

quantitatively large enough to worry about.

But recent empirical calibrations of mixed real and monetary models (Hool and

Richardson (1981), Richardson (1982), Deardorff and Stern (1980)) suggest the

opposite. At least sometimes the impacts are large. The
variables that trade and industrial policy influence

intervening

directly are: effective

prices of imported and exported intermediate goods;23 international transfers

See Johnson (1966), Deardorff and Stern (1980), and Eichengreen (1981).

35

of rent—like revenues associated with voluntary export quotas and orderly
marketing agreements; and capital gains and losses on the equity value of

domestic industries. Changes in these variables are what directly and often
significantly affect exchange rates and payments.

36

REFERENCES

Artus, Jacques R. (1982), "Toward a More Orderly Exchange Rate System,"
paper given at a Wingspread Conference on Evolving International
Monetary Arrangements, Racine, Wisconsin, July 29—31, 1982.

_________ and John H. Young (1979), "Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates: A
Renewal of the Debate," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 26
(December), pp. 654—698.

Baldwin, Robert E. (1969), "The Case Against Infant—Industry Protection,"
Journal of Political Economy, 77 (May/June), pp. 295—305.
Bergsten, C. Fred and John Williamson (1982), "Exchange Rates and Trade
Policy," processed, presented at a conference on Trade Policy in the
Eighties, June 23—25, Institute for International Economics.
Bhandari, Jagdeep S. and Bluford Putnam, eds. (1982), Economic Interdependence
and Flexible Exchange Rates, Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press.
Blackhurst, Richard (1981), "The Twilight of Domestic Economic Policies,"
The World Economy, 4 (December), pp. 357—373.

_________ and Jan Tumlir (1980), Trade Relations Under Flexible Exchange
Rates, GATT Studies in International Trade, Number 8, Geneva: General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Chipman, John S. (1978), "A Reconsideration of the Elasticity Approach to
Balance—of—Payments Adjustment Problems," in Jacob S. Dreyer, ed,
Breadth and Depth in Economics: Fritz Machiup —— The Nan and His
Ideas, Lexington, Massachusetts: D. C. Heath.

__________ (1980), "Exchange—Rate Flexibility and Resource Allocation,"
in John S. Chipman and Charles P. Kindleberger, eds., Flexible
Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments: Essays in Memory of
Egon Sobmen, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Cooper, Richard N. (1971), "The Nexes Among Foreign Trade, Investment and
Balance—of—Payments Adjustment," in United States International
Economic Policy in an Interdependent World, Papers submitted to the
President's Commission on International Trade and Investment (the
"Williams Commission"), Volume II, July.
Corden, W. N. (1978), "Exchange Rate Protection," Australian National
Working Paper No. 60, April, appearing subsequently in Richard
N. Cooper et al., eds., The International Monetary System Under
Flexible Rates: Global, Regional, and National, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Ballinger, 1981.

37

___________ (1980), "Relationships Between Macroeconomic and Industrial
Policies," The World Economy, 3 (September), pp. 167—184.
__________ and J. P. Neary (1982), "Booming Sector and De—Industrialisation in
a Small Open Economy," Institute for International Economic Studies
Seminar Paper No. 195, Stockholm, February.
Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert N. Stern (1980), "Tariff and Exchange—Rate
Protection under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates in the Major
Industrialized Countries," Research Seminar in International Economics
Discussio•n Paper No. 99, University of Michigan, June 16, forthcoming
in Bhandari and Putnam (1982).

_________ (1982a), "The Effects of Exchange—Rate Changes on Domestic Prices,
Trade, and Employment in the U.S., European Community, and Japan,"
Research Seminar in International Economics Discussion Paper No. 111,
University of Michigan, May.

_________ (1982b), "The Sectoral Impact of the Recent Appreciation of the
U.S. Dollar," a Report to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative,
processed.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
Journal of Political Economy, 84 (December), pp. 1161—1176.

Dudley, L. (1981), "Review" of J. P. Martin and A. Smith, Trade and Payments
Adjustment Under Flexible Exchange Rates, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 13, 262—264.

Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman (1981), "Tariffs as Insurance: Optimal
Commercial Policy When Domestic Markets are Incomplete," National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 797, November.
Eichengreen, Barry J. (1981), "Effective Protection and Exchange Rate
Determination," Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Discussion
Paper No. 822, forthcoming in P.J.K. Kouri and J.B. de Macedo, eds.,
Balance of Payments Adjustment and Exchange Rate Dynamics: The
Portfolio Approach. New York: New York University Press.
Frank, Isaiah, Charles Pearson, and James Riedel (1979), The Implications of
Managed Floating Exchange Rates for U.S. Trade Policy, New York University,
Graduate School of Business Administration, Monograph Series in Finance
and Economics, 1979—1.
Friedman, Melton (1969), "Discussion" (of a paper by Charles P. Kindleberger),
in Richard E. Caves, et al., The International Adjustment Mechani3m,
Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Gilpin, Rober (1977), "Economic Interdependence and National Security
in Historical Perspective," in Klaus Knorr and Frank N. Trager, eds.,
Economic Issues and National Security, Lawrence, Kansas: Regents
Press of Kansas.

38

Grossman, Gene M. and J. David Richardson (1982), "Issues and Options for U.S.
Trade Policy in the 1980s: Some Research Perspectives," National Bureau
of Economic Research, Research Progress Report.
Hool, Bryce and J. David Richardson (1980), "International Trade,
Indebtedness, and Welfare Repercussions Among Supply—Constrained Economies
Under Floating Exchange Rates," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 571, October, forthcoming in Bhandari and Putnam
(1982).

Hooper, Peter and Steven W. Kohlhagen (1978), "The Effect of Exchange Rate
Uncertainty on the Prices and Volume of International Trade," Journal of
International Economics, 8 (November), pp. 483—511.
Johnson, Harry C. (1966), "A Model of Protection and the Exchange Rate,"
Review of Economic Studies, 33, pp. 159—163.

Keohane, Robert 0. (1980), "The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes in
International Economic Regimes, 1967—1977," in Ole Hoisti, Randolph
Siverson, and Alexander George, eds., Change in the International System,
Boulder, Colorado: Westview.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1981), "Dominance and Leadership in the International Economy: Exploitation, Public Goods, and Free Rides,"
national Studies Quarterly, 25 (2), pp. 242—254.
Kouri, Pentti J. K. (1976), "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments
in the Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 78 (May), pp. 280—304.
Krasner, Stephen D. (1976), "State Power and the Structure of International
Trade," World Politics, 28 (April), pp. 317347.
Krueger, Anne 0. (1974), "The Political Economy of the Rent—Seeking Society,"
American Economic Review, 64 (June), pp. 291—303.

_________ (1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ballinger for the

_________ (1981), "Interactions Between Inflation and Trade Regimes Objectives
in Stabilization Programs," in William R. Cline and Sidney Weintraub,
eds., Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries, Washington:
Brookings Institution.
Levich, Richard M. (1981), Overshooting in the Foreign Exchange Market, Group
of Thirty Occasional Papers No. 5, New York.
Magee, Stephen P,. and William A. Brock (1981), "A Model of Politics, Tariffs,
and Rent—Seeking in General Equilibrium," processed, August.

39

Marsden, J. S. and G. Hollander (1981), "Floating Exchange Rates, Inflation
and Selective Protectionism: Their Effects on the Competitiveness of
Australian Industry," presented September 20 at the Sixth Annual
Conference of the International Economics Study Group, Sussex, England.
McCulloch, Rachel (1982), "Unexpected Real Consequences of Floating Exchange
Rates," presented at a conference on the Evolving Multiple Reserve Asset
System, July 18—30, Wingspread, Racine, Wisconsin.
Multiple Reserve Currency Study Group (1982), How Central Banks Manage Their
Reserves, New York: Group of Thirty.
Mutti, John (1982), Taxes, Subsidies, and Competitiveness Internationally,
Washington: National Planning Association Committee on Changing
International Realities.
Neary, J. Peter (1982), "Real and Monetary Aspects of the tDutch Disease',"
presented at a conference on Structural Adjustment In Trade—Dependent
Advanced Economies,

_________ and Douglas Purvis (1981), "Real Adjustment and Exchange Rate
Dynamics," presented at a conference on Exchange Rates and International
Macroeconomics, November 20—21, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Richardson, J. David (1982a), "Four Observations on Modern International
Commercial Policy Under Floating Exchange Rates," in Karl Brunner and
Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Monetary Regimes and Protectionism, Carnegie—
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 16, Amsterdam: North
Holland.

________ (1982b), "Opaque and Transparent Trade PolIcy: Some Expectatonal
Considerations," processed, February.
Roosa, Robert B. et al. (1982), Reserve Currencies in Transition, New York:
Group of Thirty.

Schadler, Susan (1977), "Sources of Exchange—rate Variability: Theory and
Empirical Evidence," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 24 (July)
pp. 253—296.
Wilson, Charles A. (1979), "Anticipated Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
Journal of Political Economy, 87 (June), pp. 639—647.

