NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXTERNALITIES AND GROWTH
Peter J. Klenow
Andrés Rodriguez-Clare
Working Paper 11009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11009
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

This is a preliminary and incomplete draft of a chapter prepared for the Handbook of Economic Growth,
edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, North Holland Press, Amsterdam. For helpful comments we
are grateful to Bob Hall, Chad Jones, Ben Malin, Paul Romer, and seminar participants at Berkeley, the
IADB, MIT, Stanford and USC. Email: Pete@Klenow.com and AndresRo@IADB.org. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2004 by Peter J. Klenow and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Externalities and Growth
Peter J. Klenow and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 11009
December 2004
JEL No. O11, O33, O40
ABSTRACT
Externalities play a central role in most theories of economic growth. We argue that international
externalities, in particular, are essential for explaining a number of empirical regularities about
growth and development. Foremost among these is that many countries appear to share a common
long run growth rate despite persistently different rates of investment in physical capital, human
capital, and research. With this motivation, we construct a hybrid of some prominent growth models
that have international knowledge externalities. When calibrated, the hybrid model does a
surprisingly good job of generating realistic dispersion of income levels with modest barriers to
technology adoption. Human capital and physical capital contribute to income differences both
directly (as usual), and indirectly by boosting resources devoted to technology adoption. The model
implies that most of income above subsistence is made possible by international diffusion of
knowledge.
Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pete@klenow.com
Andrés Rodriguez-Clare
Inter-American Adevelopment Bank (IADB)
andresro@iadb.org

If ideas are the engine of growth and if an excess of social over private returns is an
essential feature of the production of ideas, then we want to go out of our way to introduce
external effects into growth theory, not try to do without them.
Robert E. Lucas (2002, p. 6)
1. Introduction
A number of facts suggest that international knowledge externalities are critical for
understanding growth and development. The growth slowdown that began in the early
1970s was world-wide, not an OECD-only phenomenon. Countries with high investment
rates exhibit higher income levels more than higher growth rates. Country growth rate
differences are not very persistent from decade to decade, whereas differences in country
incomes and investment rates are highly persistent. These patterns hold for investment
rates in physical, human, and research capital. Together, they suggest that investment rates
affect country transitional growth rates and long run relative incomes rather than long run
growth rates. They also suggest countries are subject to the same long run growth rate. We
argue that this represents evidence of very large international spillovers at the heart of the
long run growth process.
We organize this chapter as follows. In Section 2 we describe two broad types of
externalities and the growth models that do (and do not) feature them. Section 3 presents
cross-country evidence that, we argue, is very hard to reconcile with the models that have
no international externalities. Section 4 calibrates a model of growth with international
externalities in the form of technology diffusion. The implied externalities are huge.
Section 5 concludes and points out directions for future research.

2. A Brief Guide to Externalities in Growth Models
In this section we briefly discuss the role that externalities play in prominent
theories of economic growth. One class of growth theories features externalities in the
accumulation of knowledge possessed by firms (organizational capital) or by workers
(human capital). Another class of growth models features externalities from the
introduction of new goods, in the form of surplus to consumers and/or firms. Other theories

1

combine knowledge externalities and new good externalities. Finally, some important
growth theories include no externalities at all. Table 1 provides examples of growth models
categorized in these four ways. At the end of this section, we will dwell a little on the
predictions of no-externalities models in order to motivate the evidence we describe in the
next section. The evidence in the next section will suggest that models with no externalities
cannot explain a number of empirical patterns.

2A. Models with Knowledge Externalities
Romer (1986) modeled endogenous growth due to knowledge externalities: a given
firm is more productive the higher the average knowledge stock of other firms. As an
example, consider a set of atomistic firms, each with knowledge capital k, benefiting from
the average stock of knowledge capital in the economy K in their production of output y:

(2.1)

yit = Akitα K t1−α , 0 < α < 1.

Romer showed that, under certain conditions, constant returns to economy-wide
knowledge, as in this example, can generate endogenous growth. The external effects are,
of course, critical for long-run growth given the diminishing returns to private knowledge
capital. Romer was agnostic as to whether the knowledge capital should be thought of as
disembodied (knowledge in books) or embodied (physical capital and/or human capital).
Lucas (1988) was more specific, stressing the importance of human capital. Lucas
sketched two models, one with human capital accumulated off-the-job and another with
human capital accumulated on-the-job (i.e., learning by doing). Both models featured
externalities. In the model with human capital accumulated off-the-job, Lucas posited

(2.2)

yit = Akitα [uit hit nit ]1−α H tγ , with γ > 0 and

(2.3)

hit +1 = hit + Bhit [1 − uit ] with 0 < uit < 1.

Here u is the fraction of time spent working, and 1−u is the fraction of time spent
accumulating human capital; h is an individual worker’s human capital, and H is economy-

2

wide average human capital; k and n are physical capital and number of workers at a given
firm. Because human capital accumulation is linear in the level of human capital, human
capital is an engine of growth in this model. This is true with or without the externalities;
across-dynasty externalities are not necessary for growth. As Lucas discusses, however,
within-dynasty human capital spillovers are implicit if one imagines (2.3) as successive
generations of finite-lived individuals within a dynasty. Within-dynasty externalities,
however, would not have the same normative implications as across-dynasty externalities,
namely underinvestment in human capital. Lucas (1988) did not argue that across-dynasty
externalities were needed to fit particular facts. But he later observed that such acrosshousehold externalities could help explain why we see “immigration at maximal allowable
rates and beyond from poor countries to wealthy ones” (Lucas 1990, p. 93).
Tamura (1991) analyzed a human capital externality in the production of human
capital itself. This formulation conformed better to the intuition that individuals learn from
the knowledge of others. Tamura specified

(2.4)

yit = Akitα [uit hit nit ]1−α

(2.5)

hit +1 = hit + B( hit [1 − uit ]) β H t1−β .

Because H represents economy-wide average human capital, β < 1 implies that learning
externalities are essential for sustaining growth in Tamura’s setup. If applied to each
country, this model would suggest that immigrants from poor to rich countries should enjoy
fast wage growth after they migrate, as they learn from being around higher average human
capital in richer countries. Lucas (2004) used such learning externalities within cities as an
ingredient of a model of urbanization and development.
Models not always thought of as having knowledge externalities are Mankiw,
Romer and Weil’s (1992) augmented Solow model and the original Solow (1956)
neoclassical growth model. In Solow’s model all firms within the economy enjoy the same
level of TFP. This common level of TFP reflects technology accessible to all. The Solow
model therefore does feature disembodied knowledge externalities across firms within an
economy. In Mankiw et al.’s extension, knowledge externalities flow across countries as
3

well as across firms within countries. In section 4 we will discuss models with more
limited international diffusion of knowledge. In these models imperfect diffusion means
differences in TFP can play a role in explaining differences in income levels and growth
rates. We stress that the Mankiw et al. model relies on even stronger externalities than the
typical model of international technology spillovers, such as Parente and Prescott (1994) or
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995, chapter 8). We will discuss these models at greater length
in Section 4, when we calibrate a hybrid version of them.

2B. Models with Knowledge Externalities and New-Good Externalities
Models with both knowledge externalities and new-good externalities are the most
plentiful in the endogenous growth literature. By “new-good externalities” we mean
surplus to consumers and/or firms from the introduction of new goods. The new goods take
the form of new varieties and/or higher quality versions of existing varieties. In Stokey
(1988), learning by doing leads to the introduction of new goods over time. The new goods
are of higher quality, and eventually displace older goods. The learning is completely
external to firms, and what is learned applies to new goods even more than older goods.
Hence learning externalities are at the heart of her growth process. In Stokey (1991),
intergenerational human capital externalities (the young learn from the old) are critical for
human capital accumulation. Human capital accumulation, in turn, facilitates the
introduction of higher quality goods, which are intensive in human capital in her model.
Quality ladder models − pioneered by Grossman and Helpman (1991, chapter 4) and
Aghion and Howitt (1992, 1998) − feature knowledge spillovers in that each quality
innovation is built on the previous leading-edge technology. Such intertemporal knowledge
spillovers are also fundamental in models with expanding product variety, such as Romer
(1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991, chapter 3). In Romer (1990),

(2.6)

β

Y = HY L
α

A

∫0 x(i )

•

(2.7)

1−α − β

A = B HA A.

4

di

Intermediate goods, the x(i)’s, are imperfect substitutes in production. This is the DixitStiglitz “love of variety” model. The stock of varieties, or ideas, is A. In (2.7) new ideas
are invented using human capital and, critically, the previous stock of ideas. This is the
intertemporal knowledge spillover. Jones (1995, 2002) argues that, in contrast to (2.7),
there are likely to be diminishing returns to the stock of ideas (an exponent less than 1 on
A). He bases this on the fact that the number of research scientists and engineers have
grown in the U.S. and other rich countries since 1950, yet the growth rate has not risen, as
(2.7) would predict. Intertemporal knowledge spillovers still play a pivotal role in Jones’
specification; they are just not as strong as in Romer’s (2.7).
More recent models, such as Eaton and Kortum (1996) and Howitt (1999, 2000),
continue to emphasize both knowledge externalities and new-good externalities. We will
elaborate on these in Section 4 below.

2C. Models with New-Good Externalities
It is hard to find a model with new-good externalities but without knowledge
externalities. We have identified three papers in the literature featuring such models, but
two of the papers also have versions of their models with knowledge externalities.
Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) present a variation on Romer’s (1990) model, as
part of their analysis of the potential growth gains from international integration. In their
twist, new intermediate goods are invented using factors in the same proportions as for final
goods production in (2.6):
•

(2.8)

α β

A = BH L

A

∫0 x(i )

1−α − β

di .

They call this the “lab equipment model” to underscore the use of equipment in the research
lab, just like in the production of final goods. In this formulation, they emphasize, “Access
to the designs for all previous goods, and familiarity with the ideas and know-how that they
represent, does not aid the creation of new designs” (p. 536-537). I.e., there are no
knowledge externalities, domestic or international. Production of ideas is not even
knowledge-intensive. Ideas are embodied in goods, however, and there is surplus to
downstream consumers from their availability. Rivera-Batiz and Romer note that this

5

model allows countries to benefit from ideas developed elsewhere simply by importing the
resulting products. Just as important, international trade allows international specialization
in research. Countries can specialize in inventing different products, rather than every
product being invented everywhere.
In a similar spirit, Romer (1994) considered a model in which knowledge about how
to produce different varieties does not flow across countries, but each country can import
the varieties that other countries know how to produce. For a small open economy, Romer
posited
Mt

(2.9)

Yt = A( ∑ xαjt )N t1−α , 0 < α < 1.
j =1

xj represents the quantity of imports of the jth variety of intermediate good. Because α < 1,
intermediate varieties are imperfectly substitutable in production. Firms in the importing
country will have higher labor productivity the more import varieties they can access. If
exporters cannot perfectly price discriminate and there is perfect competition among
domestic final-goods producers, the higher labor productivity (higher Y/N) will benefit
domestic workers/consumers. If consumer varieties were imported as well, there would be
an additional source of consumer surplus from import varieties. Romer analyzed the impact
of import tariffs on the number of varieties M imported in the presence of fixed costs of
importing each variety in each country. Although Romer’s model is static, growth in the
number of varieties over time, say due to domestic population growth or falling barriers to
trade, would be a source of growth in productivity and welfare in his model.
Kortum (1997) develops a model in which researchers draw techniques of varying
efficiency levels from a Poisson distribution. Kortum does consider spillovers in the form
of targeted search. But he also considers the case of blind search, wherein draws are
independent of the previous draws. (Kortum fixes the set of goods produced but allows
endogenous research into discovering better techniques for producing each good.) In the
case of blind search, there are no knowledge spillovers. Growth is sustained solely because
of population growth that raises the supply of and demand for researchers. It takes more
and more draws to obtain a quality deep enough into the right tail to constitute an

6

improvement. A constant population growth rate sustains a constant flow of quality
improvements and, hence, a constant growth rate of income.

2D. Models with No Externalities
The seminal growth models without externalities are the AK models of Jones and
Manuelli (1990) and Rebelo (1991). In the next section we will present evidence at odds
with such models, so we dwell on their implications here. We consider a version close to
Rebelo’s. Final output is a Cobb-Douglas function of physical and human capital:

Ct + I t = Yt = AKYtα H Yt1−α ,

(2.10)

where KY and H Y represent the stocks of physical capital and human capital devoted to
producing current output. As shown, current output can be used for either consumption or
investment. The accumulation equations for physical and human capital are, respectively,

(2.11)

KYt +1 + K Ht +1 = Kt +1 = (1 − δ K ) K t + I t

(2.12)

γ
1−γ
H Yt +1 + H Ht +1 = H t +1 = (1 − δ H ) H t + BH Ht
K Ht
.

H H and K H represent the stocks of human and physical capital, respectively, devoted to
accumulating human capital.
We will focus on an equilibrium with a constant fraction of output invested in
physical capital ( sI = I / Y ) and a constant share of human capital deployed in human
capital accumulation ( sH = H H / H ). We assume that the ratio of marginal products of
physical and human capital are equated across the final output and human capital sectors, so
that physical capital is devoted to

(2.13)

sK = K H / K =

sH (1 − γ )(1 − α )
sH (1 − γ )(1 − α ) + (1 − sH )γα

7

.

The balanced growth rate is defined as

1 + g = Yt +1 / Yt = K t +1 / K t = H t +1 / H t .

(2.14)

The level of the balanced growth rate is an implicit function of the investment rates and
parameter values:

1−γ

(2.15) ( g + δ K )

( g + δ H )1−α = ( A(1 − sK )α (1 − sH )1−α sI )

1−γ

( Bs

1−γ
H sK )

γ

1−α

.

Provided α < 1 , human capital is the engine of growth. The growth rate is monotonically
increasing in sI because physical capital is an input into human capital accumulation
whereas consumption is not. Related, the growth rate does not monotonically increase with
the share of inputs devoted to producing human capital. This is because devoting more
resources to producing current output increases the stock of physical capital, which is an
input into human capital accumulation and hence growth.1 When we look at the data in
Section 3, however, we will find no country so high an sH or sK as to inhibit its growth
according to this model.
When α = 1 we have a literal Y = AK model, and the growth rate is solely a
function of the physical capital investment rate:

(2.16)

g + δ K = AsI

Here there is no point in devoting effort to producing human capital, so sH = 0 .
In the special case γ = 1 , human capital is produced solely with human capital. This
might be called a BH model. Presuming α < 1 of course, the growth rate is simply

1

To reinforce intuition, consider the (unrealistic) case of γ = 0 , wherein new human capital is produced only

with physical capital. In this case, growth is not strictly increasing in sK (the share of capital devoted to
human capital production) because some physical capital itself needs to be devoted to its own production.

8

g + δ H = AsH

(2.17)

Unlike when γ < 1 , the growth rate here is monotonically increasing in the effort
devoted to adding more human capital. Lucas (1988) and many successors focus on this

BH model because human capital accumulation is evidently intensive in human capital.
Moreover, even AK models such as Jones and Manuelli (1990) construe their K to
incorporate both human capital and physical capital. The consensus for diminishing returns
to physical capital ( α < 1 ) is strong. Constant returns are entertained only for a broad
measure of physical and human capital. We stress (2.15), a hybrid of AK and BH models,
because this generalization allows us to take into account the combined impact of physical
and human capital investment rates on growth when physical capital is an input to human
capital accumulation ( γ < 1 ).

3. Cross-Country Evidence
In this section we document a number of facts about country growth experiences
over the last fifty years. We show that country growth rates appear to depend critically on
the growth and income levels of other countries, rather than solely on domestic investment
rates in physical and human capital. Cross-country externalities are a promising
explanation for this interdependence. In brief, here are the main facts we will present:
• The growth slowdown that began in the mid-1970s was a world-wide phenomenon. It
hit both rich countries and poor countries, and economies on every continent.
• Richer OECD countries grew much more slowly from 1950 to around 1980, despite the
fact that richer OECD economies invested at higher rates in physical and human capital.
• Differences in country investment rates are far more persistent than differences in
country growth rates.

9

• Countries with high investment rates tend to have high levels of income more than they
tend to have high growth rates.

3A. The World-Wide Growth Slowdown
As has been widely documented for rich countries, the growth rate of productivity
slowed beginning in the early 1970s.2 Less widely known is that the slowdown has been a

world-wide phenomenon, rather than just an OECD-specific event.3 We document this in
Table 2. Across 96 countries, the growth rate in PPP GDP per worker fell from 2.7% per
year over 1960-1975 to 1.1% per year over 1975-2000. Growth decelerated 1.6 percentage
points on average in both the sample of 23 OECD countries and the in the sample of 73
non-OECD countries.4 The slowdown hit North and South America the hardest (their
growth rates fell 2.4 percentage points) and barely brushed Asia (who slowed down just 0.4
of a percentage point). The slowdown hit all income quartiles of the 96 country sample
(based on PPP income per worker in 1975). Although each income quartile grew at least
one percentage point slower, the slowdown was not as severe in the poorest half as in the
richest half. China’s growth rate actually accelerated from 1.8 to 5.1, in the wake of
reforms that began in the late 1970s. Chile, which experienced rapid growth in the 1990s,
accelerated 2.1 percentage points.
Why does a world-wide growth slowdown suggest international externalities?
Couldn’t it simply reflect declining investment rates world-wide, as suggested by the AK
model in the previous section? Table 2 also shows what average investment rates in
physical and human capital did before and after the mid-1970s. The investment rates in
physical capital come from Penn World Table 6.1. As a proxy for the fraction of time
devoted to accumulating more human capital, we used years of schooling attainment
relative to a 60-year working life. We used data on schooling attainment for the 25 and
older population from Barro and Lee (2000). This human capital investment rate, which
averages around 7% across countries, reflects the fraction of ages 5 to 65 devoted to
schooling as opposed to working. We prefer the attainment of the workforce as opposed to
2

The causes of the slowdown remain largely a mystery. For example, see Fischer (1988).
An exception is Easterly (2001b).
4
OECD countries are based on 1975 membership. There were 24 OECD members in 1975,
but the Penn World Tables contain data for unified Germany only back to 1970.
3

10

the enrollment rates of the school-age population. The latter should take a long time to
affect the workforce and therefore the growth rate.
According to Table 2, the average investment rate in physical capital across all
countries was virtually unchanged (15.8% before vs. 15.5% after the slowdown), and the
investment rate in human capital actually rose strongly (going from 7.1% to 9.7%). The
same pattern applies for the OECD and non-OECD separately, and for all four quartiles of
initial income. Thus the growth slowdown cannot be attributed to a world-wide decline in
investment rates.
The breadth of the growth slowdown suggests something linking country growth
rates, and ostensibly something other than investment rates.5 This is contrary to the
predictions of AK models, in which the growth rate of a country depends on domestic
investment rates. The world-wide nature of the slowdown suggests that endogenous growth
models, more generally, should not be applied to individual countries but rather to a
collection of interdependent countries. Knowledge diffusion through trade, migration, and
foreign direct investment are likely sources of interdependence.
Three other examples of interdependence are offered by Parente and Prescott
(2004). First, growth rates picked up in the 20th century relative to the 19th century for
many countries. Second, the time it takes a country to go from $2000 to $4000 in per capita
income has fallen over the 20th century, suggesting the potential to grow rapidly by
adopting technology in use elsewhere. Third and related, they stress that “growth miracles”
always occur in countries with incomes well beneath the richest countries, again consistent
with adoption of technology from abroad.
Knowledge diffusion, broadly construed, could include imitation of successful
institutions and policies in other countries. Kremer, Onatski and Stock (2001) argue that
such imitation might explain the empirical transition matrix of the world income
distribution. If improving institutions leads only to static gains in efficiency, however, then
the barriers to imitation have to be large to explain why the best institutions are not in place
everywhere. As we will illustrate in section 4 below, the required barriers to technology
adoption are modest precisely because the benefits accumulate with investments.

5

It also casts doubt on explanations for the growth slowdown that are confined to rich countries.

11

3B. Beta Convergence in the OECD
As documented by Baumol (1986) and many others, incomes have generally been
converging in the OECD. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) used the term sigma convergence
to describe such episodes of declining cross-sectional standard deviations in log incomes.
We focus on a related concept that Barro and Sala-i-Martin labeled beta convergence,
namely a negative correlation between a country’s initial income level and its subsequent
growth rate. We look at beta convergence year by year in Figure 1. The data on PPP
income per worker comes from Penn World Table 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002),
and covers 23 OECD countries over 1960-2000. The Figure shows the correlation between
current income and growth hovering between –0.50 and –0.75 from 1960 through the early
1980s. The correlation was still negative from the mid-1980s through the mid-1990s, but
less so, and turned positive in the latter 1990s.
De Long (1988) pointed out that a country’s OECD membership is endogenous to
its level of income, so that members at time t will tend to converge toward each other’s
incomes leading up to time t. Our focus, however, is not on convergence per se. Our point
is instead about how investment rates correlate with income during the period of
convergence. Figure 1 also shows the physical capital investment rate, and it is positively
correlated with a country’s income throughout the sample. Figure 2 shows that schooling
attainment is also positively correlated with income throughout the sample.
How do these investment correlations square with simple AK models with no
externalities? Expression (2.15) shows that a country’s growth rate should be increasing in
its investment rates. For beta convergence to occur in this model, a country’s investment
rates must be negatively correlated with a country’s level of income. But Figures 1 and 2
show the opposite is true: in every year, richer OECD countries had higher investment rates
in human and physical capital than poorer OECD countries did. According to this class of
models, OECD countries should have been diverging throughout the entire sample, rather
than converging through most of it. Now, this reasoning ignores likely differences in
efficiency parameters A and B across countries. But rescuing AK models would require that
richer countries have lower efficiency parameters. We would guess that rich countries tend
to have better rather than worse institutions (e.g., Hall and Jones, 1999).

12

3C. Low Persistence of Growth Rate Differences
Easterly et al. (1993) documented that country growth rate differences do not persist
much from decade to decade. They estimated correlations of around 0.1 to 0.3 across
decades. In contrast, they found that country characteristics such as education levels and
investment rates exhibit cross-decade correlations in the 0.6 to 0.9 range. Just as we do,
they suggest country characteristics may determine relative income levels and world-wide
technological changes long-run growth. Easterly and Levine (2001) similarly provide
evidence that “growth is not persistent, but factor accumulation is.”
In Table 3 we present similar findings. We compare average growth rates from
1980-2000 vs. 1960-1980, and from decade to decade within 1960-2000. We find growth
rates much less persistent than investment rates for the world as a whole, and for the OECD
and non-OECD separately. Again, these facts seem hard to reconcile with the AK model in
which a country’s domestic investment rates determine its growth rate.
Figure 3 illustrates a related pattern: deciles of countries (based on 1960 income per
worker) grew at similar average rates from 1960 to 2000. Each decile consists of the
unweighted average of income per worker in 9 or 10 countries. The average growth rate is
1.7% in the sample, and the bottom decile in 1960 grew at precisely this rate. This figure
suggests movements in relative incomes, but no permanent differences in long-run growth
rates, even comparing the richest and poorest countries. This sample contains 96 countries,
and therefore many of the poorest countries mired in zero or negative growth.
Pritchett (1997), on the other hand, offers compelling evidence that incomes
diverged massively from 1800 to 1960. Doesn’t this divergence favor models, such as AK
without international externalities, in which country growth rates are not intertwined? Not
necessarily. As argued by Parente and Prescott (2004), the opening up of large income
differences coincided with the onset of modern economic growth. The divergence could
reflect the interaction of country-specific barriers to technology adoption with the
emergence of modern technology-driven growth. More generally, any given divergence
episode could reflect widening barriers to importing technology rather than simply
differences in conventional investment rates.

13

3D. Investment Rates and Growth vs. Levels
The AK model we sketched in the previous section predicts that a country’s growth
rate will be strongly related to its investment rates in physical and human capital. In Table
4 we investigate this empirically in cross-sections of countries over 1960-2000. In four of
the six cases, the average investment rate is positively and significantly related to the
average growth rate. For the OECD, the physical capital investment rate is not significantly
related to country growth, and the human capital investment rate is actually negatively and
significantly related to country growth. But for the non-OECD and all-country samples, the
signs and significance are as predicted. This evidence constitutes the empirical bulwark for

AK models.
In the four cases where the signs are as predicted, are the magnitudes roughly as an

AK model would predict? First consider the literal AK model. According to (2.16) in the
previous section, the coefficient on sI should be A. What might be a reasonable value for

A? In order to match the average growth rate in GDP per worker (1.8%), given an average
investment rate in physical capital (17%) and a customary depreciation rate (8%), the value
of A would need to be

(3.1)

g avg + δ K .018 + .08
=
≅ 0.57.
A=
.17
sIavg

This level of A is more than four times larger than the two significant positive coefficients
on sI in the first column of Table 4, which are around 0.12. The estimated coefficients are
small in magnitude compared to what an AK model would predict. This discrepancy could
reflect classical measurement error in investment rates, but such measurement error would
need to account for more than 80% of the variance of investment rates across countries.
Plus one would expect positive endogeneity bias in estimating the average level of A, due to
variation in A across countries that is positively correlated with variation in sI .
We next consider the literal BH model. According to (2.17), the coefficient on sH
should be B. To produce the average growth rate in GDP per worker given the average

14

investment rate in human capital (8.8%) and a modest depreciation rate (2%), B would need
to be

B=

(3.2)

g avg + δ H .018 + .02
=
≅ 0.43.
.088
sHavg

The third column of estimates in Table 4 contain coefficients on sH . Of the two positive
coefficients, one is half the predicted level (0.21) whereas the other is not far from the
predicted level (0.37).
Finally, consider the hybrid model in (2.15). We assume γ = 0.9 so that human
capital accumulation is intensive in human capital, but does use some physical capital. For
producing current output we assume the standard physical capital share of α = 1/ 3 . We
set the depreciation rates as previously mentioned. We set sK , the share of physical capital
devoted to human capital accumulation, based on (2.13). As (2.15) illustrates, we cannot
independently identify A and B, only their product. We set A1−γ B1−α ≅ 0.60, so that the
average predicted growth rate from (2.15) and observed sH and sI investment rates
matches the average growth rate in GDP per worker of 1.8%. We then regress actual
growth rates on predicted growth rates for a cross-section of 73 countries with available
data. The coefficient estimated is 0.26 (standard error 0.08, R2 of 0.13), far below the
theoretical value of 1. Again, the empirical estimate might be low because of measurement
error in predicted growth, but it would need to be large.
To recap, only 1 of the 7 coefficients of growth on investment rates considered is in
the ballpark of an AK model’s prediction. In contrast, we obtain uniformly positive and
significant coefficients when we regress (log) levels of country income on country
investment rates. In 5 of the 6 cases, the R2 is notably higher with levels than with growth
rates. Investment rates appear far better at explaining relative income levels than relative
growth rates. The driver of growth rates would appear to be something other than simply
domestic investment rates.
The preceding discussion focused on the steady-state predictions of AK models. It
is possible that AK models fare better empirically when transition dynamics are taken into

15

account. But it is worth noting that Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (1997), Hall and Jones
(1999), Bils and Klenow (2000), Easterly (2001a), Easterly and Levine (2001), and
Hendricks (2002) all find that no more than half of the variation in growth rates or income
levels can be attributed directly to human and physical capital. Pritchett (2004), who
considers many different parameterizations of the human capital accumulation technology,
likewise finds that human capital does not account for much cross-country variation in
growth rates.

3E. R&D and TFP
We now turn away from AK models to a model with diminishing returns to physical
and human capital, but with R&D as another form of investment. Such a model might be
able to explain country growth rates with no reference to cross-country externalities. For
example, perhaps a variant of the Romer (1990) model could be applied country by country,
with no international knowledge flows. R&D investment would have to behave in a way
that leads to a worldwide growth slowdown, beta convergence in the OECD, and low
persistence of growth rate differences. And, more directly, R&D investment would have to
explain country growth rates. Research effort, like human capital, is difficult to measure.
But Lederman and Saenz (2003) have compiled data on R&D spending for many countries.
We now ask the same questions of their R&D investment rates that we asked of investment
rates in physical and human capital: how correlated are R&D investment rates with country
growth rates and country income levels?
The first column in Table 5 says that countries with high R&D spending relative to
GDP do not grow systematically faster.6 Countries with high R&D shares do, however,
tend to have high relative incomes. But the correlation with income is not significant
outside the OECD. One possibility is that these regressions do not adequately control for
the contributions of physical and capital. We therefore move to construct Total Factor
Productivity (TFP) growth rates and levels. We subtract estimates of human and physical
capital per worker from GDP per worker:

6

Because R&D data was not available for all country-years between 1960 and 2000, we took time effects out
of the variables (growth rates, income levels, investment rates in R&D), then averaged the residuals over time.

16

(3.3)

ln TFP = ln(Y / L) − α ln( K / L) − (1 − α )ln( H / L)

where Y is real GDP, L is employment, K is the real stock of physical capital, and H is
the real stock of human capital. We suppress time and country subscripts in (3.3) for
readability. We would prefer to let α vary across countries and across time based on factor
shares, but such data is not readily available for most countries in the sample. We instead
set α = 1/ 3 for all countries and time periods. Gollin (2002) finds that capital’s share
varies from 0.20 to 0.35 across a sample of countries, but does not correlate with country
income levels or growth rates. We use Penn World Table 6.1 data assembled by Heston,
Summers and Aten (2002) for PPP GDP, employment, and PPP investment in physical
capital. We assume an 8% geometric depreciation rate and the usual accumulation equation
to cumulate investment into physical capital stocks. We approximate initial capital stocks
using the procedure in Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (1997, p. 78). We let human capital
per worker be a simple Mincerian function of schooling:
(3.4)

H = hL = exp(φ s ) L .

Here h represents human capital per worker, and s denotes years of schooling attainment.
We use Barro and Lee (2000) data on the schooling attainment of the 25 and older
population. This data is available every five years from 1960 to 2000, with the last year an
extrapolation based on enrollment rates and the slow-moving stock of workers. A more
complete Mincerian formulation would include years of experience in addition to schooling
and would sum the human capital stocks of workers with different education and
experience levels. In Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (1997) we found that taking experience
and heterogeneity into account had little effect on aggregate levels and growth rates, so we
do not pursue it here. We use (3.4) with the Mincerian return φ = 0.085 , based on the
returns estimated for many countries and described by Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002).
The latter columns in Table 5 present regressions of TFP growth rates and levels on
R&D investment rates. The sample of countries is smaller given data limitations (67
countries rather than 82). Just like growth in GDP per worker, growth in TFP is not
significantly related to R&D investment rates. But TFP levels, like levels of GDP per
17

worker, are positively and significantly related to R&D investment rates. From this we
conclude that even R&D investment rates affect relative income levels, not long-run growth
rates. The persistence of R&D investment rate differences across countries, combined with
the lack of persistent growth rate differences, supports this interpretation. We are led to
consider models in which country growth rates are tethered together.
Before considering a model with international knowledge externalities, we pause to
consider a model with “externalities” operating through the terms of trade. We have in
mind Acemoglu and Ventura’s (2002) model of the world income distribution. In their
model, each country operates an AK technology, but uses it to produce distinct national
varieties. Countries with high AK levels due to high investment rates plentifully supply
their varieties, driving down their prices on the world market. This results in a pAK model
with a stationary distribution of income even in the face of permanent differences in
country investment rates (and A levels, for that matter). Prices tether incomes together in
the world distribution, not the flow of ideas. This is a clever and coherent model, but we
question its empirical relevance. Hummels and Klenow (2004) find that richer countries
tend to export a given product at higher rather than lower prices. They do estimate
modestly lower quality-adjusted prices for richer countries, but nowhere near the extent
needed to offset AK forces and generate “only” a factor of 30 difference in incomes.
To summarize this section, AK models tightly connect investment rates and growth
rates. Such a tight connection does not hold empirically. This is the case for the world
growth slowdown, for OECD convergence, for growth persistence, and for country
variation in growth vs. income levels. A version of the AK model with endogenous terms
of trade might be able to circumvent these empirical hazards but faces empirical troubles of
its own. We therefore turn to models with international knowledge externalities that drive
long-run growth.

4. Models with common growth driven by international knowledge spillovers
Based on evidence in the previous section, we now focus on models with two
features. The first is that, in steady state, all countries grow at the same rate thanks to
international knowledge spillovers. The second feature is that differences in policies or

18

other country parameters generate differences in TFP levels rather than growth rates.
Examples of this type of model are Howitt (2000), Parente and Prescott (1994), Eaton and
Kortum (1996), as well as the model of technology diffusion in chapter 8 of Barro and Salai-Martin (1995).
In these models there is a world technology frontier, and a country’s research efforts
determine how close the country gets to that frontier. There are three different issues that
must be addressed. First, what determines the growth rate of the world technology frontier?
Second, how is it that a country’s research efforts allow it to “tap into” the world
technology frontier? And third, what explains differences across countries in their research
efforts? Our goal in this section is to build on the ideas developed in the recent literature to
construct a model that offers a unified treatment of these three issues and that is amenable
to calibration. The calibration is intended to gauge the model’s implications about the
strength of the different externalities and the drivers of cross-country productivity
differences.7
To highlight the different issues relevant for the model, our strategy is to present it
in parts. The next subsection (4A) takes world growth and R&D investment as exogenous
and discusses how R&D investment determines steady state relative productivity.
Subsection 4B discusses different ways of modeling how world-wide R&D investment
determines the growth rate of the world technology frontier. Subsection 4C extends the
model so as to allow for endogenous determination of countries’ R&D investment rates.
Subsection 4D calibrates the model. Finally, subsection 4E presents the results of an
exercise where we calculate, for each country in our sample, the impact on productivity
from international spillovers.

4A. R&D investment and relative productivity
In this section we focus on a single country whose research efforts determine its
productivity relative to the world technology frontier. Both the R&D investment rate and
the rate of growth of the world technology frontier are exogenous. Output is produced with
7

Although we refer to research externalities throughout this section, the knowledge externalities could just as
well be with respect to human capital. Only when we use data on R&D is the analysis specific to research.

19

a Cobb-Douglas production function: Y = K α ( AhL)1−α , where Y is total output, K is the
physical capital stock, A is a technology index, h is human capital per person, and L is the
total labor force. We assume that h is constant and exogenous. Output can be used for
consumption (C), investment (I), or research (R), Y = C + pI + R , where p is the relative
price of investment and is assumed constant through time. Capital is accumulated
according to: K = I − δ K . Finally, A evolves according to:
A = ( λ R / L + ε A )(1 − A / A *)

(4.1)

where λ is a positive parameter and A* is the world technology frontier, both common
across countries.8
There are three salient differences between this model and the standard endogenous
growth model. Firstly, the productivity of research in generating A-growth is affected by
the country’s productivity relative to the frontier, as determined by the term (1 − A / A*) in
(4.1). This captures the idea that there are “benefits to backwardness”. One reason for this
may be that the effective cost of innovation and technology adoption falls when a country is
further away from the world technology frontier. This is what happens in Parente and
Prescott (1994) and in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995, chapter 8). Alternatively, being
further behind the frontier may confer an advantage because every successful technology
adoption entails a greater improvement in the national technology level. This is what
happens in Howitt (2000) and in Eaton and Kortum (1996).9
Secondly, we introduce ε ≥ 0 to capture the sources of technology diffusion from
abroad that do not depend on domestic research efforts. We have in mind imports of goods
that embody technology, and that do not require upfront adoption costs (e.g, equipment

8

In models like those of Parente and Prescott (1994) and Howitt (2000) research is meant to capture both
R&D and technology adoption efforts. In this paper we follow this practice and simply refer to the sum of
these two technology investments as R&D or just “research”.
9
In Howitt’s model, (1 − A / A*) arises from the product of two terms: (1 / A*)( A * − A) . The (1 / A*) term
arises because, as the world’s technology becomes more advanced, more research is required to tap into it; the
second term captures the fact that, when the country is more backward, every successful technology adoption
entails a greater improvement in the national technology level.

20

which is no harder to use but which operates more efficiently).10 As we will see below, this
is important for the model to match certain features of the data.
Thirdly, in contrast to most endogenous growth models, we divide research effort by

L in the A-growth expression above. This is done to get rid of scale effects and can be
motivated in two ways. First, if A represents the quality of inputs, then one can envisage a
process where an increase in the labor force leads to an expansion in the variety of inputs
(Young, 1998 and Howitt, 1999). With a larger variety of inputs, research effort per variety
is diluted. This eliminates the impact of L on A growth. Second, if research is undertaken
by firms to increase their own productivity, then population growth may lead to an
expansion in the number of firms and a decrease in the impact of aggregate research on
firms’ A-growth (Parente and Prescott, 1994). In this case, L represents the number of
firms.
The measured R&D investment rate is given by sR = R / Y . This implies that
R /( AL) = sRY /( AL) = sR k where k ≡ ( K / Y )α /(1−α ) h = Y /( AL) . To proceed, note that in

steady state a ≡ A / A * will be constant, since A will grow at the same rate as A*, which we
denote by g A . Thus, from (4.1)

(4.2)

g A = ( λ sR k + ε )(1 − a )

Solving for a we obtain:
(4.3)

a = 1−

gA
λ sR k + ε

The values of k and sR determine a country’s relative A from (4.3). Conceivably, the
parameter λ (TFP in research, if you will) could differ across countries and also contribute
to differences in A. But in this paper we assume λ does not vary across countries. We do,

10

This free flow of ideas is also likely to depend on the local presence of multinationals, which bring valuable
knowledge that diffuses to other local firms without the need for additional R&D.

21

however, allow researchers to be more productive in countries with more physical and
human capital per worker.
The previous results clearly show that policies that lower investment in physical or
human capital or R&D do not affect a country’s growth rate. Their effect is on a country’s
steady state relative A. Also, as discussed above, there are no scale effects in this model:
higher L does not lead to higher growth or to a higher relative A. This stands in contrast to
most growth models based on research (e.g., Romer 1990, Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1995 –
chapter 8).
It is also noteworthy in equation (4.3) that the value of k , which captures physical
and human capital intensity, affects a country’s TFP level conditional on its R&D
investment rate. Thus, large differences in TFP across countries do not necessarily imply
that differences in human and physical capital stocks are just a small part of cross country
income differences. Indeed, this model suggests that some of the TFP differences may be
due to differences in capital intensities across countries. Below we explore this issue
quantitatively.
It is instructive to calculate the social rate of return to research at the national level.
As shown in Jones and Williams (1998), this can be done even without knowing the details
of the model that affect the endogenous determination of the R&D investment rate. Letting
A = G ( A, R ) , Jones and Williams show that the (within-country) social rate of return r can

be expressed as:

(4.4)

r =

∂Y / ∂A
+ ∂G / ∂A + g PA .
PA

Here PA stands for the price of ideas and is given by PA = ( ∂G / ∂R ) . As explained by
−1

Jones and Williams, the first two terms in (4.4) represent the dividends of research while
the third term represents the associated capital gains. The first dividend term is the obvious
component, namely the productivity gain from an additional idea divided by the price of
ideas. The second dividend term captures how an additional idea affects the productivity of
future R&D.
22

In the model we presented above, it is straightforward to show that, along a steady
state path, we have:

(4.5)

ag ⎤
⎡
r = (1 − α )λ k (1 − a ) + ⎢ε (1 − a ) − A ⎥ + g L
1− a ⎦
⎣

The first term on the right-hand side corresponds to the first dividend term in Jones and
Williams’ formula. The second term, in square brackets, corresponds to the indirect effect
of increasing A on the cost of research ( ∂G / ∂A ). The third term, g L , corresponds to the
term capturing the capital gains in Jones and Williams formula. To understand this last
term, note that we have implicitly assumed that new varieties or firms start up with the
same productivity as existing varieties or firms. Thus, the value of ideas will rise faster
with a higher g L , and the social return to research will correspondingly increase with g L .
Also note that, since the RHS of (4.5) is decreasing in a and a is increasing in sR ,
the social rate of return to research will be decreasing in sR , as one would expect. If k
varies less than a in the data, one should also expect to find higher social rates of return to
research in poor countries than in rich countries, as found by Lederman and Maloney
(2003).
More importantly, if ε is close to zero, then from (4.2) and (4.5) we should have
~
r ≈ (1 − α )λk (1 − a ) ≈ (1 − α ) g A / s R . Using the growth rate of A in the OECD in the period

1960-2000 as an approximation of g A (1.5%), and using α = 1/3, then r ≈ 0.01/ sR . Noting
that the median of sR in the non-OECD countries we have in our sample is sR = 0.5% , then
r ≥ 200% . This seems implausibly high.11 There are two ways out of this problem. First,

one can argue that measured R&D investment does not capture all the research efforts
undertaken by countries. Clearly, higher R&D investment rates would lead to lower and
more plausible social rates of return to research. Second, one can argue that the implausible
implications of the model are due to the assumption that ε is close to zero. In the

11

The problem is not so pronounced for the U.S. Given its measured R&D investment rate of s R = 2.5% , we

have r ≈ 40% , which is in the range of estimates of the social rate of return to R&D in the U.S. See Griliches
(1992) and Hall (1996).

23

calibration exercise in section 4D, we will argue that both of these solutions are needed to
make the model consistent with the data.

4B. Modeling growth in the world technology frontier
In this section we extend the model so that g A is endogenously determined by the
research efforts in all countries. The models we mentioned above deal with this in different
ways, except Parente and Prescott who leave g A as exogenous. Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995, chapter 8) have a Romer-type model of innovation that determines g A in the
“North.” We do not pursue this possibility because of the scale effect that arises in their
model (larger L in the North leads to higher g A ) and because we want to allow research
efforts by all countries to contribute to the world growth rate. We first consider an
adaptation of Howitt’s (2000) formulation. A country’s total effective research effort, λ Ri ,
gets diluted by the country’s number of varieties or number of firms, both represented by
Li , and is then multiplied by a common spillover parameter, σ , to determine that country’s

contribution to the growth of the world’s technology frontier:

⎛ λR ⎞
A * = σ ∑ ⎜ i ⎟ .
i ⎝ Li ⎠
Given our results above, we obtain:
(H1)

g A = σ ∑ λ ki sRi ai .
i

This formulation has the nice feature that the world growth rate does not depend on the
world’s level of L (no scale effect on growth at the world level), although it does depend
positively on R&D investment rates. The main problem with this formulation, and the
reason we do not pursue it further, is that larger countries contribute no more to world
growth than smaller countries do. This has the implausible implication that subdividing
countries would raise the world growth rate.

24

In footnote 21 of his paper, Howitt discusses an alternative specification wherein
country spillovers are diluted by world variety rather than each country’s variety. This
implies that:

⎛ λR ⎞
A * = σ ∑ ⎜ i ⎟ .
i ⎝ L ⎠
where L = ∑ Li . Howitt does not pursue this approach because, in the presence of steadystate differences in the rate of growth of L across countries, g A would be completely
determined in the limit by the research effort of the country with the largest rate of growth
of L. We believe, however, that it is quite natural to analyze the case in which g L is the
same across countries.12 In this case, ωi ≡ Li / L is constant through time, and the
expression above can be manipulated to yield:
g A = σ ∑ λ ki sRi aiωi .

(H2)

i

If we think of L as the number of firms rather than the number of varieties of
capital goods, then (H2) amounts to stating that g A is determined by the countryworkforce-weighted average research intensity across firms world-wide. This seems much
more reasonable than (H1), where g A is determined by the unweighted average of research
intensity across countries.
Expression (H2) differs from (H1) only in the presence of the weights ωi that
represent shares of world L . This has two advantages: first, large countries contribute
more to world growth than small countries do, and second, subdividing countries would not
affect the world growth rate. But (H2) has a problematic implication, namely that those
countries with higher than average ki sRi ai would be better off disengaging from the rest of
12

If one country’s population did come to dominate world population, however, it might be sensible to say it
does almost all of the world’s research and, hence, it will virtually determine the world growth rate. We
assume equal labor force growth rates across countries not because we think it is accurate for describing what
is happening now, but because we think it is a convenient fiction for a steady state model to explore
international spillovers.

25

the world – their growth rate would be higher if they were isolated. That is, a research
intensive country would be better off ignoring the research done in other countries.
According to Howitt’s variety interpretation of this model, this is because an
isolated country’s growth rate would be given by σλ ki sRi ai . Its research intensity would no
longer be spread out over the number of world varieties, but instead over the smaller
number of the country’s own varieties. Thus, when a country disengages, it no longer
benefits from spillovers from research conducted by the rest of the world, but there is an
important compensating gain that comes from the fact that variety – and therefore dilution –
falls for the disengaging country. Since there is no love of variety in Howitt’s model, a
high research-intensity country would gain from disengagement. By this logic, engagement
could not be sustained among any set of asymmetric countries! The higher ki sRi ai countries
would always prefer to disengage, leaving all countries isolated in equilibrium.
We now turn to an alternative specification for world spillovers in which variety
does not play such a crucial role. The specification will exhibit several of the features we
have been looking for: first, no scale effect of world population on the world’s growth rate;
second, other things equal, larger countries contribute more to world prosperity than small
countries do; and third, tapping into rest-of-world research does not require spreading
research across more varieties. We believe this is accomplished by adopting the
formulation in Jones (1995): instead of dividing by L , the scale effect is avoided by
introducing the assumption that advancing the world technology frontier gets harder as the
frontier gets higher. This can be captured by the following specification of international
spillovers:

(4.6)

γ −1
A * = ( A *) σ ∑ λ Ri
i

where γ < 1 . In this setting, sustained growth in A* depends on a continuously rising
population. To see this, notice that we can restate (4.6) as follows:

26

(J)

Lσ ∑ λ ki sRi aiωi .

g A = ( A *)

γ −1

i

This expression makes clear that g A is decreasing in A * ; as mentioned above, this is what
is going to eliminate the scale effect. Since all of the terms in the summation on the righthand side of (J) are constant, then – differentiating with respect to time – we get that:

gA =

(4.7)

gL
.
1− γ

One criticism of this specification is that g A does not depend on sR , hence policyinduced increases in research intensity would not increase the world’s growth rate (Howitt,
1999). As Jones (2002) argues, however, research intensity has been increasing over the
last decades without a concomitant increase in the growth rate, so it is far from clear that we
want a model where g A depends on sR .13
An interesting and relevant feature of the model presented by Eaton and Kortum
(1996) is that it allows for spillovers to differ between pairs of countries. We can introduce
this feature in the model by doing two things: first, we allow each country to have a
different technology frontier, Ai* ; second, we add country-pair specific spillover
parameters, ηil , to (4.6) so that now:

( )

Ai* = Ai*

γ −1

σ ∑ λ Rlηil .
l

This formulation implies that there will no longer be a world technology frontier in the way
it existed in model (J). However, it proves useful for the analysis to introduce a new
concept, which we will denote by A and which could be understood as the “frictionless
technology frontier.” To define this concept, note that if spillovers were the same among
13

Even though research intensity does not affect the growth rate, it can have sizable effects on welfare,
particularly when – as evidence suggests – the social rate of return of research is significantly higher than the
private rate of return.

27

all country pairs ( ηil = 1 for all i and l) – a case we could interpret as frictionless – then
countries would have a common technology frontier: Ai* = Al* for all i and l. We define A
so that in this case ( ηil = 1 for all i and l) Ai* = A for all i. As we will see below, in steady
state A grows at the same rate as Ai* for all i. Letting zi ≡ Ai* / A , which captures the
strength of spillovers from the rest of the world to country i, we arrive at the following
steady state restriction:

( )

g A = Ai*

(JEK)

γ −1

L(σ / zi )∑ λ kl sRl alωl zlηil
l

where JEK stands for Jones, Eaton and Kortum and where al is now country l’s technology
level relative to its own technology frontier: al ≡ Al / Al* . It can be shown that this implies
the following restriction for A :

A = (vL)1/(1−γ )

(4.8)

where v ≡ (σ / g A )∑ λ kl sRl alωl . It is clear that each country’s technology frontier and A
l

will grow at the same rate as A * did in model (J), given by g L /(1 − γ ) .
It is interesting to pause here to discuss the model’s implications regarding the
effect of country size on productivity. Imagine, to simplify, that all countries are the same
except for size, and assume that η ij = 1 for i = j and η ij = η < 1 for i ≠ j . Then it is easy
to show that z i > z j if ω i > ω j ; larger countries are more productive. Intuitively, larger
countries benefit more from spillovers because more of the world’s research takes place
within their borders. As long as borders discretely reduce spillovers, larger countries will
capture more spillovers and enjoy higher productivity.
The next step is to impose some restrictions on the international spillover
parameters ηil ’s. The literature has allowed international spillovers to depend on trade (Coe
and Helpman, 1995), distance (Eaton and Kortum, 1996), and other variables such as FDI

28

flows (Caves, 1996). Here we focus on the simplest approach, which is to assume that the
parameters ηil are completely determined by distance. (This would capture trade and FDI
related spillovers that are related to distance.) We do this by assuming that ηil = e −θ d ( i ,l ) ,
where d(i,l) is bilateral distance between countries i and l, and θ is some positive
parameter. This model collapses to (J) if θ = 0 .
This completes our discussion of different ways to model international spillovers.
Table 6 summarizes the discussion in this subsection.

4C. Determinants of R&D investment
We mentioned above that there are two ways to motivate the model we presented in
subsection 4A. First, we can think of a model like the one presented in Howitt (2000),
where research leads to improvements in the quality of capital goods, and population
growth leads to an expansion in the total number of varieties available. Second, research
may be carried out by firms to increase their own productivity, as in Parente and Prescott
(1994). We pursue this second approach because it is simpler and much more convenient
for our calibration purposes later on.
As in Parente and Prescott (1994), we assume a constraint on the amount of labor
firms can hire. In particular, we assume that firms can hire no more than F workers. To
simplify notation, we set F = 1. This constraint can be motivated as a limitation on the span
of control by managers, as in Lucas (1978).14 Output produced by firm j in country i at
time t, which we denote by Y jit , is given by Y jit = K αjit ( A jit hi )1−α . (We now use time
subscripts because they clarify the maximization problem below.) The firm can convert
output into consumption, investment goods or R&D according to Y jit = C jit + pi I jit + R jit ,
and the firm’s capital stock evolves according to K jit = I jit − δ K jit . Finally, the firm’s
technology index Ajit evolves according to:

(4.9)

14

A jit = ( (1 − µ )λ R jit + µλ Rit + ε Ajit ) (1 − Ajit / Ait* )

If one takes F = 1 literally, then the externalities are in the human capital investment of individual workers.

29

where µ is a parameter between zero and one, Rit is the average of R jit across firms in
country i (we use the bar over the variable to emphasize that this is the average across
firms, and not the aggregate economy-wide variable), and Ait* is the technology frontier for
country i with Ait* / Ait* = g A for all i in steady state.
There are two features in this specification that merit some explanation. First, the
“benefits of backwardness” are determined by the term 1 − A jit / Ait* , which can differ across
firms in country i: a more backward firm in country i would have a higher catch-up term.
If instead we specified the catch-up term as 1 − Ait / Ait* (where Ait is the average technology
index across firms in country i), then there would be a negative externality because, as a
firm does more research, it increases the country’s average technology index and decreases
the catch-up term for the other firms. Given that there is no particular reason to think that
this negative externality is a relevant feature to include in the model, we have chosen to
specify the catch-up term as 1 − Ajit / Ait* . Second, there is a positive research externality
across firms within each country, represented by the term µλ Rit . This externality captures
the idea that a firm benefits directly from research undertaken by other firms within the
same economy.
To relate this to what we had in subsection 4A, note that if firms within a country
are identical, then R jit = Rit and Ajit = Ait . Using this in (4.9), we obtain:
Ait = ( λ Rit + ε Ait ) (1 − Ait / Ait* )
But note that Ait = Ait and Rit = Rit / Lit , where Lit is the total labor force in country i and
also the number of firms there, given our assumptions above. Using these results and
noting that sRi = Rit / Yit we obtain equation (4.2).

30

Firms in country i pay taxes at rate τ Ki on capital income (output less the wage bill)
,and there is an R&D tax (or subsidy, if it is negative) of τ Ri .15 We stress that this R&D tax
parameter does not have to be interpreted strictly as a formal tax or subsidy; when positive,
the R&D tax parameter τ Ri could also be interpreted as capturing “barriers to technology
adoption”, as in Parente and Prescott (1994).16
The firm’s dynamic optimization problem is to choose a path for Rjis and I jis to
maximize

∫ ( (1 − τ
∞

t

Ki

)

) ⎡⎣Y jis − wis ⎤⎦ − pi I jis − (1 + τ Ri ) R jis e − r ( s −t ) ds

subject to K jis = I jis − δ K jis , Ais / Ais = Ais* / Ais* = g A , and

A jis = ( (1 − µ )λ R jis + µλ Ris + ε Ajis ) (1 − Ajis / Ais* )
As shown in the Appendix, by imposing the symmetry condition on the two Euler equations
for this optimization problem, we obtain the following two conditions for the symmetric
equilibrium:
(4.10)

pi K it
1 − τ Ki
=α
Yit
r +δ

(4.11)

Ωi (1 − α )λ ki (1 − ai ) − g A ai /(1 − ai ) + ε (1 − ai ) = r

where

Ωi ≡

(1 − τ Ki )(1 − µ )
.
(1 + τ Ri )

15

We should note here that the tax rate on capital income also affects the incentive to do research. The
notation used for the two tax rates is meant to emphasize that τ Ki affects all forms of accumulation by the

firm, whereas τ Ri only affects research expenditures.
16

We assume that any tax revenue collected is distributed back to consumers in lump-sum fashion.

31

Equation (4.10) defines the equilibrium capital-output ratio in country i and
equation (4.11) implicitly defines the equilibrium relative A in country i. Given ai and
knowing ki from the data, we can plug their values into equation (4.3) to obtain the
equilibrium steady state R&D investment rate, sRi . It is easy to see that an increase in the
capital income tax or the R&D tax or an increase in the externality parameter, µ , would
decrease Ωi and hence lead to a decline in equilibrium ai (this is because the left-hand side
of (4.11) is decreasing in ai ). This, of course, would imply a decline in the R&D
investment rate. The same reasoning shows that ai is increasing in ki but it is not
necessarily the case that sRi increases with ki (see the Appendix).
Combining the result for the social rate of return in equation (4.5) with (4.11), we
obtain the following expression for the wedge between the social and private rate of return
to R&D:

ri − r = (1 − Ωi )(1 − α )λ ki (1 − ai ) + g L

(4.12)

The first term on the right-hand side is the distortion created by Ω , which captures the
effect of the income tax, τ K , the R&D tax, τ R , and the externality parameter, µ . If there
are no taxes and µ = 0 (no domestic R&D externalities), then Ωi = 1 and the wedge
between the social and private rate of return to R&D collapses to g L .17

4D. Calibration
The model described in the previous section, together with the (JEK) formulation
for international spillovers with ηil = e −θ d ( i ,l ) , constitutes the model we calibrate in this
subsection. Since we will only be working with the symmetric steady state equilibrium, in
this subsection we suppress time and firm subscripts to simplify notation. Given N
17

As explained above, g L is associated with a positive externality because new firms start up with the same

productivity as existing firms. Since the number of firms is equal to the workforce, the value of ideas and the
social rate of return are increasing in g L .

32

countries, the steady state equilibrium is given by { K i , Yi , k i , ai , s R i , Ai , Ai* , z i ; i = 1… N}
such that:
(4.13)

gL
1− γ

gA =

(4.14)

pi Ki
1 − τ Ki
=α
Yi
r +δ

(4.15)

ki = hi ( Ki / Yi )α /(1−α )

(4.16)

Ωi (1 − α )λ ki (1 − ai ) − g A ai /(1 − ai ) + ε (1 − ai ) = r

(4.17)

ai = 1 −

gA
λ sRi ki + ε

(4.18)

Ai = ai Ai*

(4.19)

Ai* = zi A

(4.20)

~
A = (vL)1 /(1−γ )

(4.21)

v = (1/ g A )∑ λ kl sRl alωl
l

(4.22)

zi(1−γ ) +1 = (σ / vg A )∑ λ kl sRl alωl zl e −θ d ( i ,l )
l

where the last equation comes from (JEK) together with (4.8).
If we knew the relevant parameters and tax rates and wanted to solve for an
equilibrium, we would first start by solving for g A from equation (4.13). Given data for
exogenous variables hi , pi and τ Ki we could then calculate equilibrium ki using (4.14)
and (4.15). Together with g A and parameter ε , equation (4.16) would yield ai . From
(4.17) we would then obtain sRi . Up to this point, there is no interaction across countries,
so these results do not depend on geography or θ ; this dimension becomes relevant in
obtaining actual productivity levels, because they depend on the variables zi , which capture
spillovers from the rest of the world to country i. To see how this operates, note that given

33

the value of θ , equation (4.22) configures a system of N equations (where N is the number
of countries) in N unknowns ( z1 , z2 , ... z N ). The solution to this system determines zi .
Given parameter σ , equation (4.20) determines A , which together with zi determines each
country’s technology frontier Ai* (equation (4.19)). Finally, from equation (4.18), a
country’s technology frontier together with its relative A level ai determines Ai .
For the calibration exercise, the first step is to specify the variables we observe and
how they relate to the model. We take human capital to be hi = eϕ *MYSi , where MYSi is
mean years of schooling of the adult population in country i, obtained from Barro and Lee
(2000). We use R&D data from Lederman and Sáenz (2003). The 48 countries in our
sample are the ones for which there is R&D data for 1995, as well as the necessary TFP and
capital intensity variables described in section 3. The first two columns of Table A1
reproduce the values of the R&D investment rate and the value of A for the 48 countries in
our sample.
For the basic parameters we use the following values: ϕ = 0.085 , α = 1/ 3 ,

δ = 0.08 , g L = 0.011 and g A = 0.015 . For the first three, see our discussion in section 3.
The last two (the growth rates) were obtained from OECD average growth rates of L and A
for the period 1960-2000.18 Using (4.13), the values for the two growth rates imply

γ = 0.31 . To calculate the net private rate of return, r, which we assume to be common
across countries, we take the capital income tax in the U.S. to be 25% ( τ K ,US = 0.25 ).19
Given the 1995 U.S. nominal capital-output ratio of 1.5 (see section 3 for how we
constructed capital-output ratios), this implies from (4.14) that r = 8.6% . Given this level
for r, we then use equation (4.14) together with country nominal capital-output ratios to
obtain each country’s implicit income tax τ Ki .
Remaining parameters we must calibrate are ε , λ , µ and θ . Unfortunately, there
is no empirical work that we can rely on to pin down ε . Thus, we choose a value for

18

Specifically, the growth rate of A is the annual growth rate of the weighted average of A in the OECD with
weights given by employment levels in 1960. OECD membership is defined by 1975 status.
19
Auerbach (1996) estimates an effective tax rate in the U.S. of about 16%, but King and Fullerton (1984)
estimate a much higher level of around 35%. We use 25% as an intermediate value.

34

ε based on the following reasoning. First, ε cannot be much higher than g A . This is
because for ksR ≥ 0 equation (4.17) implies that a ≥ 1 − g A / ε . Thus, a high value of ε
would imply that some countries’ relative empirical A becomes lower than the theoretical
minimum 1 − g A / ε . In other words, if free technology diffusion is too important, then it
would be hard to account for countries with very low A levels. Second, if ε < g A , then
countries with a low value of ksR ( λ sR k < g A − ε ) would not be able to keep up with the
world’s rate of growth in technology, so they would not have a steady state relative A level.
(Consistent with stable long run relative income levels, Figure 3 showed roughly parallel
slopes for average income across deciles over 1960-2000, with each decile based on 1960
income.) Thus, it seems reasonable to impose the intermediate condition that ε = g A . We
believe, however, that future empirical work should attempt to understand the importance
of free technology diffusion captured by parameter ε .
Given this choice for ε , we use two empirical findings to pin down parameters λ
and µ , namely that the social rate of return to R&D in the U.S. is three times the net private
rate of return (Griliches, 1992) and that the U.S. imposes a subsidy of 20% on R&D (Hall
and Van Reenen, 2000), implying that τ R ,US = −0.2 . Given data for sR and k for the U.S. in
1995 ( sRUS = 2.5% and kUS = 3.6 ), then this restriction together with equation (4.17)
implies aUS = 0.7 and λ = 0.38 .20 From (4.16) we then obtain µ = 0.55 .
A parameter remaining to calibrate is θ .21 Before discussing possible values for
this parameter, it is useful to consider the case where θ = 0 – so that there is no effect of
distance on international spillovers – and to compare the implications of the model to the
data. Using the R&D investment rate data of Lederman and Saenz (2003) and our

20

Due to the non-linearity of the expression for the social rate of return to R&D, there are actually two values
of λ which are compatible with a social rate of return equal to 26% (three times the private rate of return).
The higher value of λ , however, would imply a high relative A level for the U.S. and consequently – given
measured A for the U.S. – a value for A* that would be lower than the measured A levels of the high A
countries, such as Hong Kong and Italy. To avoid this, we choose the lower value of λ .
21
We must also set a value for σ , which is crucial for determining the level of A . We use the value of A
US

obtained from the data, (4.18)-(4.20), aUS = 0.7 , and a value for zUS (equal to one when θ = 0 and a known
value from the solution to the above system of equations for the case θ > 0 ) to arrive at a value for σ .

35

estimated k levels, equation (4.17) yields the model’s implied relative A level for each
country (ai). We want to compare this against the data. To do so, we use the value of A we
calculated for the U.S. in the previous section and aUS = 0.7 to obtain an implied value for
the world technology frontier, A* (recall that with θ = 0 there is a well defined technology
frontier that is common to all countries). We can then obtain the model’s implied A values
for all countries using Ai = ai A * . The result of this exercise is shown in Table 7, where we
divide countries into four groups according to their levels of A and show the median of the
different variables for each group. It is clear that the model does badly for the poorest
countries, predicting much lower A levels for them than occur in the data. This discrepancy
does not occur for the richest countries, so the model is predicting significantly larger A
differences than in the data. For example, whereas (according to the data) the top group’s
median A is 3.4 times the median A of the bottom group, the model implies a ratio of 5.6.
The model implies large differences in productivity in response to small differences
in R&D investment rates. As is well known, the neoclassical model – with only around 1/3
share for physical capital – cannot generate large differences in steady state labor
productivity in response to modest differences in investment rates (see the discussion in
Lucas, 1990). It is worth pausing here to explore some of the reasons behind these
divergent properties. Manipulating the neoclassical model, one can show that the semielasticity of steady state labor productivity with respect to the investment rate is given by:

(4.23)

⎞
∂ ln y ⎛ r ⎞ ⎛
1
=⎜
⎟
⎟⎜
∂s
⎝ 1 −α ⎠ ⎝ δ + g A + gL ⎠

With the values we used above ( α = 1/ 3 , δ = 0.08 , g L = 0.011 and g A = 0.015 ), (4.23)
yields a semi-elasticity of only 1.22% when evaluated at r = 8.6% . Thus large differences
in investment rates would be required to generate sizable differences in labor productivity
across countries. Two differences between the way the R&D investment rate operates in
our model and the way the physical capital investment rate operates in the neoclassical
model stand out: first, the depreciation rate of ideas in our model is zero versus δ = 0.08
for capital in the neoclassical model; second, the elasticity of output with respect to the
stock of ideas can exceed 1/3 (we have it at 2/3). To see the importance of these values,

36

note that with α = 2 / 3 the semi-elasticity doubles to 2.46% (still with r = 8.6% ). If we use

δ = 0 as well, then the semi-elasticity increases to 9.6%. In our model, the combined share
of physical capital and ideas is actually 1. Without the constraint of the world technology
frontier, therefore, the long run response of output would be infinite.
It is important to recall that the results shown in Table 7 and discussed above were
derived for the case of θ = 0 . Is it possible that a positive value of θ could improve the
model’s fit with the data? As will become clear below, countries with high levels of k and
high R&D investment rates tend to cluster together. Thus, assuming a positive value for θ
would actually make the model less consistent with the data, since it would imply an even
larger difference between A levels across rich and poor countries.
One possible reason why the model is not doing well in matching the data is that
measured R&D is not the appropriate empirical counterpart of “research” in the type of
models we have been examining. In particular, measured R&D only includes formal
research; this is research performed in an R&D department of a corporation or other
institution. This fails to capture informal research, which may be particularly important in
non-OECD countries. To explore this idea, in the rest of this section we assume that both
R&D intensity and the productivity index A are measured with error. We estimate “true”
R&D intensities by minimizing a loss function equal to the sum of two terms that capture,
respectively, the deviation of the “true” R&D intensities from the data and the deviation of
the model’s implied (log of) A values from the data, with weights given by the standard
deviation of the corresponding differences.22 In principle, we could follow this procedure
for each value of θ . However, at θ = 0 , the partial derivative of our loss function with
respect to θ is positive and large, implying that – just as argued above – the model’s fit
with the data worsens as θ increases from zero. Thus, we restrict ourselves to estimating
R&D intensities for θ = 0 and later show what happens if, keeping the same R&D
intensities estimated for θ = 0 , we have positive values of θ .

22

We do this in two stages. In the first stage we minimize a loss function without weights. We use the results
to calculate the standard deviation of the error terms, or differences between data and “true” values for both
R&D intensity and productivity. In the second stage we minimize the loss function with weights given by
these calculated standard deviations.

37

It should be acknowledged that this procedure obviously implies that we can no
longer evaluate the model’s consistency with the data; our interest is now to explore the
implications of the model for the differences in R&D investment rates that would be
necessary to explain cross-country differences in A, as well as the implied differences in
R&D tax rates that would be necessary to bring about those R&D investment rates.
The results of the exercise described above are shown in Figure 4 and Table A1
(columns 3 and 4). There are three points to note from these results. First, it is clear that
the procedure leads to only small deviations of A from the data, whereas the deviations are
more significant for R&D intensities. It would appear that R&D intensities have more
significant measurement problems (or are conceptually more different than research
intensity in our model) than productivity levels. Indeed, the standard deviation of residuals
of sR with respect to the data is 0.12, whereas the corresponding value for the (log of) A is
0.01.23 Second, there are some countries for which the estimated R&D intensity is much
higher than the data. Italy, for example, has a measured R&D intensity of 1.1%, whereas
its “true” value is 8.3%. This arises because of Italy’s high measured productivity (Italy’s
A is 24% higher than the U.S. level) and low value of k (2.6 versus 3.6 in the U.S.).
Something similar happens for other high-A countries, such as Hong Kong and Ireland.
Finally, just as one would expect given the results above, estimated R&D intensities vary
much less than the corresponding values in the data. This is the main mechanism by which
the procedure allows the model to fit perfectly. It also suggests that measurement error may
be behind the low R&D intensities of several poor countries and of some high A countries
such as Italy, Ireland and Hong Kong.
We can now explore what happens when θ is positive, so that spillovers decline
with distance. Given the estimated R&D intensities, productivity levels change with θ
only because of the associated changes in the variables z , which capture the effect of
distance on spillovers for each country. In principle, we can obtain the values of
( z1 , z2 , ... z48 ) for any θ ≥ 0 from the solution of a system of 48 non-linear equations
represented by (4.22). Equation i of this system can be expressed as:
23

These standard deviations are the ones that arise after the two stage procedure described in the previous
footnote. After the first stage, the standard deviations for the R&D rate and the (log of) A are 0.11 and 0.03,
respectively.

38

48

(4.24)

zi(1−γ ) +1 =

∑ λk s

a z ωl e −θ d ( i ,l )

l Rl l l

j =1

48

∑ λk s
l =1

a ωl

l Rl l

Solving this system numerically for the parameter values we have discussed and the R&D
intensities derived before, we arrive at a value of zi for each country, from which we can
then obtain the country’s level of A by using Ai = ai zi A from (4.18) and (4.19).
What are reasonable values to use for the parameter θ ? Using industry level data
on productivity and research spending across the G-5 countries, Keller (2002) estimated a
reduced form model where cumulative industry research affects own productivity and also
affects productivity in the same industry in other countries through international spillovers
that decline with distance.24 Given the similarity between Keller’s system and a reduced
form of our model, it seems reasonable to use Keller’s estimate of θ , namely θ K ≡ 0.0009
in the calibration of our model. It turns out, however, that with θ = θ K our model cannot
match the data – in particular, there is no solution to the system of equations (4.24), at least
for the parameters used for the exercises above. This is because θ K is unreasonably high.
One way to see this is by noting that it implies a half distance of 746 miles: this implies that
spillovers from the U.S. to Japan would be only one tenth of those to Mexico, and
spillovers from the U.S. to New Zealand would be only one fifth of those to Japan.
We were able to find solutions for the system with θ = θ K / 5 . For comparison, we
also obtained solutions for two other values of θ , namely θ = θ K /10 and θ = θ K /100 . A
group of European countries (Belgium, France, United Kingdom, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
and Netherlands) always come out with the highest values of z , whereas New Zealand
always comes out with the lowest value. For θ = θ K /100 , θ = θ K /10 and θ = θ K / 5 , the
minimum and maximum values of z are (93%, 96%), (48%, 68%) and (24%, 50%),
respectively. Clearly, for high values of θ , geography by itself can lead to large
differences in productivity across countries.
24

For other estimates of international spillovers from R&D, see Coe and Helpman (1995) and Coe, Helpman
and Hoffmaister (1997). For a study of agricultural R&D spillovers, see Evenson and Gollin (2003). Becker,
Philipson and Soares (2003) present evidence consistent with international spillovers of health technology.

39

In the rest of this section, we focus on the case θ = 0 , since – as explained above –
the model’s fit with the data is best at this point. (Recall that the model fits perfectly
because we are using the estimated research intensities and the implied A values). Table 8
presents summary statistics for the solution for the case of θ = 0 . Our discussion of these
results will focus on the comparison of the poorest and richest quartiles (ordered, as above,
in terms of A levels) in this table.
There are several points that we want to highlight in relation to these results. First,
the median income tax is 13% and 6% for the poorest and richest countries, respectively.
Everything else equal, this would lead to a lower R&D investment rate in the poorest
countries. Second, as expected, rich countries have a higher k than poor countries: the level
of k in these two groups is 2 and 2.9, respectively. As commented in Section 4B, higher k
has a direct effect on relative A (see equation (4.17)) and an indirect effect (it could be
positive or negative) through its impact on R&D investment rates (see equation (4.16)). A
natural question arises: is it the case that once we take into account the effect of k on TFP
we can resuscitate the “neoclassical revolution” mantra that differences in physical and
human capital accumulation rates account for most of cross-country income differences?
More concretely, how much of the variation in A levels across countries is due to the
variation in levels of k? A simple way to answer this question is to note from equation
(4.17) that differences in relative A levels are driven by differences in the product sR k
across countries. Running a regression of sR on the log of this product yields a coefficient
of 0.8, which implies that when sR k increases by one percent, we should expect sR to
increase by 0.8%. Clearly, most of the variance of the product sR k is accounted for by the
variance of sR .
Third, the social return to R&D is higher for poor countries. This is consistent with
the findings in Lederman and Maloney (2003) and also with the idea that poor countries
have policies and institutions that negatively affect the quantity of research.
Fourth, the column with heading τ R indicates the R&D tax rate required to produce
the “true” R&D investment rates given each country’s levels of τ K . The main question we
address here is whether differences in income tax rates, which affect both the rate of
40

investment in physical capital and R&D, are sufficient to explain differences in estimated
research intensities. The answer is clearly negative: the required R&D tax rate in the
poorest countries is 102% compared to -16% in the richest countries. To address the same
question from a different angle, the last column calculates each country’s implied relative A
level if all countries had the same R&D tax as the U.S. but kept their own levels of τ K . It
is clear that differences in τ K alone are too small to account for the wide dispersion in
productivity levels across countries.
Finally, as emphasized above, the results in Table 8 suggest that small differences in
steady-state R&D investment rates have large effects on steady state relative A levels. For
example, in the calibrated model, by increasing its R&D investment rate by 1% from 0.6%
India could double its steady state relative A level from 17% to 34%, clearly a very large
effect. India’s social rate of return to research, however, is a moderate 30%. The apparent
contradiction arises because the large effect of the increase in the R&D intensity on the
relative A level is a steady-state comparative-statics result, and hence does not take into
account the transition, which is a crucial component in the calculation of the social rate of
return to R&D. As a result, in spite of the large effect of differences in R&D investment
rates on relative A levels in steady state, the required implicit taxes on R&D are not huge.

4E. The benefits of engagement
One of the benefits of the model we have constructed is that it allows us to perform
an interesting exercise. We can ask: how much do countries benefit from spillovers from
the rest of the world?
First, note that a country’s equilibrium ai is not affected by being isolated or
engaged. Thus, the whole benefit of engagement is going to captured by the way
engagement affects the term zi . Now, if a country is isolated, or disengaged, its
equilibrium z would be characterized by the solution to the system (4.24) when θ → ∞ . It
is easy to check that this yields

41

(4.25)

⎛
 ⎜ λ ki sRi aiωi
zi =
⎜ ∑ λk s a ω
l Rl l l
⎜
⎝ l

1/(1−γ )

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠


Thus, the benefits of engagement are captured by zi / zi . From (4.17) we get

⎛ ∑ ωlυl

zi / zi = zi ⎜ l
⎜ ωυ
⎜ i i
⎝

1/(1−γ )

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

where υi ≡ ai λ ki sRi = λ Ri / Ai* Li is a measure of research intensity. Letting υ ≡ ∑ ω jυ j be
j

the world’s weighted average of υi , we obtain
1/(1−γ )

(4.26)

⎛ 1 ⎞
zi
 = zi ⎜ ⎟
zi
⎝ ωi ⎠

1/(1−γ )

⎛υ ⎞
⎜ ⎟
⎝ υi ⎠

The first term on the RHS of this equation, zi , captures the fact that even when fully
engaged, a country’s technology frontier is inferior to the world’s frictionless frontier if

θ > 0 , in which case zi < 1 for all i. The second term is the pure scale effect that arises in
this model. The third term, which we call the “Silicon Valley” effect, captures the fact that
richer countries benefit less from being part of the world than poor countries do because of
their higher effective research intensity.
Table 9 presents results based on these values and assuming θ = 0 , which implies
zi = 1 for all i. The results suggest huge benefits of engagement. At the extreme, Senegal’s
productivity is 187 thousand times higher than it would be if it was isolated! Of course, if

θ > 0 then zi < 1 and the overall effect would be small. Still, it is our conjecture that any
reasonable value of θ would still imply enormous benefits of engagement. Of course, in a
more general model, it is reasonable to think that productivity could not fall below a certain
level because of Malthusian forces. Specifically, suppose there is a fixed factor such as
land. Then, for sufficiently low A, population would decline until income per capita was
equal to the subsistence level. Instead of very low levels of A, disengagement would mean
42

very low population sizes. Put differently, an important part of the benefits of engagement
may be realized through larger population rather than higher productivity. The implications
are clear: if it were not for the benefits of sharing knowledge internationally, countries
would have much lower productivity levels and populations than they now do.

4F. Discussion of main results
We finish this section with a discussion of the main results we want to emphasize.
First, the usual separation between capital and productivity – or between investment
and technological change – is not always valid. For a given R&D investment rate, higher
investment rates in physical and human capital lead naturally to higher TFP productivity
levels. Thus, one should not jump from cross-country dispersion in TFP to the conclusion
that differences in physical and human capital play a minority role in accounting for
international income differences. When we calibrate our model, however, we find that
differences in R&D investment rates account for most of the cross country variation in
productivity.
Second, international variation in R&D investment appears more than large enough
to generate the international variation in productivity. But it seems likely that measured
R&D does not capture all of the investment associated with adoption of foreign technology.
Indeed, we find that countries such as Indonesia, Peru and Senegal have R&D investment
rates that are much too low to be consistent with their productivity levels. It is likely that
their true research intensities are much higher than the measured ones. We hope to see
more research in understanding how to capture and measure “research”.
Third, differences in (implicit) capital income tax rates are not large enough to
account for the observed differences in R&D investment rates and productivity levels. The
calibrated model suggests that sizable differences in R&D taxes are needed. These R&D
taxes are clearly not formal or explicit taxes, but the result of policies and institutions that
make research more costly or reduce its associated returns. Exploring the nature and source
of these differences in implicit R&D taxes across countries is an important topic for future
research.

43

Finally and most importantly, the calibrated model indicates that countries benefit
enormously from international knowledge spillovers. We think any reasonable value of θ
(which governs the rate at which spillovers decline with distance) would yield results
similar to those we presented above.

5. Conclusion
Externalities are not theoretically necessary to sustain growth. But they appear
essential for understanding why many countries grow at similar rates despite differing
investment rates. A dramatic way to summarize the importance of international knowledge
externalities is to calculate world GDP in the absence of such externalities. According to
our calibrated model, world GDP would be only 6% of its current level, or on the order of
$3 trillion rather than $50 trillion, if countries did not share ideas. Such scale effects from
the nonrivalry of knowledge are a central theme in the works of Romer (1990), Kremer
(1993), Diamond (1997), Jones (2001, 2004) and many others.
Because diffusion is not costless, however, differences in knowledge investments
may explain a significant portion of income differences across countries. We show that
modest barriers to technology adoption could account for differences in TFP of a factor of
four or more, as observed in the data. But we have not documented such barriers to
knowledge diffusion in practice. We consider this a priority for future research.
We have also left for future research the identification of the primary channels of
international knowledge spillovers. Trade, joint ventures, FDI, migration of key personnel,
and imitation may all play important roles. See Keller (2004) for a survey of recent
empirical work on this topic. A model with trade would lead naturally to some countries
having a comparative advantage in doing innovative R&D and other countries focusing on
adoption and imitation R&D. The evidence on international patenting supports the notion
that innovative R&D is concentrated in rich countries. Of course, countries can imitate
other imitators as well as the original innovators. We hope to see future research
documenting not only the vehicles for knowledge diffusion, but their specific routes.

44

Appendix
The firm’s maximization problem can be restated as choosing A jis and K jis to
maximize:
⎞ ⎞ − r ( s −t )
A jis
∞⎛
(1 + τ Ri ) ⎛
α
1−α

(1
τ
)
(
)
δ
ε
µλ
−
−
−
−
−
−
K
A
h
p
K
p
K
A
R
ds
⎜
⎜
⎟⎟ ⎟e
Ki
jis
jis
i
i
jis
i
jis
jis
is
∫t ⎜
⎟
(1 − µ )λ ⎜⎝ 1 − A jis / Ais*
⎠⎠
⎝
Letting Q represent the expression in the integral, then we know that a solution to this
problem must satisfy the following Euler Equations: ∂Q / ∂K jis = dsd (∂Q / ∂K jis ) and
∂Q / ∂A = d (∂Q / ∂A ) . The first Euler equation is:
jis

ds

jis

α Y jis
pi K jis

=

r +δ
1 − τ Ki

Since in a symmetric equilibrium the capital-output ratio of firm j is the same as the
aggregate capital output ratio, then this implies that:
pi K it
1 − τ Ki
=α
Yit
r +δ
As to the second Euler equation, differentiation yields (we are using the symmetry
condition for the equilibrium):

⎞⎞
(1 + τ Ki ) ⎛ g A ai
∂Q ⎛
= ⎜ (1 − τ Ki )(1 − α )Y jis / Ajis −
− ε ⎟ ⎟ e − r ( s −t )
⎜
2
⎟
(1 − µ )λ ⎝ (1 − ai )
∂Ajis ⎜⎝
⎠⎠
and

∂Q / ∂A jis = −

(1 + τ Ri )
e − r ( s −t )
(1 − µ )λ (1 − ai )

Hence,
d
ds

(∂Q / ∂A jis ) =

r (1 + τ Ri )
e − r ( s −t )
(1 − µ )λ (1 − ai )

Thus, the Euler equation is:
(1 − τ Ki )(1 − α )Y jis / A jis −

⎞
(1 + τ Ri ) ⎛ g A ai
r (1 + τ Ri )
−ε ⎟ =
⎜
2
(1 − µ )λ ⎝ (1 − ai )
⎠ (1 − µ )λ (1 − ai )

Noting that in a symmetric equilibrium we must have Y jis / Ajis = Yis / Ais Lis = ki , and
manipulating, we get:
Ωi (1 − α )λ ki (1 − ai ) − g A ai /(1 − ai ) + ε (1 − ai ) = r

45

where Ωi ≡

(1 − τ Ki )(1 − µ )
.
(1 + τ Ri )

Comparative statics
(From here onwards we drop the subscripts). It is easy to show that a is increasing
in both Ω and k . In particular:
∂a
Ω(1 − α )λ (1 − a )
>0
=
∂k Ω(1 − α )λ k + ( g A /(1 − a ) ) (1 + 1/(1 − a )) + ε

Differentiating g A = (λ ks + ε )(1 − a ) (using s for sR ) we get
(λ sdk + λ kds )(1 − a ) − da (λ ks + ε ) = 0
This implies that:
(∂a / ∂k )(λ ks + ε )
λ k (∂s / ∂k ) =
− λs
(1 − a )
Plugging in from the result above we finally get:
Ω(1 − α )(λ ks + ε )
k (∂s / ∂k ) =
−s
Ω(1 − α )λ k + ( g A /(1 − a ) ) (1 + 1/(1 − a )) + ε
Summing on the RHS and noting that the denominator is clearly positive we get that
∂s / ∂k > 0 if and only if:
Ω(1 − α )ε − s ( g A /(1 − a ))(1 + 1/(1 − a )) − ε s
This could well be negative!

46

Table 1
Some Growth Models by Type of Externality

New Good Externalities

Knowledge Externalities

No Knowledge Externalities

No New Good Externalities

Stokey 1988 & 1991
Romer 1990
Aghion and Howitt 1992
Eaton and Kortum 1996
Howitt 1999 & 2000

Romer 1986
Lucas 1988 & 2004
Tamura 1991
Parente and Prescott 1994

Rivera-Batiz and Romer 1991
Romer 1994
Kortum 1997

Jones and Manuelli 1990
Rebelo 1991
Acemoglu and Ventura 2002

47

Table 2
Output Growth Declined Sharply Worldwide
Average Y/L Growth

1960-75

Average sI

1975-00

# of
countries

1960-75

1975-00

Average sH
# of
countries

1960-75

1975-00

# of
countries

World

2.7%

1.1%

96

15.8%

15.5%

96

7.1%

9.7%

74

OECD

3.4

1.8

23

23.2

22.9

23

11.4

14.3

21

Non-OECD

2.5

0.9

73

13.5

13.2

73

5.4

8.0

53

Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
South America

2.0
3.2
3.8
2.8
2.3

0.5
2.8
1.9
0.4
-0.1x

38
17
18
13
10

12.3
14.5
24.9
14.3
17.3

10.5
19.9
23.1
14.5
15.0

38
17
18
13
10

3.9
6.9
10.7
7.5
7.1

6.0
9.9
13.7
10.2
9.8

19
16
16
13
10

1st quartile (poorest)
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile (richest)

1.6
2.6
3.5
3.0

0.5
1.4
1.1
1.5

24
24
24
24

9.6
14.8
15.4
23.6

9.9
14.2
16.3
21.9

24
24
24
24

3.1
5.7
7.5
12.3

5.0
8.9
10.3
15.1

19
19
18
18

Notes: Y/L is GDP per worker. sI is the physical capital investment rate, and sH years of schooling attainment (for the 25+
population) divided by 60 years (working life). Data Sources: Barro and Lee (2000) and Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002).

48

Table 3
Investment Rates Are More Persistent than Growth Rates
1980-2000 vs. 1960-1980

Decade to Decade

Y/L
Growth

sI

sH

Y/L
Growth

sI

sH

World

.34
(.13)

.56
(.07)

1.02
(.04)

.20
(.07)

.77
(.04)

1.00
(.02)

OECD

.12
(.13)

.44
(.09)

.86
(.08)

.27
(.09)

.70
(.06)

.92
(.03)

Non-OECD

.36
(.17)

.44
(.09)

1.10
(.07)

.17
(.08)

.71
(.05)

1.04
(.03)

Notes: World = 74 countries with available data; OECD = 22 countries; and non-OECD = 52
countries. Decades consisted of the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. All variables are averages over
the indicated periods. Each entry is from a single regression. Bold entries indicate p-values of 1%
or less. Data Sources: Barro and Lee (2000) and Penn World Table 6.1 (Heston, Summers and
Aten, 2002).

49

Table 4
Investment Rates Correlate More with Levels than with Growth Rates
Independent Variable = sI

Independent Variable = sH

Dependent Variable

Dependent Variable

Y/L
Growth
Rates

Y/L
Log
Levels

# of
countries

Y/L
Growth
Rates

Y/L
Log
Levels

# of
countries

All countries

.111
(.017)
R2 = .32

1.25
(0.13)
R2 = .48

96

.210
(.060)
R2 = .15

.313
(.026)
R2 = .67

74

OECD

.020
(.047)
R2 = .01

.760
(.358)
R2 = .18

23

-.259 x
(.078)
R2 = .37

.119
(.024)
R2 = .56

21

Non-OECD

.124
(.023)
R2 = .29

.842
(.162)
R2 = .28

73

.367
(.095)
R2 = .22

.314
(.043)
R2 = .51

53

Notes: Variables are averages over 1960-2000. Each entry is from a single regression. Bold entries
indicate p-values of 1% or less. Data Sources: Barro and Lee (2000) and Penn World Table 6.1
(Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002).

50

Table 5
R&D Intensity Also Correlates More with Levels than Growth Rates
Independent Variable = R&D Spending as a Share of GDP
Dependent Variable

Dependent Variable

Y/L
Growth Rates

Y/L
Log Levels

# of
countries

TFP
Growth Rates

TFP
Log Levels

# of
countries

All countries

0.40
(0.59)
R2 = .01

0.69
(0.23)
R2 = .10

82

0.43
(0.52)
R2 = .01

0.37
(0.08)
R2 = .27

67

OECD

-0.15x
(0.46)
R2 = .01

0.42
(0.11)
R2 = .45

21

-0.16 x
(0.32)
R2 = .01

0.17
(0.06)
R2 = .28

21

non-OECD

0.88
(1.03)
R2 = .01

0.55
(0.41)
R2 = .03

61

0.85
(1.01)
R2 = .02

0.34
(0.14)
R2 = .12

46

Notes: Variables are country averages over years in 1960-2000 with data relative to time effects. Y/L is GDP per
worker. TFP nets out contributions from human and physical capital, as described in the text. Each entry is from a
single regression. Bold entries indicate p-values of 2% or less. Data Sources: Barro and Lee (2000), Penn World
Table 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002), and Lederman and Saenz (2003).

51

Table 6
Alternative Ways of Modeling International Spillovers
Spillovers

Growth rate

Advantages

Disadvantages

g A = σ ∑ λ ki sRi ai

No scale effects

H1

⎛ λR ⎞
A * = σ ∑ ⎜ i ⎟
i ⎝ Li ⎠

Larger countries contribute no
more to g A than do small
countries

g A = σ ∑ λ ki sRi aiωi

Previous ones plus:

H2

⎛ λR ⎞
A * = σ ∑ ⎜ i ⎟
i ⎝ L ⎠

γ −1
A * = ( A *) σ ∑ λ Ri

Countries with higher than
Size matters for a country’s average ki sRi ai would be better
off ignoring research from the
contribution to g A
rest of the world

i

where ωi = Li / L
g A = g L /(1 − γ )

Previous ones plus:
Research-intensive
countries do not prefer to
disengage from the rest of
the world.

i

J

( )

Ai* = Ai*
JEK

i

γ −1

σ ∑ λ Rlηil

g A = g L /(1 − γ )

Previous ones plus:
The model takes into
account effect of distance
on spillovers.

l

52

g A does not depend on R&D
efforts…but is this a
disadvantage?
(See Jones, 1995)
We will find it hard to see the
cost of geographic isolation in
the TFP data.

Table 7
Model A versus data A ( θ = 0 case)
Country
Quartile 1
Quartile 2
Quartile 3
Quartile 4

Data sR

Data k
2.0
2.5
3.1
2.9

0.4%
0.5%
1.7%
1.7%

Data A
4,478
9,574
11,111
15,441

Model A
2,184
5,358
11,763
12,286

Table 8
Implied R&D tax rates

Country
Quartile 1
Quartile 2
Quartile 3
Quartile 4

τK
13%
0%
4%
6%

k
2.0
2.5
3.1
2.9

“True”
sR
0.60%
1.13%
1.97%
2.98%

a for

a
20%
43%
50%
70%

SRR
42%
37%
29%
21%

τR

τ Ri = τ R ,US

102%
93%
31%
-16%

58%
68%
72%
70%

Notes: τ R is calculated as the level of τ R needed to generate the “true” research intensity. For each
country, we use its own implied income tax level ( τ K ) and its own capital intensity level k . The last
column presents the equilibrium steady state relative A level ( a ) for the hypothetical case in which all
countries have the same R&D tax as the U.S. ( τ Ri

= τ R ,US ) but have different income tax rates and

capital intensity levels.

53

Table 9
Benefits of Engagement for Selected Countries
Country

Share of world’s L

Scale Effect

S.V. Effect

Total Effect

U.S.

7.1%

37

0.12

5

U.K.

1.5%

297

0.21

64

Belgium

0.2%

4,093

0.12

480

Brazil

3.1%

114

0.97

110

India

1.3%

9

23.0

217

China

38.7%

4

70.6

258

Senegal

0.2%

4,451

42.0

187,035

54

Figure 1: OECD Incomes Correlate Negatively
with Growth Rates, Positively with Investment Rates
1.00
0.75

Correlation(investment rate, log GDP per worker)
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
1960

Correlation(growth rate, log GDP per worker)

1970

1980

Source: Penn World Table 6.1 data on 23 OECD Countries

55

1990

2000

Figure 2: OECD Incomes Correlate Negatively
with Growth Rates, Positively with Schooling
1.00
0.75

Correlation(schooling attainment, log GDP per worker)

0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75

Correlation(growth rate, lagged log GDP per worker)

-1.00
1960

1970

1980

Sources: Penn World Table 6.1 and Barro and Lee (2000) data for 21 OECD countries.

56

1990

2000

Figure 3: The Evolution of Income for 1960 Deciles
12

log PPP GDP per worker

11

10

9

8

7

6
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

Source: Penn World Table 6.1.

57

1985

1990

1995

2000

Figure 4: Deviations of the model from the data
for research intensity and productivity

0.2%

ln(A): model - data

0.0%

-0.2%

-0.4%

-0.6%

-0.8%

-1.0%
-4%

-2%

0%

2%
R/Y: "true" - data

58

4%

6%

8%

Table A1: Data and “true” values for research intensity and productivity
Country

Data sR

Data A

“True” sR

Argentina

0.41%

9,720

1.21%

Implied A
9,719

Bolivia

0.37%

4,672

0.74%

4,672

Brazil

0.86%

9,836

1.67%

9,835

Chile

0.61%

11,078

1.98%

11,075

China

0.60%

2,570

0.28%

2,570

Colombia

0.28%

8,143

1.54%

8,141

Ecuador

0.08%

5,990

0.69%

5,990

Egypt

2.11%

11,126

3.57%

11,119

Hong Kong

0.25%

17,874

5.49%

17,732

Hungary

0.73%

7,172

0.63%

7,172

Indonesia

0.09%

5,912

0.91%

5,911

India

0.63%

3,755

0.60%

3,755

Israel

2.75%

13,919

2.15%

13,922

South Korea

2.49%

8,842

0.71%

8,843

Mexico

0.31%

8,781

1.08%

8,780

Panama

0.38%

6,106

0.60%

6,106

Peru

0.05%

4,285

0.40%

4,285

Poland

0.69%

4,893

0.33%

4,893

Romania

0.80%

2,757

0.16%

2,757

Senegal

0.02%

3,069

0.64%

3,068

Singapore

1.16%

13,592

2.16%

13,587

El Salvador

0.33%

11,096

3.26%

11,084

Thailand

0.12%

5,212

0.49%

5,212

Tunisia

0.32%

10,323

2.11%

10,319

Taiwan

1.78%

14,944

3.59%

14,928

Uganda

0.59%

2,878

1.02%

2,878

Uruguay

0.28%

10,088

1.69%

10,085

Venezuela

0.48%

9,427

1.35%

9,426

Austria

1.56%

14,807

2.60%

14,800

Belgium

1.57%

15,597

2.89%

15,586

Canada

1.64%

11,614

1.12%

11,615

Denmark

1.84%

13,678

1.95%

13,677

Spain

0.81%

15,758

3.69%

15,726

Finland

2.37%

10,358

0.94%

10,360

France

2.31%

15,411

3.07%

15,404

United Kingdom

1.99%

13,954

2.35%

13,952

Germany

2.25%

11,993

1.31%

11,994

Greece

0.49%

10,046

1.07%

10,046

Ireland

1.35%

17,177

5.08%

17,098

Italy

1.08%

19,204

8.27%

18,795

Japan

2.89%

9,864

0.85%

9,865

Netherlands

1.99%

14,136

2.19%

14,135

Norway

1.71%

10,990

0.88%

10,991

New Zealand

0.97%

9,911

0.85%

9,911

Portugal

0.57%

13,230

2.65%

13,220

Sweden

3.46%

10,416

0.91%

10,418

Turkey

0.38%

7,800

1.18%

7,800

USA

2.51%

15,472

2.51%

15,472

59

References
Acemoglu, D. and J. Ventura (2002), “The World Income Distribution,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117: 659-694.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica 60: 323-351.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory (MIT Press, Cambridge).
Auerbach, A.J. (1996), “Tax Reform, Capital Allocation, Efficiency and Growth,” in:
H.J. Aaron and W.G. Gale, eds., Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform
(Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.) 29-73.
Barro, R.J., and J.W. Lee (2000), “International Data on Educational Attainment:
Updates and Implications,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7911,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1995), Economic Growth (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Baumol, W. J. (1986), “Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the LongRun Data Show,” American Economic Review 76: 1072-1085.
Becker, G.S., T.J. Philipson, and R.R. Soares (2003), “The Quantity and Quality of Life
and the Evolution of World Inequality,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 9765, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bils, M. and Klenow, P.J. (2000), “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review 90: 1160-1183.
Caves, R.E. (1996), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, second edition,
(Cambridge University Press, New York).
Coe, D.T. and E. Helpman (1995), “International R&D Spillovers,” European Economic
Review 39: 859-887.
Coe, D.T., E. Helpman, and A.W. Hoffmaister (1997), “North-South R&D Spillovers,”
Economic Journal 107: 134-139.
De Long, J.B. (1988), “Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: Comment,”
American Economic Review 78: 1138-1154.
Diamond, J. (1997), Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (WW Norton
and Company, New York).
Easterly, W. (2001a), The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and
Misadventures in the Tropics (MIT Press, Cambridge).

60

Easterly, W. (2001b), “The Lost Decades: Explaining Developing Countries’ Stagnation
in Spite of Policy Reform 1980-1998,” Journal of Economic Growth 6: 135-157.
Easterly, W., M. Kremer, L. Pritchett, and L.H. Summers (1993), “Good Policy or Good
Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 32: 459-484.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2001), “It's Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and
Growth Models,” World Bank Economic Review 15: 177-219.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1996), “Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the
OECD,” Journal of International Economics 40: 251-278.
Evenson, R.E. and D. Gollin (2003), “Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution,
1960-2000,” Science 300: 758-762.
Fischer, S. (1988), “Symposium on the Slowdown in Productivity Growth,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 2: 3-7.
Gollin, D. (2002), “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy 110:
458-474.
Griliches, Z. (1992), “The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 94: S29-S47
Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy
(MIT Press, Cambridge).
Hall, B.H. (1996), “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in:
B.L.R. Smith and C. Barfield, eds., Technology, R&D, and the Economy (Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C.) 140-183.
Hall, B.H. and J. Van Reenen (2000), “How Effective Are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A
Review of the Evidence,” Research Policy 29: 449-469.
Hall, R.E. and C.I. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 83-116.
Hendricks, L. (2002), “How Important is Human Capital for Development? Evidence
from Immigrant Earnings,” American Economic Review 92: 198-219.
Heston, A., R. Summers and B. Aten (2002), Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for
International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).
Howitt, P. (1999), “Steady Endogenous Growth with Population and R&D Inputs
Growing,” Journal of Political Economy 107: 715-730.

61

Howitt, P. (2000), “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,”
American Economic Review 90: 829-846.
Hummels, D.and P.J. Klenow (2004), “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,”
forthcoming in the American Economic Review.
Jones, C.I. (1995) “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy 103: 759-84.
Jones, C.I. (2001), “Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth Over the
Very Long Run,” Advances in Macroeconomics 1: 1-43.
Jones, C.I. (2002) “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,” American
Economic Review 92: 220-239.
Jones, C.I. (2004) “Growth and Ideas,” Chapter 10 in this volume.
Jones, C.I., and J.C. Williams (1998), “Measuring the Social Return to R&D,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113: 1119-1135.
Jones, L. and R. Manuelli (1990), “A Convex Model of Equilibrium Growth: Theory and
Policy Implications,” Journal of Political Economy 98: 1008-1038.
Keller, W. (2002), “Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion,”
American Economic Review 92: 120-142.
Keller, W. (2004), “International Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Economic Literature
42: 752-782.
King, M.A. and D. Fullerton (1984), The Taxation of Income from Capital: A
Comparative Study of the U.S., U.K., Sweden and West Germany (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago).
Klenow, P. J. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (1997), “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, eds., 1997 NBER
Macroeconomics Annual (MIT Press, Cambridge) 73-103.
Kortum, S. (1997), “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica 65:
1389-1419.
Kremer, M., A. Onatski, and J. Stock (2001), “Searching for Prosperity,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 55: 275-303.
Kremer, M. (1993), “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to
1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 681-716.
Lederman, D. and W.F. Maloney (2003), “R&D and Development,” unpublished paper.
Office of the Chief Economist for LCR, The World Bank, Washington, DC.

62

Lederman, D. and Laura Saenz (2003), “Innovation around the World: A Cross-Country
Data Base of Innovation Indicators,” unpublished paper, Office of the Chief Economist
for LCR, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Lucas, R.E. (1978), “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
Economics: 508-523.
Lucas, R.E. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22: 3-42.
Lucas, R.E. (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
American Economic Review 80: 92-96.
Lucas, R.E. (2002), Lectures on Economic Growth (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge).
Lucas, R.E. (2004), “Life Earnings and Rural-Urban Migration,” Journal of Political
Economy 112: S29-S59.
Mankiw, N.G., D. Romer, and D.N. Weil (1992), “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 407-437.
Parente, S.L. and E.C. Prescott (1994), “Barriers to Technology Adoption and
Development,” Journal of Political Economy 102: 298-321.
Parente, S.L. and E.C. Prescott (2004), “A Unified Theory of the Evolution of
International Income Levels,” Chapter 31 in this volume.
Pritchett, L. (1997), “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11
(Summer), 3-17.
Pritchett, L. (2004), “Does Learning to Add Up Add Up? The Returns to Schooling in
Aggregate Data,” forthcoming in the Handbook of Education Economics.
Psacharopoulos, G. and H.A. Patrinos (2002), “Returns to Investment in Education: A
Further Update,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2881.
Rebelo, S. (1991), “Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth,” Journal of
Political Economy 99: 500-521.
Rivera-Batiz, L.A. and P.M. Romer (1991), “Economic Integration and Endogenous
Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 531-555.
Romer, P.M. (1986), “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy 94: 1002-1037.

63

Romer, P.M. (1990), “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy
98: S71-S102.
Romer, P.M. (1994), “New Goods, Old Theory, and the Welfare Costs of Trade
Restrictions,” Journal of Development Economics 43: 5-38.
Solow, R.M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 70: 65-94.
Stokey, N.L. (1988), “Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods,” Journal of
Political Economy 96: 701-717.
Stokey, N.L. (1991), “Human Capital, Product Quality, and Growth,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 106: 587-617.
Tamura, R.F. (1991), “Income Convergence in an Endogenous Growth Model,” Journal
of Political Economy 99: 522-540.
Young, A. (1998), “Growth without Scale Effects,” Journal of Political Economy 106:
41-63.

64

