                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXECUTIVE FINANCIAL INCENTIVES AND PAYOUT POLICY:
                 FIRM RESPONSES TO THE 2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT

                                        Jeffrey R. Brown
                                          Nellie Liang
                                        Scott Weisbenner

                                       Working Paper 11002
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11002


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2004




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Board. We thank Darrell Ashton, Vivek Choudhary, Yoon Sok Lee, and Lizy Mathai for
excellent research assistance. We thank John Graham, Paul Harrison, Kevin Hassett, and seminar
participants at the University of Illinois, the Federal Reserve Board, the American Enterprise
Institute, and the 2006 AFA Meetings for their comments and constructive suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Executive Financial Incentives and Payout Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 11002
December 2004, Revised July 2006
JEL No. G32, G35, H24

                                            ABSTRACT

We test whether executive stock ownership affects firm payouts using the 2003 dividend tax cut to
identify an exogenous change in the after-tax value of dividends. We find that executives with higher
stock ownership were more likely to increase dividends after the tax cut in 2003, whereas no relation
is found in previous periods when the dividend tax rate was higher. Relative to previous years, firms
that initiated dividends in 2003 were more likely to reduce repurchases. The stock price reaction to
the tax cut suggests that the substitution of dividends for repurchases may have been anticipated,
consistent with agency conflicts.



Jeffrey R. Brown                    Nellie Liang                    Scott Weisbenner
340 Wohlers Hall                    Federal Reserve Board           304C David Kinley Hall
University of Illinois              20th and Constitution Avenue,   MC-706
at Urbana-Champaign                 NW                              University of Illinois at
Champaign, IL 61820                 Washington, DC 20551            Urbana-Champaign
and NBER                            nliang@frb.gov                  Urbana, IL 61801
brownjr@uiuc.edu                                                    and NBER
                                                                    weisbenn@uiuc.edu
Introduction

Shareholder payouts have changed dramatically over the past two decades, with dividend payout

ratios falling substantially and share repurchases increasing rapidly (Fama and French (2001),

Grullon and Michaely (2002)). Following the dividend tax cut in the Jobs and Growth Tax

Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) of May 2003, however, dividend activity increased sharply,

particularly the number of dividend initiations (e.g., Blouin, Raedy and Shackelford (2004),

Chetty and Saez (2005)). 1 The dividend tax cut represented a large increase in the after-tax

value of dividends to individual investors, as the top marginal tax rate on dividends was cut over

20 percentage points, from 38.6% to 15%. 2 This tax change moved from initial proposal to

signed law in under five months, and was thus largely unanticipated prior to 2003. Because this

tax cut is an exogenous increase in the after-tax value of dividends to individual investors, it

represents a unique laboratory for using actual firm behavior to determine the role of taxes and

other factors that affect dividend policy.

       We use this dividend tax change to answer three questions. First, what determines how

firms responded to the dividend tax cut? In particular, can executive stock holdings explain the

cross-sectional pattern of dividend increases? Second, do the dividend increases raise total firm

payouts, or are they partially offset by reduced share repurchases? Third, by examining share

price reactions around key events leading to the tax cut, are we able to shed light on whether

these payout policy decisions reflect possible agency problems within firms?

       Why might executive stock holdings influence the firm’s reaction to the dividend tax cut?

The 2003 dividend tax cut raised the after-tax value of a $1 dividend to high-income

shareholders from 61.4 cents to 85 cents, a 38% increase. Thus, the cost of initiating or

increasing dividend payments for executives who have large direct stock ownership decreased

substantially in 2003. Moreover, executives who are under-diversified with large company stock

ownership may place additional value on dividends for liquidity reasons, stemming from the fact

that they may face explicit/contractual restrictions (e.g., Core and Guay (1999)) or implicit




                                                                                                    1
restrictions (e.g., insider sales may be viewed as a negative signal by the market) on their ability

to sell shares of stock. 3

        In contrast, firms whose executives are compensated primarily in the form of cash or

stock options would have no such incentives. Because employee stock options are rarely

dividend-protected (Murphy (1999)), executives compensated with options have a personal

financial incentive to limit dividends because they face a 100% implicit “tax” rate on dividends,

both before and after the dividend tax cut. That is, executive options fall in value with the

decline in the share price that would result from a cash dividend which is not offset by the receipt

of the dividend to option holders. Thus, while an executive who holds a large share of their

wealth in options would have a personal financial incentive to keep dividend payments low, this

is true both before and after the dividend tax cut. Indeed, several prior studies have found that

when managers have more of their wealth in the form of options, rather than direct shares, they

tend to use dividends less heavily (Lambert, Lanen and Larcker (1989), Jolls (1998), Weisbenner

(2000), Fenn and Liang (2001), Kahle (2002)).

        These prior studies, however, did not have any exogenous shift in the relative cost of

distributing cash through dividends or repurchases. Because of this lack of exogenous variation,

the previous literature is subject to the criticism that the cross-sectional correlation between

executive compensation and payout policy may reflect unobservable characteristics, such as

managerial quality or corporate governance, that generate both compensation policy and

dividend policy. A key contribution of our study is that we use the unexpected and exogenous

shift in the relative cost of paying dividends that arises from the tax change to address these

criticisms and thus provide stronger econometric identification of the relations of interest.

        More recently, in work conducted simultaneously with ours, other authors have also

investigated the effect of the 2003 tax cut on firm payout behavior. While Chetty and Saez

(2005) and Nam, Wang and Zhang (2004) are focused primarily on establishing a causal link

between the tax cut and increased dividend activity, they do provide some cross-sectional

evidence that dividend increases are positively related to share ownership by managers. 4 Blouin,


                                                                                                       2
Raedy and Shackelford (2004) also report that dividend increases are positively related to insider

ownership. Our study differs from these studies in several ways. First, our primary focus is on

using the tax cut as a source of exogenous variation in the tax cost of executive ownership as a

way of more definitively testing whether executive ownership influences payout decisions.

Second, we test whether the dividend tax cut resulted in an increase in total firm payouts, or

instead represented a substitution between payout mechanisms for some firms. Grullon and

Michaely (2002) find that some of the increase in share repurchases over the past decade has

come at the expense of a reduction (or lack of increase) in dividends. We provide what we

believe is the first test of whether this pattern occurs in reverse, i.e., whether in response to the

2003 dividend tax cut, an increase in dividends is accompanied by a decrease in share

repurchases. Third, we examine whether excess stock returns around key legislative events

pertaining to the tax cut reflect potential agency costs. Specifically, we are interested in whether

stock prices reacted to the possible agency conflict between executives’ incentives to raise

dividends when their personal ownership stakes are higher and the fact that the overall tax

burden for other individual shareholders may have actually risen if dividends were substituted

for share repurchases (which ought to still be preferred due to their lower effective tax rate). 5

        We have three principal findings. First, we provide evidence that executive stock

holdings are an important explanation of which firms chose to respond to the tax cut by

increasing dividends. We show that the substantial variation across firms in the fraction of

shares held by top executives can explain approximately one-quarter of the total unexpected

increase in dividends after the May 2003 tax cut, and an even larger share (roughly one-half) of

dividend initiations. In further support of this effect, we find that while there is virtually no

relation between executive stock ownership and the likelihood of a dividend increase in the

decade before the tax cut (when the dividend tax rate, and hence the cost to the stock-owning

executive of paying out dividends, was much higher), not only is the relation quite strong in 2003,

but it is disproportionately concentrated after the passage of the act in late May of that year when

the tax cost of paying dividends is substantially reduced. While other factors, such as executive


                                                                                                        3
stock option holdings, firm cash flow, leverage, past firm performance, and institutional

ownership are important determinants of dividend policy in general, only the effect of executive

stock holdings substantially changed with the change in tax regime, which is supportive of a tax

effect. These results are quite robust to additional controls and to alternative specifications.

       Our second finding is that, despite the increase in dividends in response to the tax cut,

about one-third of firms that initiated dividends in 2003 scaled back repurchases by an amount

sufficient to reduce total payouts (dividends plus share repurchases). This is in sharp contrast to

prior years, when approximately 10% of dividend initiators reduced total payouts in the year of

initiation. Our results further suggest that while the firms with more executive stock holdings are

more likely to increase dividends, they are no more likely to increase total payouts. This

suggests that, among those firms for which executive ownership had a large effect on dividend

initiations, there is some degree of dividend-repurchase substitution occurring. Thus, while

Grullon and Michaely (2002) found that firms with lower-than-expected dividend yields had

larger repurchase programs in the 1990s, we find that many of the firms that initiated dividends

in response to the 2003 tax cut were likely to at the same time reduce share repurchases,

suggesting that payout substitution may work in both directions.

       Finally, we explore potential agency problems by examining how the market responded

to news of the 2003 tax cut. To the extent that there is some substitution occurring between

dividends and share repurchases, this suggests that the dividend tax cut may have actually

increased the overall tax burden for the typical individual shareholder as capital gains are likely

still tax advantaged relative to dividends even after the tax cut. We find that the firms which

historically have paid large dividends and which have a large fraction of individual shareholders

experienced stock price gains in response to the proposal and passage of the tax cut. However,

the market appears to have at least partially anticipated that some firms, in particular those firms

whose executives had large stock holdings, would substitute dividends for tax-advantaged share

repurchases or the retention of earnings, and thus potentially raise the tax burden on total

distributions for individual shareholders.


                                                                                                      4
       This paper proceeds as follows. In section I, we discuss our sample, summary statistics

of the data, and provide more background on the 2003 dividend tax cut. In section II, we present

our results on the effect of executive share ownership on dividend increases, and test how the

relation between executive holdings and dividend policy has changed over the pre- and post-tax-

change regimes. In section III, we examine whether firms who increase dividends are increasing

total payouts, or are just substituting dividends for share repurchases, leaving total payouts

unchanged. In section IV, we analyze the market response to news of the tax cut to determine

whether the market anticipated for which firms the tax cut would lead to dividend substitution.

Section V concludes.



I. Sample, Summary Statistics, and the 2003 Tax Cut

       We begin with approximately 1,700 publicly traded firms in each year from 1993 to 2003

for which we are able to merge the necessary firm characteristic, stock, and executive

compensation data from Compustat, CRSP and Execucomp. 6 These firms together comprise the

vast majority of total U.S. stock market capitalization. In addition to share ownership and

options outstanding held by the top five executives, as provided by Execucomp, we are also

interested in shares and options held by others. Because institutional investors may face

different tax rates from managers and may serve as important monitors of firm activity, we

collect data on institutional ownership from CDA Spectrum, including a split between mutual

funds and other institutions. We also hand collect data from company 10-k filings on options

held by employees who are not among the top executive ranks. Specifically, we define options

held by non-executive employees to be the difference between total and top executive holdings.

       Table I reports summary statistics for our sample in 2002 and 2003. We focus on

ordinary dividend increases in 2003 and contrast them with those in earlier years. As we discuss

below, our analysis is robust to the inclusion of special dividends. We use CRSP data so that we

can accurately measure whether the dividend announcement date was before or after the passage

of the tax cut in May 2003. We code a firm as having increased dividends if, at any time during


                                                                                                  5
the period in question, the firm announced a dividend that was higher than the level of dividends

they paid previously. Specifically, an increase in dividends is defined as an increase in dividends

per share (adjusted for stock splits). We also make use of the Compustat definition of dividends

to confirm dividend initiations among firms that previously did not pay dividends.

        [Insert table I here]

        In 2003, 28.7% of the entire sample increased dividends, which is substantially larger

than the fraction of dividend increasers in 2002 (which was 22.0%) and in other recent years.

Particularly striking is the frequency of dividend initiations: 5.9% of previously non-dividend

paying firms started paying dividends in 2003, compared to only 1.2% in 2002, and it is higher

than for any other year since 1980.

        Because our primary question of interest is how the executive ownership of company

stock influences firm dividend policy, we highlight executive stock and option holdings in table I.

Consistent with prior literature, top executive ownership is 0.8% of firm shares at the median

firm, and 3.8% on average. While the fraction of total shares outstanding held by top executives

is relatively small, this can represent substantial wealth for these individuals. For example, at the

median, the value of stock held by the top executives at the end of 2002 was almost $12 million,

nearly four times the median annual cash salary and bonus for top executives of $3.3 million.

Summary statistics for other variables are provided at the bottom of table I.



II. Empirical Results on Executive Ownership and Dividend Increases

A. Results: Dividend Increases for 2003 Relative to Prior Decade

        The May 2003 dividend tax cut represents an ideal experiment for several reasons. First,

it is the first time in 17 years that the market faced a substantial reduction in the tax cost of

paying dividends. 7 Second, aside from the reduction in dividend taxes, the legislation was free

of other major changes to the tax law that might confound empirical analysis of its effects. Third,

it came largely as a “surprise” to the market, thus enabling us to treat it as an exogenous event.

Specifically, the May 2003 legislation, which was made retroactive to January 1, 2003, was


                                                                                                     6
completely unanticipated until the days leading up to President Bush’s speech to the Economic

Club of Chicago in early January 2003. The news leakage of this idea prior to this event was

minimal, and fewer than five months elapsed from the time of this announcement until the

legislation passed. 8 Therefore, it is virtually certain that firms did not adjust their compensation

structure prior to 2003 in anticipation of a future dividend tax cut, and thus we can treat our

measure of executive ownership (which is based on 2002 data) as pre-determined. This allows

us to identify the causal effect of executive holdings on changes in dividend policy in response to

the tax cut.

        In table II, we begin by exploring the correlation between the likelihood of a dividend

increase and the fraction of shares held by the top five executives of the company. 9 We also

control for a rich set of covariates, including executive holdings of options, the firm’s market-to-

book ratio (a proxy for growth opportunities), free cash flow, cash on hand, leverage, past firm

stock market performance, volatility, firm size, firm age (to control for the “maturity” effect

posited by Julio and Ikenberry (2005)), and industry effects covering 14 broad groups. 10 These

variables are as of year-end 2002, and are related to whether the firm increased ordinary

dividends per share in 2003. Columns 1 through 3 report the results from a linear probability

model, whereas columns 4 through 6 report results for a Probit model.

        [Insert table II here]

        Our first principal finding is that the fraction of shares held by top five executives is a

very important determinant of dividend policy. As shown in column 1, the coefficient on the

fraction of shares outstanding held by the top executives is positive and highly significant; the

coefficient of 54 indicates that moving from the 25th percentile (0.3%) to the 75th percentile

(3.2%) of the fraction of shares held by the top executives raises the probability of a dividend

increase by 1.6 percentage points, from a baseline of 28.7%. 11 Further, a one-standard-deviation

increase in executive ownership translates into a 4.2 percentage point higher likelihood of a

dividend increase.




                                                                                                        7
       If it is indeed the case that the relation between executive stock ownership and dividend

activity is driven by the change in the tax cost of paying dividends, then such a relation should

not appear in prior years when dividends were taxed at a considerably higher rate (the top

personal rate was nearly 40% over the 1993 to 2002 period). The next two columns, which

report coefficients from a single regression, provide such a comparison. In column 2, we report

the coefficients on key covariates over the 1993 to 2002 period pooled, while column 3 reports

the interaction of these covariates with a year 2003 indicator variable. 12 This approach allows us

to easily test whether the effect of each covariate is different in 2003 than in prior years.

       Focusing again on shares held by top five executives, we immediately see that there is no

correlation between executive share ownership and dividend increases in the prior decade, but a

strong relation in 2003, with the difference in the executive ownership effect highly significant.

This pattern is consistent with the view that the dividend tax cut reduced the cost of paying

dividends and thus raised the probability of a dividend increase for those firms in which

management had the most to gain, such as by obtaining liquidity through dividend payments.

       Before discussing other covariates, we also report, in columns 4 through 6, the marginal

effects from a Probit specification. The marginal effect of a change in the fraction of shares held

by the top five executives is nearly identical to that from the linear probability model. 13

       Turning to the many covariates that might plausibly explain firm payout behavior, we

find a pattern that is quite consistent with our hypothesis. Not surprisingly, most of these

covariates have significant explanatory power in explaining cross-sectional differences in

dividend policy. Starting with the OLS results over the 1993 to 2002 period, the likelihood of

increasing dividends is increasing with free cash flow, past five-year returns, and (log) market

value of the firm. It is decreasing in the number of options held by top executives, cash on hand,

leverage, and monthly stock price volatility. 14

       Perhaps most importantly for our hypothesis, the differences in the magnitude of these

effects between 2003 and the earlier decade are all insignificant. In other words, we cannot

reject a zero difference between the effects of these covariates in 2003 versus prior years (the p-


                                                                                                      8
value of the joint test that the differences in the non-ownership coefficients are all zero is 0.85).

Thus, the only effect that has a differential effect in 2003 is executive share ownership, which is

consistent with our tax-motivation hypothesis. The lack of a significant difference on the

executive options variable is particularly notable, because the implicit 100% tax on dividends

faced by executives who own non-dividend protected options did not change with the change in

the tax law. This provides further reassurance that the observed correlations of interest are not

being spuriously driven by some third factor that generally influences both executive

compensation and payout policy.

       The results from the Probit are similar. Executive stock option holdings, free cash flow,

cash on hand, leverage, past returns, volatility, and firm market value are all significant

predictors of firm payout behavior in general, but there is again no significant difference between

2003 and prior years. Owing to the non-linear fit of the Probit model, the magnitude of the

marginal effects for many of the covariates are larger in absolute value than in the linear

probability model, but as noted, our primary coefficient of interest (executive shares) is

essentially unaffected. The p-value of the joint test that the differences (i.e., 2003 relative to

1993-2002 period) in the non-ownership coefficients are all zero is 0.53, with only the difference

in the coefficient on market-to-book individually significant at the 10% level.

       To summarize, the results in table II are consistent with our hypothesis that dividend

increases were motivated by executives’ personal financial incentives. Executive share

ownership is a significant determinant of dividend policy in 2003 but not in prior years, which is

consistent with a change in tax rates in 2003. Conversely, other determinants of dividend policy,

while significant in all years, are generally not significantly different in 2003 versus prior years.

This provides assurance that there were not other factors or events changing in 2003 that are

spuriously driving the observed relation. These results suggest that dividend policy was changed

in 2003 in response to the fact that the fall in dividend taxes reduces the cost of paying dividends,

and this effect is strongest in firms where the executives’ personal financial incentives are most

affected by the tax cut.


                                                                                                        9
B. Further Identification of the Executive Ownership Effect

        In order to provide further evidence that the executive ownership effect is due to the tax

cut, we extend our analysis in two important ways in table III. First, recognizing that the tax cut

did not occur until late May 2003, we break 2003 into two shorter time periods representing the

part of the year that fell before the tax cut and the part that fell after the tax cut. In other words,

rather than simply focusing on 2003 versus 2002 (or the prior decade), we can focus on: i) the

pre-2003 period, ii) the portion of 2003 through May 23 (when the tax cut was formally passed

by Congress), and iii) the portion of 2003 after May 23 (the period immediately after the tax cut

was passed). The CRSP data allow us to divide dividend increases into these sub-periods based

on the announcement date, rather than the payable date, so that we can be sure of the relevant tax

regime in place at the time the firm made its dividend decisions.

        Second, we distinguish between dividend increases that are dividend initiations among

firms that did not pay dividends in the prior year and dividend increases among firms that were

already paying dividends. Among this latter group of firms that were already paying dividends,

we can also look at firms increased dividends by a large amount, which we define as an increase

in dividends per share of more than 25%.

        These extensions are potentially important for determining causality. For example,

dividing 2003 into a period before and after the tax cut may provide insight as to whether the tax

cut itself is the reason for the observed strong 2003 correlation between executive ownership and

dividend policy. If the observed correlation occurred mostly in the early part of the year, when

ultimate passage of the tax cut was uncertain, one might be concerned that the observed

correlation is not tax related. Of course, as with any legislative event, there is uncertainty about

the release of information during the period between the initial announcement and the final

passage of the act, and thus how firms will react. As noted earlier, the tax cut was unanticipated

before January 2003, but then from January to May, the possibility of a dividend tax cut was in

the news regularly. While the ultimate passage of the tax bill was not a “sure thing” during this

period, some firms may have made changes to their dividend policy in anticipation of the


                                                                                                      10
possible tax cut. In particular, while it is highly unlikely that many firms would make a dramatic

change in payouts, such as initiating a dividend program, solely in anticipation of a possible

future tax cut, it is quite conceivable that a firm that was already paying dividends and already

considering an increase, might go ahead and raise the dividend during the January to May period

in anticipation of the tax cut. If the latter were the case, and if executives with heavy stock

ownership are more likely to push for the increase, then we might expect to see the correlation

between ownership and dividend increases become more important even before the passage of

the Act than in previous years. Such an uptick in the correlation at the start of 2003 should be

less likely for a dividend initiation, however, since the cost of being wrong about the tax cut

would be greater (because the dollar amount of an average dividend initiation is typically much

larger than the size of a dividend increase among prior dividend payers.)

       The results, reported in table III, are consistent with these patterns. Each coefficient

reported in table III represents the marginal effect of the percent of shares held by top five

executives on dividend increases from a separate linear probability model. 15 In each regression,

we include all of the same control variables from table II, including the age and industry effects,

but do not report the individual coefficients on those controls in the interest of brevity. 16

       [Insert table III here]

       The first row corresponds to the linear probability model from table II, where the

dependent variable is defined as any dividend increase (including firms with and without a

previous history of paying dividends). In column 1, the coefficient of 6.3 on the probability of

increasing dividends over 1993 to 2002 suggests that executive share ownership was

uncorrelated with dividend increases in the decade prior to the tax cut (this is the same 6.3

coefficient from column 2 in table II). The second column in table III shows the result for 2002

only, and the coefficient is again quite similar and insignificant, as expected. In column 3, we

see the highly significant coefficient of 54 on executive ownership for the year 2003, suggesting

a strong effect of executive ownership on dividend increases (again, this is the same coefficient

that we found in column 1 of table II). In columns 4 and 5 of table III, we separate 2003 into


                                                                                                    11
pre- and post-tax cut periods. As can be seen, the significant correlation between executive

ownership and dividend increases is driven almost entirely by the post-tax cut period. The

coefficient in the pre-tax cut period is indeed higher than in prior years, consistent with the

possibility that some firms may have increased dividends in anticipation of the tax cut, but the

effect is not statistically different from zero. In contrast, the coefficient for the post-tax cut

period is 43.3, which is not only significantly different from zero, but also from the coefficient in

prior years. These results provide further evidence that the observed correlation is indeed a tax

effect.

          How big is this executive ownership effect? The actual fraction of firms increasing

dividends in the portion of 2003 following the tax cut approval in May was 16.8%. If one

estimated a regression of dividend increases on the various explanatory variables during the

same time period in 2002, and used the estimated coefficients to predict the post-May 2003

dividend increases, one would have predicted that only 9.5% of firms would have increased

dividends. The difference, approximately 7.4%, represents the “unexpected” increase in

dividend activity. The change in the relation between dividend policy and executive ownership

after the tax cut (relative to the same period in 2002) can explain 2.0 of this 7.4 percentage points,

or about one-quarter of the overall effect.

          The results from row 1 of table III represent the combined effect of dividend initiations

and dividend increases among firms already paying dividends. As noted, however, there are

reasons to suspect that firms already paying dividends might be willing to increase their dividend

in anticipation of a possible tax cut, whereas firms are less likely to initiate a new dividend

program for tax reasons until after the tax cut has become law. This is because dividends are

“sticky,” in that investors may expect dividends to be paid out regularly once started and rarely

cut (Lintner (1956)).

          Turning to the second row of table III, we focus on the subset of firms that did not pay

dividends in the prior year and examine how executive compensation affects initiations. In the

period prior to 2003, there is no discernable relation between executive compensation and


                                                                                                      12
dividend initiations, with an insignificant coefficient of 6.2 over the prior decade and –3.6 in

2002. In contrast, there is a strong relation in 2003, with a highly significant coefficient of 37.8.

The coefficient of 37.8 indicates that moving from the 25th percentile (0.3 percent) to the 75th

percentile (3.2 percent) of the fraction of shares held by the top executives raises the probability

of a dividend initiation by 1.1 percentage points, while a one-standard-deviation increase in

executive ownership translates into a 2.9 percentage point higher likelihood of a dividend

initiation – both are economically large effects given the baseline initiation rate of 5.9% in 2003.

An examination of columns 4 and 5 indicate that this correlation with initiations occurs entirely

after the passage of the 2003 dividend tax cut. This result is consistent with our hypothesis, as a

firm is unlikely to initiate a new dividend program for tax reasons until they are quite confident

in the passage of the act.

        As above, we can use the regression coefficients from the latter part of 2002 to predict

the level of dividend initiations in the latter part of 2003 had the tax cut not occurred. By

comparing the predicted to the actual, we find an “extra” 3.8 percentage points of firms initiated

dividends after the tax cut. The change in the relation between dividend initiations and executive

ownership after the tax cut (relative to the same period in 2002) can explain approximately half

of this additional initiation activity (specifically, 1.8 percentage points of the 3.8 percentage

point “unexpected” increase.)

        In row 3, we turn to dividend increases among firms that already have a prior history of

paying dividends to shareholders. While there is no significant relation between executive share

ownership and dividend increases in the period before 2003, there is a highly significant

coefficient (72.6) for the year 2003. In contrast to initiations, where this effect was concentrated

in the post-tax cut months, this effect is more evenly divided over the pre and post tax cut period.

This is not entirely surprising given that firms that already pay dividends and that may be already

considering increasing dividends further may be more willing to go ahead and increase dividends

in anticipation of the tax cut, because of the cost of being wrong about the tax cut is lower than

for an initiation.


                                                                                                     13
       Because many firms with dividend programs follow a rather predictable pattern of

slightly increasing dividends every year, it is also of interest to focus on “large” dividend

increases. We therefore examine whether executive ownership is correlated with the probability

of increasing dividends by more than 25% over the prior year’s dividend level. 17 We observe a

statistically significant relation between executive ownership in the pooled 1993 to 2002 data,

although this effect is substantially and significantly smaller than in 2003, with a coefficient of

only 12.9, versus the 64.9 that we observe in 2003. Thus, the overall pattern is similar to that of

any dividend increase among prior payers (i.e., including smaller increases), with a coefficient

for 2003 that is significant and much higher than in prior years, but with the effect spread much

more evenly over 2003 than initiations.

       Overall, these results indicate that the correlation between executive share ownership and

dividend activity was uniquely strong in the year 2003. Firms were loathe to start paying

dividends for tax reasons until they had a high degree of confidence that the tax reduction would

become law, and thus the executive ownership effect upon initiations is concentrated almost

entirely in the period following the tax cut. For dividend increases among firms that already pay

dividends, the results suggest that many of the firms with high executive ownership increased

dividends even prior to final passage, during the period in which the President and Republican

members of Congress were moving the tax cut from initial proposal to final legislation.

C. Share and Option Ownership by Institutions and Other Individuals

       Our results provide evidence that the stock ownership of top executives has a significant

effect on a firm’s decision of whether to increase dividends after the tax cut. Of course,

ownership by other groups could also have led to a differential response to the tax cut. For

example, a firm that is owned mostly by individual investors would benefit relatively more from

the tax cut than a firm whose shares are owned primarily by pension funds, whose dividend

income is not subject to tax. 18 Further, options held by non-executives, as well as those held by

top executives, have been shown to influence payout policy (Lambert, Lanen and Larcker (1989),

Jolls (1998), Weisbenner (2000), Fenn and Liang (2001), Kahle (2002)). However, since options


                                                                                                      14
are not dividend-protected, their effect on dividends should not vary with a change in dividend

tax rates. In light of this, we have tested whether these other stock and option holders influence

dividend policy, and if so, whether the effect changed with the tax cut.

           In table IV, we re-estimate our primary specifications for the 2003 sample, as well as the

difference in the relevant coefficient for 2003 relative to the pooled period 1993-2002. However,

this time we include additional controls for the fraction of shares held by individual investors

other then the top five executives and the fraction of shares held by non-mutual fund institutional

investors (primarily tax-exempt pension funds). Like top executives, all individuals would face a

higher after-tax return to dividends in 2003 than earlier years. However, the share of the firm

held by each of the non-executive individuals is less likely to represent a large part of their own

personal wealth, and so the provision of liquidity is not nearly as an important an incentive for

dividend payments as it is for top management. The omitted category in this specification is

mutual funds, which includes both taxable and tax-exempt accounts and which would potentially

benefit more from the tax cut than non-mutual fund institutional investors.

           [Insert table IV here]

           The key finding from this specification is that even after controlling for individual and

institutional ownership, the coefficient on executive ownership shares in 2003 relative to the

prior decade (displayed in column 3 of table IV), is 47.4 and highly significant, and is little

changed from the 47.7 in the specification without individual and institutional ownership

(displayed in column 3 of table II). 19 Thus, while many of the other ownership variables are

themselves significant, their inclusion does not alter the executive ownership effect, and, unlike

executive stock holdings, their own effect on dividend policy does not change in 2003 with the

tax cut.

           The effects of the other ownership variables are of some interest in their own right. For

example, we find a positive relation between the fraction of shares held by individuals and the

likelihood of a dividend boost during 2003, which by itself is consistent with the tax motivations.

However, in contrast to the results for executive ownership, the relation for non-executive


                                                                                                       15
individuals was no different in 2003 than it was for the prior decade when dividend tax rates

were much higher. 20 Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005) find that only 1/5 of chief

financial officers report that the personal taxes shareholders pay are important when making

dividend decisions. Our results are consistent with this survey evidence—we find that firms with

high individual ownership did not boost dividends in response to the 2003 tax cut, but those with

high executive ownership did.

       In addition, we find a positive and significant coefficient on the fraction of shares held by

non-mutual fund institutions, which presumably have more tax-exempt assets than mutual funds

(the omitted category), throughout the 1993 to 2003 period. The effect is not statistically

different in 2003 than over the prior decade. Of course, the dividend tax cut yields no direct

increase in the after-tax value of dividends paid on shares held by tax-exempt institutions, and a

pure tax story would suggest the opposite sign. This finding, however, is consistent with the

view that institutional investors such as pension funds serve as monitors of firms. Pension funds,

for example, are generally considered to be much more active monitors of corporations, whereas

mutual funds are thought to “vote with their feet” and simply sell the shares of companies with

poor governance mechanisms (Gillan and Starks (1998)). With skepticism about the quality of

corporate earnings in the post-Enron period, there was a growing perception that firms should be

pressured to pay dividends, because cash distributions cannot be manipulated and make it easier

for investors to verify the cash flows of the firm. In addition, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner

(2000) also argue that institutions may like the smoothness of regular dividends because it makes

their task of rebalancing their portfolios more predictable and thus they increase their demand for

dividends when its after-tax cost to other shareholders declines.

       In unreported results, we also find that options held by employees outside of the top

senior ranks have a negative effect on dividend increases in 2003, but that the effect is about one-

third the magnitude of that for options held by the top executives. Similar to executive options,

the effect of lower management options on dividend policy is not different in 2003 relative to




                                                                                                    16
2002, as would be expected, given that the dividend “tax rate” on options is 100% in both

years. 21

        In sum, the coefficients on the additional ownership variables and the option variables,

both for upper management and lower level employees, suggest that they also influenced the

likelihood of a dividend increase in 2003. However, only the relation with executive stock

ownership is larger in 2003 relative to the pre-tax cut period, indicating that the tax cut did not

influence dividends through these other measures. The inclusion of these other controls has very

little influence on the executive holdings variables, suggesting that our executive holdings results

are not being spuriously driven by the composition of the other owners of the firm.

D. Further Robustness Checks

        In this section, we briefly discuss the large number of specification checks that we

conducted. 22 The key point is that our primary finding – namely, that executive stock ownership

strongly influenced payout policy following the 2003 dividend tax cut – is extremely robust.

        Using the CRSP definition of dividends allows us to determine the precise dividend

announcement date and thus to sub-divide the 2003 period into pre- and post-tax cut periods.

We have, however, also tested our hypothesis using annual dividends paid as measured in

Compustat, which includes both ordinary dividends as well as special dividends. In contrast to

ordinary dividends, where the firm has the incentive to increase them only if they are confident

that they continue to pay them in the future, special dividends are a one-time tool and do not

necessarily signal a long-term increase in payouts. Given the prominence of Microsoft’s

announcement in July 2004 that they would pay a special dividend of $3 per share, totaling about

$32 billion, 23 and the work of Blouin, Raedy, and Shackelford (2004) that finds a rise in special

dividends after the tax cut, one might be interested in whether the results are significantly

affected. Using the Compustat measure of annual total dividends paid to construct dividend

increases and initiations, we find that the results for 2003 are quite similar, with a highly

significant coefficient on executive share ownership of 55.5 in the dividend increase regression

and 38.1 in the initiation regression (the differences between these 2003 coefficients and those


                                                                                                      17
from the pre-tax cut period 1993 to 2002 are 51.4 and 32.6, respectively, and are also highly

significant). 24

        Baker and Hall (2004) argue that for many incentive problems, the dollar amount of

management ownership is a more accurate measure of management’s incentives. Thus, as a

second specification check, we replace our dependent variable with the log of the dollar amount

of shares held. Returning to our CRSP definition of an increase in ordinary dividends, we find a

coefficient on the natural log of the dollar value of shares held by top executive shares of 3.0,

which is significant at the 1% level. Of note, we find that the coefficient in 2003 is also greater

than the coefficient in the 1993 to 2002 period, and that this difference of 1.8 is significant at the

5% level. Among dividend initiators, we find a similar effect, with a coefficient on the log of the

dollar value of executive shares of 1.8, which is significantly different from both zero and from

the coefficient in the 1993 to 2002 period at the 1% level (difference in coefficients is 1.7).

        Finally, we also break executive ownership into that held by the CEO and that held by

other top executives to see if the holdings of the CEO are a bigger determinant of payout policy

than those of the next four top executives in the firm (CEOs, on average, account for about one-

half of the stock held by the firm’s top five executives at the end of 2002). For both total

dividend increases and dividend initiations, we find that both the share ownership of the CEO

and that for the other top executives are important determinants of dividend policy in 2003.



III. Executive Holdings and the Dividend Substitution Hypothesis

        The 2003 Economic Report of the President, released in February of that year, provided

the Bush administration’s economic rationale for the dividend tax cut. In the analysis, the

administration highlighted a number of reasons that a cut in dividend tax rates could have

positive economic effects, including the elimination of distortions to investment decisions of

firms, arguing that “the heavier tax burden on dividends can encourage investment in established

businesses with internally generated earnings, because these businesses will tend to have more

retained earnings because of the tax distortion.” Implicit in this claim is that the dividend tax cut


                                                                                                    18
will increase dividends and result in higher total payouts, rather than cause firms to shift the type

of payout towards dividends and away from share repurchases. Grullon and Michaely (2002)

find that firms with large repurchase programs also have a lower than expected dividend yield,

indicating some substitutability between the two. We, on the other hand, wish to test if the

reverse is also true – do firms that increased dividends in response to the tax cut at the same time

reduce share repurchases?

        In table V, we examine dividends and share repurchases paid during a given year by

firms in our sample as reported in Compustat. We define share repurchases as funds used to buy

back shares, as reported on cash flow statements, consistent with other studies (e.g., Jagannathan,

Stephens, and Weisbach (2000), Fenn and Liang (2001), and Grullon and Michaely (2002)). For

the subset of firms that increased/initiated dividends, as well as for firms that did not increase

their dividend payouts, we report three statistics. First, we report the likelihood the firm

repurchased shares in the previous year and thus has a track record of distributing cash through

other means. Second, we report the likelihood that the firm decreased share repurchases

(normalized by assets) conditional on having bought back stock in the prior year. Third, we

report the probability that the firm increased total payouts (dividend plus share repurchases,

normalized by assets) relative to the prior year. We do these calculations for three cohorts of

dividend increasers, those that increased in the periods prior to the tax cut (1993 to 2002 and

2002) and those that increased dividends in 2003. 25

        [Insert table V here]

        The first row of table V reports results for all firms that increased dividends. It indicates

that the fraction of dividend increasers in 2003 that had previously repurchased shares (67%) was

not significantly different from the prior decade (65%). Just less than two-thirds of the firms that

increased dividends in 2003 reduced their level of share repurchases (normalized by assets),

which is slightly higher than in prior years. The net result is that only about one-half (52%) of

dividend increasers actually increased total payouts (normalized by assets). This fraction is in

line with prior years. 26


                                                                                                     19
       For dividend initiations, the evidence is strongly suggestive of partial substitution. As

shown in the middle row of the upper panel, we find that among firms that initiated dividends in

2003, 68% had repurchased shares in the previous year, significantly greater than the 38% in

1993 to 2002. Among these repurchasing-firms, 78% reduced their share repurchases from the

previous year’s level upon initiating dividends in 2003, again significantly greater than the 56%

in 1993 to 2002. The net result is that 66% of all the firms that initiated dividends in 2003

(including those that had not repurchased shares in 2002) also increased total payouts, with the

remaining one-third actually cutting total payouts the year they started paying dividends. As a

benchmark, if no substitution had occurred, 100% of the firms that initiated dividends would

have increased total payouts. 27 The contrast of the effect of a dividend initiation on total payouts

for 2003 relative to previous years is striking. During the previous decade (1993 to 2002), 89%

of firms that initiated dividends increased total payouts. In 2002, the figure was 92 percent.

These rates are much closer to the 100% that we would expect if no substitution had occurred.

These results are not driven by what may have been a lower inclination to repurchase shares in

the early to mid-1990s, as the pattern of increased payouts upon a dividend initiation is also

present when we focus only on the year 2002. Thus, it appears that there are an additional 20 to

25% of dividend initiators in 2003 than in prior years that failed to increase total payouts in the

year they initiated dividends.

       Another possible reason that repurchases might have fallen in 2003 is that fewer stock

options were being exercised that year, and thus the incentive to buy back is potentially lessened.

To test this possibility, we show in row 3 of table V that payouts did not decline to the same

degree for firms that did not increase dividends. Specifically, the fraction of non-dividend

increasers in 2003 that repurchased shares in the prior year (50%) was similar in 2003 as in prior

years (44% for 1993 to 2002, and 51% in 2002). Similarly, the fraction of firms that did not

increase dividends in 2003 that experienced a decline in repurchases-to-assets in 2003 was quite

similar to prior years (64% in 2003, versus 63% over prior decade and 58% in 2002). As such, it




                                                                                                   20
does not appear that our substitution result among initiators is driven by a general decline

repurchases across all firms.

       To provide perspective on the size of the change in total payouts, the bottom panel of the

table shows the distribution of changes in dividends, share repurchases, and total payouts (all

normalized by assets) for firms that initiated dividends. The normalized size of the dividend

initiation is comparable for the pre-tax cut period (1993 to 2002) and the post-tax cut (2003),

with no statistical difference in the mean or median. However, the changes in both share

repurchases and total payouts in 2003 are considerably lower than the changes in previous years.

The mean change in share repurchases (normalized by assets) is –1.6 percentage points in 2003,

leading to only a 0.6 percentage point increase in the payout-to-asset ratio, compared to an

average of a 4.5 percentage point increase over the period 1993 to 2002. Median changes in total

payouts are also smaller in 2003, though not significantly different from earlier years. Perhaps

most telling is the negative change in payouts at the 25th percentile in 2003 relative to the slight

increase in payouts at the 25th percentile from 1993 to 2002, owing to the more frequent cutback

in share repurchases that occurred in 2003.

       Overall, these tabulations suggest some substitution from repurchases to dividends, at

least among dividend initiators, prompted by the dividend tax cut. The fact that there was no

increase in total payouts among about one-third of dividend initiators might be somewhat

surprising given that the tax burden of total payouts declined. However, for firms that had relied

more heavily on share repurchases to distribute excess cash flow (which was evidently the case

for many of the dividend initiators in 2003), the reduction in the tax burden is actually somewhat

small. The tax rate on dividends was cut to the statutory rate on long-term capital gains (both

were changed to 15%), but firms for which the previously higher tax burden of dividends was

important likely had switched to share repurchases to exploit their tax advantage. With an

equalization of statutory rates, these firms became more willing to substitute towards dividends

and scale back repurchases, leaving total payouts little changed.




                                                                                                   21
       The analysis in table V suggests nontrivial substitution of dividends for share repurchases

among firms initiating dividend programs. In table VI we more rigorously model the

determinants of the broader payout policy choices firms made in response to the 2003 tax cut.

As in the bottom panel of table V, we also focus here on the level of payouts, this time using a

Tobit specification. Having established that there is some substitution occurring, we are now

interested in whether the executive-ownership-induced increase in dividends in 2003 translated

directly into higher total payouts or was instead offset, leaving total payouts little changed.

       [Insert table VI here]

       We begin by running a Tobit specification where the dependent variable is equal to the

increase in the amount of dividends paid (again normalized by assets), or zero for firms that did

not increase dividends-to-assets, during the year 2003. Column 1 reports the coefficients for the

specification estimated on all firms. Looking first at the non-ownership control variables in the

Tobit model, the results indicate, not surprisingly, that free cash flow and cash on hand are

positively related to the size of a dividend increase, while the executive option holdings, the

market-to-book ratio, and volatility are negatively related to the amount of the increase. This

holds true both in 2003 and in unreported results for prior years. Turning to the primary

coefficient of interest, we see that greater executive ownership of shares leads to a larger amount

of dividends. Importantly, this effect is not only significantly different from zero, but it is also

significantly different from the effect of executive ownership on the amount of dividend

increases in the earlier decade. Indeed, in unreported results, a Tobit model estimated over the

pre-tax cut period yields a statistically insignificant, close to zero, effect of executive ownership.

       In column 2, we report a similar specification, but this time we replace the increase in

dividends(-to-assets) with the increase in total payouts (dividends plus repurchases-to-assets) as

the dependent variable. We find that while greater executive share ownership translates into a

higher level of dividends, it does not lead to greater total payouts. These results suggest that

firms with executive-ownership-induced dividend initiations in response to the 2003 tax cut often

engaged in dividend substitution (i.e., often did not boost total payouts to shareholders as a result


                                                                                                       22
of the new dividend program). In unreported results, a Tobit model estimated over the pre-tax

cut period also yields a statistically insignificant, close to zero, effect of executive ownership on

total payouts. Thus, unlike the dividends result, the relation between executive holdings and

total payouts do not seem to change in 2003.

       In columns 3 and 4, the exercise is repeated for those firms that did not previously pay

dividends. We find a highly significant positive relation between the executive share ownership

variable and the amount of a dividend initiation. This relation does not, however, exist for total

payouts. Again, this is evidence that those firms that initiated dividends due to executive

ownership considerations did not always experience a comparable increase in total payouts.

       These findings on dividend substitution complement prior studies that support

substitution between dividends and share repurchases. Grullon and Michaely (2002) find higher

share repurchases by firms whose dividend increases are less than what would be predicted by a

model of firm-level dividend changes, and Dittmar (2000) has similar findings based on an

aggregate-level analysis. Our study, which benefits from the exogenous change in the tax rate on

dividends, provides evidence of payout substitution in the other direction. Specifically, we find

that shareholder taxes are a factor in the choice of payout mechanism and that when the tax rates

are more closely aligned, firms exhibit some substitutability between the two (i.e., increasing

dividends, at least in part, by reducing stock buybacks).



IV. Evidence from the Market Reaction to the Dividend Tax Cut Announcement

       We have shown that a firm’s ownership structure and the composition of its executive

holdings influenced the change in payout policy following the dividend tax cut. This raises the

possibility that, to the extent that the financial markets anticipated these responses, one might

expect a differential market response to the dividend tax cut based on these characteristics. Here,

we explore whether the market anticipated that at firms with large management stock holdings,

the tax cut would lead to a substitution of dividends for tax-advantaged share repurchases, and

thus perhaps raise the average tax burden on total distributions, at least for individual


                                                                                                    23
shareholders. This analysis can be thought of as an indirect test of whether the compensation

contract for executives results in agency problems between executives and shareholders.

       As with any event study, the power of the test depends on how accurately one can

identify the actual date on which the value-relevant information was released to the financial

markets. While an ideal event study has a very well defined event window, for legislative events

the release of information is often spread out over a long legislative process, including, at

minimum, an initial announcement of intent, committee hearings and votes, and votes by each

house of Congress prior to final Presidential approval. Despite the difficulties, there is a long

history of research examining the effect of legislative events on stock prices. 28 The legislative

process surrounding the 2003 dividend tax cut includes the possible release of information on

multiple dates. For purposes of this section, we focus on eight event windows, each consisting

of five trading days (a +/-2 day window around each event). These eight event windows are

based on the careful analysis of news events between December 2002 and the May 2003 passage

of the dividend tax cut conducted by Auerbach and Hassett (2005). These eight event windows,

combined spanning 40 trading days, are meant to capture the market reaction from the initial

announcement of the tax cut proposal by the White House through the final passage of the tax

cut in the House and Senate. 29

       The average stock return for our sample of firms, compounded over the eight event

windows, is 9.9 percent, with a median of 6.4 percent. Because a standard OLS regression of

returns will be sensitive to outliers (some sample firms had extreme performance over these 40

days as returns varied from a high of over 200% to a low of –44%), we estimate a robust

regression and a median regression.

       Given that the dividend tax cut applied only to individual investors, we have two

predictions for the stock price reaction of firms to the dividend tax cut. First, returns should be

higher for those firms with higher individual ownership (the group that gains from the reduction

in individual tax rates) and that also have historically paid more. This implies that the coefficient

on the interaction of individual ownership and the prior year dividends-to-asset ratio should be


                                                                                                     24
positive. This simply reflects the fact that, holding payout policy constant, the dividend tax cut

is more valuable for firms with higher levels of dividends (as opposed to share repurchases).

       Our second prediction is the most important for investigating the role of executive share

ownership. To the extent that the markets anticipated that some of the firms that initiated or

increased dividends were more likely to reduce share repurchases (less likely to boost total

payouts) in 2003 than in prior years, we would expect a negative coefficient on the interaction of

the level of individual ownership and executive holdings. As noted earlier, the overall tax

burden for the individual shareholder may have increased because despite equal statutory rates,

share repurchases are still tax-preferred because capital gains can be deferred. The intuition is as

follows: if a firm has a higher level of individual ownership, which leads shareholders to care

more about dividend taxes, and also has a higher level of executive ownership, which leads to a

greater likelihood of dividend substitution and greater individual tax burden, then relative to

other firms there should be a negative stock price reaction. In a sense, this interaction of

executive holdings with the share of individual ownership provides a way of quantifying the

potential agency issues between management and shareholders. If the tax cut induces executives

with wealth tied up in company stock to boost or initiate dividend payments, even though the

non-executive individual shareholders with far less concentrated portfolios would still prefer

receipt of capital gains via earnings retention or stock buybacks to dividends even after the tax

cut, this would be indicative of agency issues. Thus, the more negative is the coefficient on this

interaction term, the greater the agency costs.

       [Insert table VII here]

       As shown in table VII, the results are supportive of both hypotheses. Consistent with the

first hypothesis, we find that the interaction of a firm’s dividend-to-asset ratio in 2002 with the

individual investors’ share of ownership is positive and significant. It indicates that for a firm

with a dividend yield of 2%, a one-standard-deviation increase in individual ownership

corresponds to a 1.0 percentage point higher stock return during the eight tax-cut events. These

results are consistent with Perez-Gonzalez (2003) who finds that dividend valuation increased


                                                                                                      25
when dividends were less tax disadvantaged, but only for firms with large individual

shareholders.

        We also find evidence supportive of our second hypothesis. Specifically, the coefficient

on the interaction of executive stock ownership with the individual ownership share is significant

and negative. We find that for firms primarily owned by institutions, the executives’ stock

holdings do not influence how the market reacted to the tax cut (i.e., the executive ownership

coefficient is small in magnitude and insignificant). However, firms with higher individual

ownership and high executive ownership actually declined in value. Specifically, for a firm with

the average level of individual ownership, a one-standard-deviation increase in executive

ownership leads to a 1.7 percentage point lower return. 30 This is consistent with the view that

the markets anticipated the potential agency conflicts between executives and other individual

shareholders. Further, this negative price reaction is suggestive that, at least for some firms, the

compensation contract in place for top executives may not lead to optimal payout policy

decisions from the shareholders’ perspective under a lower dividend-tax regime. The right panel

of table VII repeats these specifications using returns in excess of Fama-French benchmarks and

the results are nearly identical.

        These results are suggestive of potential agency problems within some firms. Ex post,

we found that firms whose executives had large ownership shares were more apt to increase or

initiate dividends, often by at least partial substitution with share repurchases. Even after the tax

cut, retained earnings and share repurchases, which distribute capital gains, are likely taxed

somewhat less heavily than dividends since the gains are taxed on a realization basis. Thus, at

least in part, the market seems to have capitalized the likely payout-policy response by firms

based on the incentives provided by executives’ share ownership.


V. Summary and Conclusions

        The 2003 tax cut provides a unique laboratory to test how a large reduction in the

individual dividend tax rate influences corporate payout policy. We provide evidence that top


                                                                                                   26
executive holdings of company stock significantly influence a firm’s choice of payouts. We find

that top executive holdings of company stock have a substantial impact on whether a firm

increased or initiated dividends in response to the reduction in the tax-cost of paying dividends.

       Unlike past studies in this area that identify results from cross-sectional correlations, the

unexpected and exogenous change in the after-tax value of dividends allows us to directly

address the usual criticism that a cross-sectional relation between executive holdings and payout

policy may simply reflect unobservable characteristics, such as managerial quality or corporate

governance, that generate both option compensation and low dividends.

       We find that in 2003, especially in the months following the passage of the May tax cut, a

firm was much more likely to increase dividends if the executives owned a larger fraction of the

outstanding shares. This correlation between executive ownership and payout policy is

significantly different in 2003 than in prior years. In contrast, while other factors, such as cash

flow, leverage, past firm performance, executive stock option holdings, and institutional

ownership are important determinants of dividend policy in general, their effect on dividend

policy did not change in 2003. Because only the effect of executive stock holdings changed

significantly with the change in tax regime, we interpret this as strong evidence of a tax effect

upon payout policy.

       Our work also indicates that, at least for dividend initiations, taxes are a factor in the

choice of dividends versus share repurchases and that when tax rates are more closely aligned,

firms exhibit some substitutability between the two. We also provide evidence that the markets

may have at least partially anticipated these effects, leading to differential stock price responses

to key events leading up to the passage of the tax cut.

       This paper raises a particularly interesting avenue for future research. The main finding

of this paper is that personal financial incentives for executives clearly matter for firm payout

behavior. This finding is consistent with a standard agency theory perspective that, rather than

operating the firm solely in the best interests of shareholders who may still prefer share

repurchases or earnings retention to dividends even after the tax cut, managers are inclined to


                                                                                                      27
also incorporate their own financial incentives in corporate decisions. The results in this paper,

particularly those concerning the stock price reaction to the tax cut, suggest there may be an

agency problem between management and outside shareholders that should be considered when

structuring management compensation contracts. The relation between firm actions (e.g., payout

policy, capital structure, investment decisions, etc.) and the incentives provided by executive

holdings to undertake these actions, and whether the compensation package is structured a priori

by the firm to encourage these reactions by managers remains an interesting area for further

research.




                                                                                                  28
References

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael Weisbach, 2004, The Cash Flow Sensitivity of
      Cash, Journal of Finance 59, 1777-1804.
Amromin, Gene, Paul Harrison, and Steve Sharpe, 2005, How Did the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
     Affect Stock Prices? FEDS Working Paper 2005-61.
Auerbach, Alan, and Kevin Hassett, 2005, The 2003 Dividend Tax Cuts and the Value of the
      Firm: An Event Study, NBER Working Paper 11449.
Baker, George, and Brian Hall, 2004, CEO Incentives and Firm Size, Journal of Labor
       Economics 22 (4), 767-798.
Bettis, Carr, John Bizjak, and Michael Lemmon, 2001, Managerial Ownership, Incentive
        Contracting, and the Use of Zero-Cost Collars and Equity Swaps by Corporate Insiders,
        Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36 (3), 345-370.
Blouin, Jennifer, Jana Raedy, and Douglas Shackelford, 2004, The Initial Impact of the 2003
       Reduction in the Dividend Tax Rate, unpublished working paper.
Boyle, Glenn, and Graeme Guthrie, 2003, Investment, Uncertainty and Liquidity, Journal of
       Finance 58, 2143-2166.
Brav, Alon, John Graham, Campbell Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Payout Policy in the 21st
       Century, Journal of Financial Economics 77 (3), 483-527.
Brown, Jeffrey, David Cummins, Christopher Lewis, and Ran Wei, 2004, An Empirical
      Analysis of the Economic Impact of Federal Terrorism Reinsurance, The Journal of
      Monetary Economics 51, 861-898.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez, 2005, Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from
       the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 791-833.
Core, John, and Wayne Guay, 1999, The Use of Equity Grants to Manage Optimal Equity
       Incentive Levels, Journal of Accounting and Economics 28, 151-184.
Cornett-Millon, Marcia, and Hassan Tehranian, 1990, An Examination of the Impact of the
       Garn-St. Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982 on Commercial Banks and Savings
       and Loans, Journal of Finance 45, 95-111.
Cutler, David, 1988, Tax Reform and the Stock Market: An Asset Price Approach, American
        Economic Review 78, 1107-1117.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas Skinner, 2000, Special Dividends and the
     Evolution of Dividend Signaling, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 309-354.
Dittmar, Amy, 2000, Why do Firms Repurchase Stock?, Journal of Business 73, 321-356.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The Cross Section of Expected Returns, Journal of
      Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2001, Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm
      Characteristics of Lower Propensity to Pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-44.



                                                                                              29
Fenn, George, and Nellie Liang, 2001, Corporate Payout Policy and Managerial Stock Incentives,
       Journal of Financial Economics 60, 45-72.
Gillan, Stuart, and Laura Starks, 1998, A Survey of Shareholder Activism: Motivation and
        Empirical Evidence, Contemporary Finance Digest 2 (3), 10-34.
Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, Share Repurchases, and the Substitution
       Hypothesis, Journal of Finance 57, 1649-1684.
Jagannathan, Murali, Clifford Stephens, and Michael Weisbach, 2000, Financial Flexibility and
       the Choice Between Dividends and Share Repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics
       57, 355-384.
James, Christopher, 1983, An Analysis of Intra-Industry Differences in the Effect of Regulation:
       The Case of Deposit Rate Ceilings, Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 417-432.
Jensen, Michael, 1986, Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,
       American Economic Review 76 (2), 323-329.
Jolls, Christine, 1998, Stock Repurchases and Incentive Compensation, NBER Working Paper
        6467.
Julio, Brandon, and David Ikenberry, 2005, Reappearing Dividends, Journal of Applied
        Corporate Finance, forthcoming.
Kahle, Kathleen, 2002, When a Buyback isn’t a Buyback: Open-market Repurchases and
       Employee Options, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 235-261.
Lambert, Richard, William Lanen and David Larcker, 1989, Executive Stock Option Plans and
      Corporate Dividend Policy, Journal of Financial Quantitative Analysis 24, 409-425.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distributions of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained
       Earnings, and Taxes, American Economic Review 46, 96-114.
Murphy, Kevin, 1999, Executive Compensation, in Ashenfelter, O., Card, D., (Eds.), Handbook
      of Labor Economics, Vol. 3B, North Holland, Amsterdam.
Nam, Jouahn, Jun Wang, and Ge Zhang, 2004, The Impact of Dividend Tax Cut and Managerial
      Stock Holdings on Firm’s Dividend Policy, Working paper, Lubin School of Business,
      Pace University.
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco, 2003, Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence from U.S. Tax
       Reforms, working paper, Columbia University.
Schumann, Laurence, 1988, State Regulation of Takeovers and Shareholder Wealth: The Case of
      New York’s 1985 Takeover Statutes, RAND Journal of Economics 19, 557-567.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining Investor Preference for Cash Dividends,
       Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253–282.
Weisbenner, Scott, 2000, Corporate Share Repurchases in the Mid-1990s: What Role Do Stock
      Options Play? Working Paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.




                                                                                              30
Table I. Summary Statistics for Dividend Policy, Stock and Option Holdings, and Firm
Characteristics, S&P 1500 Sample
The table provides summary statistics of changes in dividend policy during 2002 and 2003 for the firms in
Execucomp (roughly the S&P 1500). A dividend increase is defined as a rise in ordinary dividends per share
(adjusted for stock splits), based on dividend announcements in CRSP. The table also provides summary statistics,
as of the end of 2002, on stock and option holdings of a firm’s top five executives and various firm financial
characteristics. Unless stated otherwise, variables are measured in percent.

                                                                                                25th to 75th
                                                          Mean              Median
                                                                                                percentile
Dividend Policy (2002 and 2003)

Probability Increase Dividends in 2003                     28.7               0.0                0 .0 – 100

Probability Increase Dividends in 2002                     22.0               0.0                0.0 – 0.0

Probability Initiate Dividends in 2003                      5.9               0.0                0.0 – 0.0

Probability Initiate Dividends in 2002                      1.2               0.0                0.0 – 0.0

Stock Holdings (end of 2002)
Percent of Shares Held by Top Five
                                                            3.8               0.8                0.3 – 3.2
Executives
Value of Stock Held by Top Executives ($M)                142.1              11.7                3.3 – 40.0

Other Variables (end of 2002)

Options Held by Top Five Executives
                                                            3.2               2.6                1.3 – 4.4
Normalized by Shares Outstanding

Market-to-Book Ratio                                        1.6               1.3                1.1 – 1.8

Free Cash Flow / Assets                                     6.3               7.1                2.5 – 11.9

Cash on Hand / Assets                                      14.9               7.2                2.3 – 21.9

Debt / Assets                                              24.0              22.4                6.1 – 36.0

Five-Year Stock Return                                     -1.9               0.8               -10.0 – 9.3
Monthly Stock Return Volatility
                                                           14.4              11.9                8.6 – 18.0
(past 24 months)




                                                                                                               31
Table II. Regression of Likelihood of Dividend Increase on Executive Stock Holdings and
Firm Characteristics, Comparison of 2003 with Earlier Years

The table presents linear model (the left panel) and Probit model (the right panel) regressions of
whether a firm increases dividends in 2003 and in earlier years. A dividend increase is defined
as a rise in ordinary dividends per share (adjusted for stock splits) based on dividend
announcements in CRSP. The dependent variable is measured in percentage points, while the
explanatory variables are expressed as raw ratios (i.e., not in percentage points), unless stated
otherwise. Thus, the dependent variable in this table takes on values of either 0 (did not increase
dividends) or 100 (did increase dividends). The likelihood of a dividend increase is related to the
top five executive stock and options (both normalized by total firm shares outstanding) as well as
the firm’s market-to-book ratio, free cash flow-to-assets (where free cash flow is defined as
operating income before depreciation minus capital expenditures), cash on hand-to-assets, debt-
to-assets (where debt is long-term debt), past five-year stock return, monthly stock volatility
(based on the past 24 months), log of market value, firm age indicator variables (1-5, 6-10, 11-
15, 16-20, and 21 or more years), and industry indicator variables. The top five executive stock
and option variables are obtained from Execucomp, the firm financial characteristics are
obtained from Compustat, and the past five-year stock return and monthly stock volatility are
obtained from CRSP. The table presents regressions of whether a firm increases dividends in the
2003 (leftmost column of each panel), the 1993-2002 period pooled (middle column of each
panel), and the difference between the coefficients over the two time periods (rightmost column
of each panel). Specifically, a regression is estimated across the pooled sample 1993-2003, with
an indicator variable for 2003 interacted with all the explanatory variables (interaction terms
shown in far right column) to test whether the effect of a variable on the likelihood of a dividend
increase is different in 2003 relative to earlier years (i.e., the period 1993-2002). Marginal
effects evaluated at the sample mean are presented for the Probit model. The standard errors,
given in parentheses, account for heteroskedasticity (i.e., robust standard errors), and, in the
pooled regressions, correlation across observations of the same firm over time (i.e., clustering on
firm).




                                                                                                32
Table II. Regression of Likelihood of Dividend Increase on Executive Stock Holdings and
Firm Characteristics, Comparison of 2003 with Earlier Years (continued)

                                                                                   Marginal Effects from
                                                       OLS
                                                                                      Probit Model
                                                         1993-2003                           1993-2003
                                                       Sample Pooled                       Sample Pooled
                                                                      2003                                    2003
                                                       1993-                                  1993-
                                           2003        2002
                                                                   relative to    2003        2002
                                                                                                           relative to
                                                                   1993-2002                               1993-2002
Fraction of Shares Held by                 54.0 ***      6.3         47.7 ***      57.4 ***    11.2            56.3 ***
Top Five Executives                      (15.5)        (8.5)       (15.3)        (15.7)        (9.6)         (17.3)
Options Held by Top Five
                                          -96.0 **    -103.0 ***    7.0          -161.9 ***   -171.8 *** -18.6
Executives Normalized by
                                         (42.4)        (25.7)    (42.4)           (57.2)       (44.6)    (67.3)
Shares Outstanding
                                            0.8          0.1           0.7         -6.1 ***     -2.9 ***        -4.3 *
Market-to-Book Ratio
                                          (1.5)        (0.5)         (1.4)        (1.9)        (0.8)           (2.3)

                                           11.2        22.6 *** -11.3             107.7 ***     96.0 ***   30.7
Free Cash Flow / Assets
                                         (10.7)        (6.8)    (10.2)           (23.0)       (10.2)     (29.4)

                                           -7.1        -13.5 ***       6.5        -13.9        -29.3 ***   12.9
Cash on Hand / Assets
                                          (6.9)         (5.2)        (7.0)         (8.8)        (8.0)    (10.4)

                                           -8.7        -12.4 ***       3.6        -14.5 **     -17.7 ***         0.6
Debt / Assets
                                          (5.6)         (4.1)        (5.7)         (6.8)        (5.2)          (8.2)

                                          16.8 **      15.1 ***        1.7        32.4 ***     38.2 ***   -0.1
Past Five-Year Stock Return
                                          (7.4)        (3.5)         (7.6)        (8.9)        (4.5)    (11.0)

                                         -120.6 ***   -121.8 ***    1.1          -184.6 ***   -262.8 ***   45.7
Monthly Stock Volatility
                                          (16.9)       (12.1)    (18.4)           (31.8)       (23.7)    (44.8)

                                            4.2 ***      3.9 ***       0.3          4.3 ***      3.3 ***         1.7
Log (Market Value)
                                          (0.9)        (0.6)         (0.9)        (0.9)        (0.7)           (1.1)


p-value for joint test of significance     0.00 ***     0.00 ***       0.85        0.00 ***     0.00 ***       0.53
of non-exec ownership coefficients

Firm Age and Industry Effects?              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes

Adjusted R2                                0.203               0.219              0.262                0.247

Number of Observations                     1,356            12,618                1,356             12,618
*** **      *
  , , and denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                       33
Table III. Examination of Timing of Relation Between Executive Ownership and Dividend Increases and Initiations
The table presents linear regressions of whether a firm increases dividends in 2003. A dividend increase is defined as a rise in ordinary dividends per share
(adjusted for stock splits) based on dividend announcements in CRSP. These regressions are estimated over two pre-tax cut periods (1993-2002 pooled and
2002), the full 2003 year, the portion of 2003 prior to the signing of the dividend tax cut on May 23, and the portion of 2003 after the tax cut was signed (after
May 23). The analysis is done separately for all firms (row 1), firms that did not pay dividends in the prior year and thus for whom a dividend increase
represents an initiation (row 2), and firms that paid dividends in the prior year (rows 3 and 4). The dependent variable is measured in percentage points, while
the explanatory variables are expressed as raw ratios (i.e., not in percentage points), unless stated otherwise. Thus, the dependent variable in this table takes on
values of either 0 (did not increase dividends) or 100 (did increase dividends). Only the coefficients on the stock holdings of the top five executives (normalized
by total firm shares outstanding) are reported. Other variables included in the regression, but not reported, are the stock options held by top executives, market-
to-book ratio, free cash flow-to-assets, cash on hand-to-assets, debt-to-assets, past five-year stock return, monthly stock volatility, log of market value, and firm
age and industry indicator variables (as in the table II regressions). The standard errors, given in parentheses, account for heteroskedasticity (i.e., robust standard
errors), and, in the pooled regressions, correlation across observations of the same firm over time, i.e., clustering on firm.

                                                   Pre-2003 Dividend Tax Cut                                                  2003
                                                                                                                          Portion Prior            Portion After
                                                  1993 - 2002
                                                                               2002                 Full Year              to Tax Cut                Tax Cut
                                                   (pooled)
LHS Variable                                                                                                             Signed May 23            Signed May 23

                                                          6.3                    7.1                   54.0 ***                  18.0                   43.3 ***
Probability Increase Dividends
                                                        (8.5)                 (12.0)                 (15.5)                    (12.1)                 (15.0)


                                                          6.2                    -3.6                  37.8 **                     1.3                  37.1 **
Probability Initiate Dividends
                                                        (3.9)                   (3.2)                (15.6)                      (4.2)                (15.5)


Probability Increase Dividends                          13.3                    36.0                   72.6 ***                  40.6                   49.0 *
given already pay dividends                           (10.1)                  (26.0)                 (22.0)                    (25.3)                 (28.1)

Probability Increase Dividends by
                                                         12.9 ***               -1.3                   64.9 ***                  34.4                   37.1 *
at least 25% given already pay
                                                        (5.1)                 (14.0)                 (22.7)                    (22.5)                 (22.5)
dividends
*** **
   , , and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                    34
Table IV. Relation Between Likelihood of Dividend Increases and Initiations and Holdings of Various Shareholders,
Comparison of 2003 with Earlier Years
The table presents linear regressions of whether a firm increases dividends in the 2003 (leftmost column of each panel), the 1993-2002 period pooled (middle
column of each panel), and the difference between the coefficients over the two time periods (rightmost column of each panel). Specifically, a regression is
estimated across the pooled sample 1993-2003, with an indicator variable for 2003 interacted with all the explanatory variables (interaction terms shown in far
right column) to test whether the effect of a variable on the likelihood of a dividend increase is different in 2003 relative to earlier years (i.e., the period 1993-
2002). Regressions are estimated for all firms in the left panel and the subset of firms that did not pay dividends over the previous year in the right panel (for
which an increase represents an initiation). A dividend increase is defined as a rise in ordinary dividends per share (adjusted for stock splits) based on dividend
announcements in CRSP. The dependent variable is measured in percentage points, while the explanatory variables are expressed as raw ratios (i.e., not in
percentage points), unless stated otherwise. Thus, the dependent variable in this table takes on values of either 0 (did not increase dividends) or 100 (did increase
dividends). Relative to table II, these specifications add the fraction of shares held by individuals directly (outside of the top executives) and by non-mutual fund
institutions. Thus, in this case, the omitted category is the fraction of shares held by mutual funds. The institutional ownership data is obtained from CDA
Spectrum. Individual ownership is defined as the fraction of shares that remains after accounting for executive and institutional ownership. Only the coefficients
on the stock holdings of the top five executives (normalized by total firm shares outstanding) and the ownership of non-executive individuals and non-mutual
fund institutions are reported. Other variables included in the regression, but not reported, are the stock options held by top executives, market-to-book ratio, free
cash flow-to-assets, cash on hand-to-assets, debt-to-assets, past five-year stock return, monthly stock volatility, log of market value, and firm age and industry
indicator variables (as in the table II regressions). The standard errors, given in parentheses, account for heteroskedasticity (i.e., robust standard errors), and, in
the pooled regressions, correlation across observations of the same firm over time (i.e., clustering on firm).

                                                                   All Dividend Increases                                  Dividend Initiations
                                                                                1993-2003                                             1993-2003
                                                                              Sample Pooled                                         Sample Pooled
                                                                            1993-     2003 relative                               1993-      2003 relative
                                                              2003                                                    2003
                                                                            2002     to 1993-2002                                 2002       to 1993-2002
Fraction of Shares Held by Top Five                            98.2 ***            50.8 ***        47.4 **             39.7 **              6.3             33.4 *
Executives                                                   (20.9)              (11.8)          (20.2)              (18.4)               (4.1)           (18.7)

Fraction of Shares Held By Individuals                         59.5 ***            59.4 ***         0.1                 3.0                 0.9              2.1
Directly (excluding Top Executives)                          (13.5)               (7.8)          (13.3)              (12.3)               (1.8)           (12.2)

Fraction of Shares Held by                                     74.3 ***            66.2 ***         8.1                12.0                 3.2              8.8
Non-Mutual Fund Institutions                                 (18.7)              (10.8)          (18.3)              (15.4)               (2.9)           (15.3)

Adjusted R2                                       0.218                   0.232                                      0.066                        0.060
Number of Observations                            1,245                 12,087                                        605                         4,491
*** **    *
   , , and denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                     35
Table V. Payout Substitution? Change in Share Repurchases and Total Payouts for Various Firms
The table summarizes payout policy for firms that increase dividends per share, previous non-dividend payers that initiate dividends, and firms that do not
increase dividends. Data on dividends and share repurchases paid (and thus total payouts) are obtained from Compustat. The likelihood of a payout and the
amount of the payout are in percentage points.


                                                                                  Likelihood of Payout Policy

                                                                                  Decrease Repurchases given
                                                Repurchased Shares                                                               Increase Total Payouts
                                                                                    Repurchased Last Year
                                                   Last Year?                                                                    (i.e., PAY/ASSET ↑)?
                                                                                     (i.e., RP/ASSET ↓)?
                                         1993-                                    1993-                                    1993-
Sample                                                    2002         2003                        2002         2003                         2002         2003
                                         2002                                     2002                                     2002
Firm Increases Dividends
                                           65              71           67          55              60           64          56              53            52
(All Firms)
     Firm Initiates Dividends              38              54           68          56              57           78          89              92           66

Firm Does Not Increase Div.                44              51           50          63             58            64          30               37          30


                                                                       Payout Policy the Year of the Dividend Initiation
                                                                                           Change in                                 Change in
                                                 Dividend / Assets
                                                                                   (Share Repurchase / Assets)                (Total Payouts / Assets)
                                       Mean        25th     Median       75th    Mean       25th     Median      75th     Mean        25th     Median      75th

1993-2002 Dividend Initiators            3.1       0.2           0.6     1.3      1.4       0.0           0.0    0.3       4.5        0.2           0.7    2.8

2003 Dividend Initiators                 2.2       0.4           0.8     1.5      -1.6      -3.2         -0.1    0.2       0.6       -1.5           0.4    1.8

Bold indicates statistic in earlier period (i.e., 2002 or 1993-2002) is different from comparable 2003 statistic at the 5% level.



                                                                                                                                                                36
Table VI. Amount of Increase in Dividends and Total Payouts in 2003, Tobit Model
The table presents estimated coefficients from a Tobit model for both the amount of the increase in dividends and
the amount of the increase in total payouts (dividends plus share repurchases), both normalized by total assets. For
firms whose dividends-to-assets or total payouts-to-assets fell, the amount of the increase is set to zero. The left
panel focuses on the full sample of firms, while the right panel focuses on the subsample of firms that did not pay
dividends in 2002 (and hence an increase in dividends represents a dividend initiation). Data on dividends and share
repurchases (and hence total payouts) paid during the year are obtained from Compustat. Regressions also include
indicator variables for the age of the firm. Standard errors are given in parentheses.


                                                     Tobit Model of Increase in Dividends/Assets
                                                           and Total Payouts/Assets in 2003

                                                         All Firms               No Dividend in 2002 Firms
                                                                    Max                                 Max
                                                  Max                              Increase in
                                                                 (Change in                          (Change in
                                              (Change in                          Div / Assets in
                                                                Total Payout /                      Total Payout /
                                            Div / Assets, 0)                           2003
                                                                  Assets, 0)                          Assets, 0)
Fraction of Shares Held by Top Five                4.4 ***            1.0              21.4 ***          2.3
Executives                                       (1.4)              (2.4)             (6.2)            (4.3)
Options Held by Top Five Execs                  -11.8 **              6.6             -42.0             13.2
Normalized by Shares Outstanding                (5.6)               (8.1)            (26.4)           (13.8)
                                                  -0.9 ***           -0.1              -3.5 ***         -0.3
Market-to-Book Ratio
                                                 (0.2)              (0.3)             (1.1)            (0.6)
                                                  11.7 ***           13.9 ***          44.9 ***         15.4 ***
Free Cash Flow / Assets
                                                 (2.0)              (2.8)            (10.2)            (4.8)
                                                   3.6 ***            4.9 ***          14.3 ***          3.3
Cash on Hand / Assets
                                                 (0.9)              (1.4)             (3.8)            (2.4)
                                                   0.2               -2.7 **            0.1             -8.1
Debt / Assets
                                                 (0.7)              (1.2)             (3.7)            (2.3)
                                                  -0.6               -1.6              -7.1             -3.8
Past Five-Year Return
                                                 (1.0)              (1.5)             (4.7)            (2.6)
                                                -12.4 ***            -9.0 **          -37.5 ***        -12.9 **
Monthly Stock Volatility
                                                (2.7)               (3.7)            (12.4)            (6.4)
                                                   0.2                0.2               1.5 ***          0.9 ***
Log (Market Value)
                                                 (0.1)              (0.2)             (0.6)            (0.3)
Pseudo R2                                0.053          0.022             0.118                         0.031
Number of Observations                   1,319          1,169              683                           577
*** **    *
   , , and denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                         37
Table VII. Cumulative Stock Return over Announcement of Dividend Tax Cut Proposal
by White House, Introduction of Bill in Congress, and Final Package of Tax Cut—Relation
with Dividend Payout Policy in 2002, Individual Ownership, and Executive Holdings
The table reports regressions of the compounded stock returns over the eight event windows (40 trading days)
surrounding the proposal and passage of the 2003 dividend tax cut upon the stock holdings of the top five executives
(normalized by total firm shares outstanding), the stock options held by top executives (normalized by total firm
shares outstanding), the share of individual ownership in the firm, and prior firm dividend policy. We focus on eight
event windows, each consisting of five trading days (a +/-2 day window around each event), that were first used by
Auerbach and Hassett (2005). We report robust regression and median regression results. The left panel reports
results using raw returns, while the right panel reports results using excess returns. To calculate the excess returns
over the 40 days, we subtract from the compounded raw returns over the eight event windows the appropriate Fama-
French (1992) benchmark returns, compounded over these eight event windows, formed according to two size and
three book-to-market groupings. Returns are expressed in percentage points. Standard errors are given in
parentheses.
                                                      Dependent Variable =
                                     Cumulative Return Over the Eight Five-Day Windows
                                                                    Excess Return Relative to
                                           Raw Return                Fama-French Size and
                                                                   Book-to-Market Portfolios
                                    Robust          Median          Robust           Median
                                   Regression      Regression     Regression       Regression
Individual Investors’                    0.9                     1.2                0.2                    1.2
Share of Ownership                     (3.4)                   (3.7)              (3.5)                  (3.7)
Executive Shares /                       0.1                    -3.8               -2.0                   -6.1
Firm Shares                            (7.6)                   (7.9)              (7.7)                  (7.8)
(Executive Shares /
                                      -81.4 **                 -60.4 *            -84.4 **              -52.7
Firm Shares) *
                                     (35.6)                   (36.4)             (36.1)                (35.8)
Individual Share
Executive Options /                    -0.3                      5.4               -7.4                 -10.2
Firm Shares                          (21.7)                   (23.2)             (21.9)                (22.7)
(Executive Options /
                                        6.0                     -6.9              -13.1                  30.5
Firm Shares) *
                                     (62.4)                   (66.8)             (63.2)                (66.1)
Individual Share
                                     -139.4 **              -123.7 *            -104.9 *               -109.3 *
Dividend/Asset 2002
                                     (60.2)                 (64.9)              (61.0)                 (64.4)
Dividend/Asset *                      271.7 *                230.3               266.8 *                259.6 *
Individual Share                    (152.4)                (155.2)             (154.7)                (154.0)
                                 7.1 ***             6.9 ***          0.1                                 -0.3
Constant
                               (1.1)               (1.2)            (1.1)                                (1.2)
                   2
Adjusted / Pseudo R             NA                0.007              NA                                 0.007
Number of observations         1,477              1,477             1,477                               1,477
*** **     *
   , , and denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                         38
1
    While Julio and Ikenberry (2005) have argued that the up-tick in dividend activity started before the 2003 tax cut,

Chetty and Saez (2005) subsequently showed that this result was due to issues with sample construction, and that the

tax cut was indeed responsible for an increase in dividend activity in 2003.
2
    The 2003 tax change also reduced the top marginal tax rate on ordinary income from 38.6% to 35%, and reduced

the statutory long-term capital gains tax rate from 20% to 15%. Repurchases still are tax-preferred because, though

subject to the same rate as dividends, the tax is deferred until the capital gains are realized at the time the shares are

sold (and may go untaxed through basis step-up at death). However, this preference shrunk substantially with the

dividend tax cut.
3
    While executives are not allowed to short their own company stock, Bettis, Bizjak, and Lemmon (2001) show that

some executives hedge the idiosyncratic risk of their portfolios through collars and equity swaps. Managers also

could pre-commit to a regular pattern of stock sales to try to avoid sending a negative signal to the market when

their stock is sold. To the extent any of these diversification strategies occur will make it more difficult to find a

relation between executive ownership and the likelihood of a dividend increase in 2003.
4
    The Nam, Wang and Zhang (2004) is much more limited in scope, in that it examines only S&P 1500 firms with

ongoing dividend programs and thus misses the important effects of the tax cut on dividend initiations.
5
    Auerbach and Hassett (2005) and Amromin, Harrison, and Sharpe (2005) find that high dividend-paying stocks

earned excess returns of a few percentage points around the period of the tax cut. Neither of these two studies,

however, examined the firm-level variation in excess returns.
6
    In the regressions, the samples contain about 1,350 firms each year because roughly 350 firms are dropped each

year due to missing values for some explanatory variables.
7
    We do not examine the previous dividend tax rate cut in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 for three reasons. First, we

lack the extensive data on the stock ownership of top executives during this time period. Second, this act included

numerous other changes in the relative tax treatment of corporate and individual income that would make it difficult

to isolate the effect of the dividend tax cut. Third, the 1986 Act was the outcome of a much longer political and

legislative process, making it less plausible that the 1986 tax cut was a surprise to the market.
8
    Auerbach and Hassett (2005) provide a very careful chronology of the events leading to the tax cut and confirm

that there was very little, if any, information released prior to the announcement of the tax cut.




                                                            39
9
    Unless stated otherwise, when referring to dividend increases we include both initiations as well as increases for

prior dividend payers. In table III we will analyze initiations as well as increases for prior dividend payers

separately.
10
     Industry groups are as follows: mining, oil and gas, construction, food, basic materials, biotech/medical,

manufacturing, transportation, telecom, utilities, retail/wholesale trade, financial, technology, and other.
11
     Throughout the tables, our dependent variable is measured in percentage points, while our explanatory variables

are expressed as raw ratios (i.e., not in percentage points).
12
     The first year we can relate a change in dividend payouts to executive holdings at the prior year-end is 1993

because the Execomp database starts in 1992.
13
     Note that, unlike the linear probability model, the marginal effects of 1993 to 2002 and 2003 separately need not

add up to the marginal effect over the entire period 1993 to 2003. This is because in a non-linear model, the

marginal effects are evaluated at the sample means, which themselves differ slightly in the different time periods.
14
     The negative relation with cash on hand likely reflects that firms with greater needs to hold cash balances, because

of higher transaction costs or precautionary demands (Boyle and Guthrie (2003), Almeida, Campello and Weisbach

(2004)) are less likely to commit to paying or increasing dividends. In addition, firms with greater debt ratios, and

likely higher claims from interest expense on their earnings, are less likely to pay dividends as well. Leverage may

also substitute for dividends as a way to reduce agency problems (Jensen, 1986).
15
     As with the results of Table 2, the magnitude of the marginal effect of executive share ownership from a Probit

model is nearly identical to that of the linear probability model.
16
     These coefficient estimates are available from the authors by request.
17
     While 53.5% of prior dividend payers increased ordinary dividends per share in 2003, only 13.8% increased them

by more than 25% over their prior level. For comparison, in 2002, while 43.3% of prior dividend payers increased

dividends, only 5.5% increased them by more than 25% over their prior level. Thus, most of the rise in dividend

increases among dividend payers following the tax cut seems to be concentrated among the larger increases.
18
     While not all stocks held by individuals are in taxable accounts (e.g., some stocks are owned through tax deferred

accounts such as IRAs), the fraction of direct stock ownership held in taxable accounts is higher than the fraction of

mutual fund assets held in taxable accounts.




                                                            40
19
     In contrast to the results from Table II where the omitted group was total non-executive ownership, here the

omitted group is mutual funds. As such, the coefficient on executive ownership during the pre tax cut period (1993

to 2002) changes from 6.3 to 50.8. What matters for our hypothesis, however, is that the difference in the executive

ownership coefficient for 2003 versus earlier years is nearly identical in each specification.
20
     This ongoing demand for dividends by individuals is consistent with Shefrin and Statman (1984) who argue that

individuals may prefer dividends despite their tax disadvantage because it helps them to solve a self-control problem.

That is, by committing to consume only out of dividends, investors avoid deciding how many shares to sell and how

much to consume, and thus commit themselves not to consume too much.
21
     Because total options outstanding, and hence the difference between total and top executive option holdings, had

to be collected by hand, we collected these data for year-end 2001 and 2002, and related non-executive options,

along with other variables, to dividend changes in the next year. Thus, our comparison of 2003 with earlier years is

limited to a comparison of 2003 with 2002 when this variable is included in the regression. The coefficient on the

variable non-executive options-to-total firm shares outstanding is significantly negative in both years (-36.4 in 2002

and -50.7 in 2003), with the difference in coefficients statistically insignificant.
22
     In the interest of space, we do not report the coefficients from all the specification checks. These results, and

others, are available from the authors upon request.
23
     This large special dividend by Microsoft does not fall within our sample period.
24
     We also estimated a specification using another possible definition of a “dividend increase,” namely an increase in

the amount of dividends paid relative to firm size (e.g., an increase in the dividends-to-assets ratio), and found

similar results. For example, the coefficient on executive share ownership is 44.8 in 2003, with a difference of 42.4

between the 2003 coefficient and that from the pre-tax cut period 1993-2002.
25
     We report results for the Execucomp sample (roughly the S&P 1500). An analysis of all firms in Compsutat

yields qualitatively similar results.
26
     It is possible that an increase in dividends per share need not increase the dividends-to-assets ratio, and thus not

increase total payouts. To address this possibility, we also redefined a “dividend increase” as an increase in the

amount of dividends paid relative to firm size (i.e., an increase in the dividends-to-assets ratio). With this alternative

definition, we find the following patterns in payout policy for those firms that boosted dividends-to-assets: (i) the

fraction of dividend increasers in 2003 that had previously repurchased shares (62%) was identical to that of the


                                                             41
prior decade; (ii) among those that had repurchased shares in 2002, 65% reduced repurchases in 2003 while only

53% did in the prior decade, a statistically significant difference; (iii) the net result is that 66% of dividend

increasers actually increased total payouts in 2003, significantly less than the 73% over the prior pre-tax period.

Note that for dividend initiations, the two measures of a “dividend increase” are identical.
27
     We also compared share repurchases and payouts during the year a firm increased dividends to the firm’s average

level of dividends and share repurchases over the past three years (as opposed to just the prior year). The results

regarding dividend substitution are very similar. For example, only 58% of dividend-initiators in 2003 increased

total payouts above their average payout-to-assets ratio over the past three years (79% of dividend-initiators over the

period 1993 to 2002 increased payouts relative to the prior three-year average).
28
     Some examples include the effect of the 1986 tax reform act (Cutler (1988)), financial services deregulation

(James, 1983; Cornett and Tehranian, 1990), regulation of the market for corporate takeovers (Schumann (1988)),

and the passage of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (Brown, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei (2004)).
29
     By using all eight event windows, we are taking the conservative approach in that we are biasing ourselves against

finding a significant effect. This is because a few of the 8 events have been shown by Auerbach and Hassett to be

less informative to the market than the others. By restricting ourselves to the more salient news days, our results are

even more highly significant.
30
     However, the interaction of the individual ownership share with the amount of executive stock options had no

effect on the market reaction to the tax cut (recall that the effect of dividends on stock option value did not change

with the tax cut, thus whether the executives had a lot of stock options would not lead to a change in payout policy

after the tax cut relative to earlier years, as confirmed in our earlier dividend policy regressions).




                                                            42
