NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ASSIGNMENT THEORY OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Volker Nocke
Stephen Yeaple
Working Paper 11003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11003
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the National Science Foundation (grant SES0422778) and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. We would like to thank seminar
audiences at the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, Michigan State University, the University
of Michigan, the University of Texas-Austin, Pennsylvania State University, the 2004 Winter Meeting of the
NBER ITI program (Stanford), and the 2004 International Economics Conference at UC Santa Cruz. The
statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. Multinational Corporations reported in this study was conducted
at the International Investment Division, U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, under arrangement that
maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Views expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment
Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 11003
December 2004
JEL No. F12, F14, F23, L11
ABSTRACT
We develop an assignment theory to analyze the volume and composition of foreign direct
investment (FDI). Firms conduct FDI by either engaging in greenfield investment or in cross-border
acquisitions. Cross-border acquisitions involve firms trading heterogeneous corporate assets to
exploit complementarities, while greenfield FDI involves building a new plant in the foreign market.
In equilibrium, greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions co-exist, but the composition of FDI
between these modes varies with firm and country characteristics. Firms engaging in greenfield
investment are systematically more efficient than those engaging in cross-border acquisitions.
Furthermore, most FDI takes the form of cross-border acquisitions when factor price differences
between countries are small, while greenfield investment plays a more important role for FDI from
high-wage into low-wage countries. These results capture important features of the data.
Volker Nocke
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
nocke@econ.upenn.edu
Stephen Yeaple
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
snyeapl2@ssc.upenn.edu

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

1

1

Introduction

Multinational enterprises (MNEs) play a dominant role in an increasingly globalized world.
In 1999, the domestic operations of the approximately 2,400 U.S. multinational enterprises
accounted for approximately 26 percent of U.S. GDP, 63 percent of U.S. exports, 37 percent
of U.S. imports, and 68 percent of U.S. R&D expenditures (Mataloni and Yorganson, 2002).
That year, nearly half of all U.S. manufacturing workers were employed by U.S. multinationals.
Despite their economic importance, the investment decisions of multinationals are not yet
well understood. With few exceptions, the trade literature has not distinguished between
the two modes in which a multinational enterprise can engage in foreign direct investment
(FDI): cross-border acquisition (entering a foreign market by buying an existing enterprise)
and greenfield FDI (entering a foreign market by building a new enterprise). Consequently,
the literature has been preoccupied with understanding the volume of FDI, neglecting its
composition across modes.
To the extent that MNEs do not view cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI as perfect substitutes, trade economists and policy makers should care not only about the volume
of FDI, but also about its composition. Indeed, governments of many host countries perceive
cross-border acquisitions as being rather diﬀerent from greenfield FDI.1 Any change in policies
towards FDI and any variation in country characteristics is likely to aﬀect cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI diﬀerently. Therefore, the volume of FDI cannot fully be understood
without first understanding its composition.
If our hypothesis that cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI are not perfect substitutes is correct, then this should show up in the data: there should be systematic diﬀerences
in FDI mode choice across MNEs. Indeed, if the two FDI modes were perfect substitutes, then
all firms would be indiﬀerent between the two modes, and so there should be no systematic
variation in mode choice across firms within the same industry. In figure 1, we explore the
relationship between a U.S. multinational’s eﬃciency and its propensity to favor cross-border
acquisitions over greenfield FDI. This figure is constructed using data from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) on outward FDI of U.S. multinational enterprises over the period
1994-1998. From this dataset, we construct two measures of a U.S. multinational’s eﬃciency:
1

See, for example, United Nations Center for Transnational Corporations (2000, p. xxiii).

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

2

0.6

Share of Cross-Border Acquisitions

U.S. Sales

Gross Product per Worker

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
Low

Middle

High

Firm Efficiency

Figure 1: The Share of Cross-Border Acquisitions in Total U.S. Outward FDI by Firm Eﬃciency
(i) the parent company’s sales in the U.S. (relative to its industry mean),2 and (ii) the parent
company’s value added per worker in the U.S. (relative to its industry mean). Based on each
measure of firm eﬃciency, we sort MNE’s into three equally-sized bins: “low”, “medium”, and
“high” eﬃciency. The figure reveals that firms are less likely to choose cross-border acquisitions
over greenfield FDI the more eﬃcient they are.3 The fact that FDI mode choice varies systematically with firm characteristics shows that cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI are
not perfect substitutes.
FDI mode choice varies not only across firms, but also across host countries with diﬀerent
levels of development. In figure 2, we explore the relationship between a host country’s level
2
3

Most models of firm heterogeneity predict a monotonic relationship between firm eﬃciency and sales.
As the econometric analyis in the appendix shows, this relationship is robust to including various control

variables that might aﬀect FDI mode choice. Additional information concerning the construction of the data is
also provided in the appendix.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

3

Share of Cross-Border Acquisitions

0.7

0.6

0.5

GDP per Capita
Average Wage

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
Low

Middle

High

Host Country's Level of Development

Figure 2: The Share of Cross-Border Acquisitions in Total U.S. Outward FDI by the Host
Country’s Level of Development

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

4

of development, as measured by GDP per capita and the average wage rate, and the fraction
of U.S. multinationals that enter this country through cross-border acquisition rather than
greenfield FDI. As the figure reveals, U.S. multinationals are more likely to favor cross-border
acquisition over greenfield FDI, the more developed is the host country. Interestingly, more
than sixty percent of U.S. outward FDI is directed towards the group of countries with the
highest level of development, which is also the group with the highest fraction of cross-border
acquisition in total FDI. This suggests that an understanding of the composition of FDI across
modes will provide us with a deeper understanding of the volume of FDI.4
In this paper, we develop an assignment theory of foreign direct investment to explain
multinationals’ FDI mode choice. According to much of the business literature, acquisitions
allow firms to exploit complementarities in their firm-specific assets. This view of mergers and
acquisitions is in line with the fact that approximately half of all mergers and acquisitions in
the U.S. involve trade in individual plants and divisions rather than entire corporations; see
Maksimovic and Phillips (2001).5 These observations show that firms are in the business of
buying and selling corporate assets, and that these assets are heterogeneous and complementary.
Indeed, as Caves (1998; p. 1963) points out:
“For the reshuﬄing of plants (or lines of business) among firms to be productive,
there must be sources of heterogeneity. [...] These heterogeneities cause assets’
productivities to vary substantially depending on the other business assets with
which they collaborate within the firm.”
We therefore model the merger market as a market in which heterogeneous firms buy and
sell heterogeneous firm-specific assets to exploit complementarities. The equilibrium of the
merger market is the solution of the associated assignment problem: which firm-specific assets
should optimally be combined?
In our model, a cross-border acquisition involves purchasing foreign corporate assets that
the acquirer lacks. Greenfield FDI, on the other hand, involves building production capacity
in the foreign country to allow the firm to deploy its corporate assets abroad. There are two
4
5

See the appendix for an econometric analysis and a description of the data.
As Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2004) document, more than sixty percent of U.S. manufacturing firms

add or delete entire four-digit product lines within five years.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

5

countries that can freely trade with one another. Motivated by our empirical finding that
the host country’s level of development is an important determinant of FDI mode choice, we
assume that countries diﬀer in factor prices and in the distributions of entrepreneurial abilities
(or some other corporate assets). Factor price diﬀerences give rise to greenfield FDI (from the
high cost to the low cost country) and to cross-border acquisitions (from each country to the
other). Cross-country diﬀerences in entrepreneurial abilities, however, give rise only to crossborder acquisitions (from each country to the other). Our model thus generates (potentially
large) two-way FDI flows even in the absence of transport costs and factor price diﬀerences
between countries.
In our model, greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions co-exist. However, as factor
price diﬀerences become small, almost all FDI takes the form of cross-border acquisitions. This
prediction is consistent with figure 2 since factor price diﬀerences between the U.S. and rich,
developed countries are arguably much smaller than between the U.S. and poor, developing
countries. We also show that the propensity of firms in the high-cost country to engage in
cross-border acquisitions rather than greenfield FDI is decreasing in the relative supply of
corporate assets in the low-wage country. To the extent that poor, developing countries have
fewer attractive corporate assets than rich, developed countries, this result is also consistent
with figure 2.
Another prediction of our model is that firms engaging in greenfield FDI are, on average,
more eﬃcient than those engaging in cross-border acquisitions. This is consistent with the data
summarized in figure 1. The intuition for this result may be summarized as follows. Greenfield
FDI necessitates the expense of building a new plant in the foreign country, and such an expense
is worthwhile only if the gains from relocating production are suﬃciently large. Hence, only
suﬃciently productive firms will engage in greenfield FDI. In contrast, the market for corporate
assets allows even relatively ineﬃcient firms to exploit complementarities.
In our model, foreign direct investment has important implications for aggregate productivity. The existence of an international market for corporate assets allows for a more eﬃcient
global assignment of firm-specific assets. However, while the re-assignment of corporate assets
improves the distribution of firm eﬃciencies in the low cost country, it has the opposite eﬀect
in the high cost country.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

6

Related literature. Our paper is mainly related to two strands in the theoretical trade
literature. A feature common to both strands, and shared by our paper, is the assumption that
contracting problems prevent arm’s-length relationships.6
In our model, FDI arises because of underlying diﬀerences across countries, not because of
transport costs, and there is a tendency for each firm to locate production in only one country. It
is this feature that our paper shares with the literature on “vertical FDI” (e.g., Helpman, 1984,
and Neary, 2004). Indeed, recent empirical work by Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2003)
documents a tendency for multinationals to concentrate production in low-wage countries.
None of the papers on vertical FDI consider FDI mode choice. In Helpman (1984), there is
only greenfield FDI, while in Neary (2004), there are only cross-border acquisitions (motivated
by market power).
Our paper is also related to the recent and growing literature on firm heterogeneity which
is concerned with the selection of heterogeneous firms into diﬀerent modes of serving global
markets. We extend this literature by introducing an international merger market. Within
this literature, the two papers that are most closely related to ours are Helpman, Melitz, and
Yeaple (2004), and Nocke and Yeaple (2004).7 However, in Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004)
there is no motive for firms to engage in cross-border acquisitions, and so greenfield is the only
mode of FDI. On the other hand, Nocke and Yeaple (2004) consider cross-border acquisitions
but analyze the interaction between trade costs (which are absent in the present model) and
the source of firm heterogeneity (mobile versus non-mobile capabilities). In the present paper,
we are able to analyze general heterogeneity in all corporate assets, which is precluded by the
presence of trade costs in Nocke and Yeaple (2004). Another benefit of abstracting from trade
costs in the present paper is that it allows us to analyze large country diﬀerences.8
Plan of the paper. In the next section, we present the model. Then, in section 3, we derive
the equilibrium assignment of corporate assets and the equilibrium location of production.
6

There is, however, an interesting recent (but so far empirically untested) literature that explores the trade-

oﬀs between in-house production and outsourcing; see Antras (2003), Antras and Helpman (2004), and Grossman
and Helpman (2004).
7
Other papers in the literature on firm heterogeneity include Melitz (2003), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and
Kortum (2003), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2004).
8
While not concerned with FDI, Antras, Garicano and Ross-Hansberg (2004) analyze a model of the assignment of heterogeneous agents into international teams.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

7

Further, we explore the implications of the assignment for the distribution of firm eﬃciencies
across countries. In section 4, we solve for the FDI flows implied by the equilibrium assignment
and location decisions. We show that greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions co-exist
but that, in the limit as factor price diﬀerences vanish, all FDI takes the form of cross-border
acquisitions. Next, in section 5, we analyze the link between firm characteristics and FDI mode
choice. We show that firms engaging in greenfield FDI are systematically more eﬃcient than
those engaging in cross-border acquisitions. Then, in section 6, we investigate the relationship
between country and industry characteristics on the one hand, and the composition of foreign
direct investment on the other. Finally, we conclude in section 7.

2

The Model

We consider a model of the world economy. There are two countries, 1 and 2, indexed by i,
that can freely trade with one another. There are no transport costs or tariﬀs, and so the price
of each good is the same in both countries.
Consumers. The world is populated by a unit mass of consumers with identical CES
preferences. The representative consumer’s utility function is given by
U = ln

·Z

1−ρ

m(ζ)

ρ

x(ζ) dζ

¸1

ρ

+ y,

ρ=

σ−1
, σ > 1,
σ

(1)

where x(ζ) is the consumption of variety ζ, m(ζ) is the variety-specific mass appeal, and y
the consumption of the homogeneous good.9 We assume that the representative consumer’s
income is suﬃciently large so that, in equilibrium, she will consume a positive quantity of the
homogeneous good.
Firms. A firm is defined as a triplet (e
a, m, i), consisting of one (unique) entrepreneur of
ability e
a, a (unique) variety of mass appeal m, and a plant to produce that variety in country
i. Each firm can produce (at most) one variety, using entrepreneurial ability e
a and labor.

An entrepreneur’s ability e
a may be thought of as productivity-enhancing headquarter services
9

The variety-specific mass appeal m(ζ) should not be confused with intrinsic quality. What we have in mind

here is, rather, perceived quality after adjusting for input intensity: a Hyundai arguably is a lower-quality car

than a Rolls-Royce but it is considerably cheaper to produce and, therefore, has a greater market share. For
expositional simplicity, we abstract from variety-specific input requirements.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

8

that can be provided independently of the location of production but only within the firm.
In particular, firm (e
a, m, i) can produce any one unit of its variety using 1/e
a units of labor in
a, where ω i denotes the wage
country i. Hence, the firm’s unit cost of production is given by ω i /e
rate in country i. For notational convenience, it will be helpful to use the following (monotone)
transform of the entrepreneur’s ability: a ≡ e
aσ−1 .

A plant is variety-specific in the sense that it must be designed for a specific variety; it has

zero value in any other usage. Building a (variety-specific) plant in country i requires φ units
of labor from country i.
Countries. In each country, producers of the diﬀerentiated product face a perfectly elastic
supply of labor. The wage rate in country 1 is higher than that in country 2, ω 1 > ω 2 . This
assumption can be derived as an equilibrium outcome in a general equilibrium model, where
the homogeneous good is produced in both countries by perfectly competitive firms using labor,
and firms in country 1 use a more eﬃcient technology in the production of the homogeneous
good than firms in country 2.10 For notational convenience, we normalize the wage in country
2 to one, ω2 ≡ 1.
In country i, there is a mass Ei of atomless producers of the diﬀerentiated good. Each firm
in country i is endowed with (i) an entrepreneur, (ii) property rights over a unique variety,
and (iii) a plant to produce that variety in country i. Entrepreneurs and varieties are in fixed
supply.
In each country, the empirical distribution function of the varieties’ mass appeal m in
the endowments of the population of firms is H. We allow for cross-country diﬀerences in
the distribution of endowments with entrepreneurial abilities. In country i, the empirical
distribution function of entrepreneurial ability a in the endowments of the population of firms
is Gi . The world distribution of entrepreneurial ability is then G ≡ (E1 G1 + E2 G2 )/(E1 + E2 ).
All distribution functions are continuously diﬀerentiable and strictly increasing on [0, ∞). The
associated density functions are denoted by h, gi , and g, respectively. Our formulation does not
require us to make any further assumption on the joint distribution of m and a across firms.
Merger market. There exists a perfectly competitive global market for corporate assets in
which entrepreneurs (firms) can buy and sell varieties and the associated variety-specific plants.
10

Equivalently, we could assume that there are no wage diﬀerences, but workers in country 2 are more pro-

ductive than those in country 1 when producing the diﬀerentiated good.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

9

Let Wi (m) denote the market price of a variety originating in country i (and its associated
plant in country i), and V (a) the shadow value of an entrepreneur with ability a.
Foreign direct investment. There are two modes of foreign direct investment: greenfield FDI
and cross-border acquisition. A firm (or entrepreneur) from country i engages in greenfield FDI
if (i) it manages a variety that originated in country i, and (ii) builds a new plant for that
variety in country j 6= i.11 Note, however, that a firm engaging in greenfield FDI may not
necessarily produce the variety with which it was initially endowed (as the firm may have
acquired the variety from some other domestic firm). A firm (or entrepreneur) from country
i engages in a cross-border acquisition if it acquires a variety (and its associated plant) in the
other country j.

3

Equilibrium Assignment

In this section, we turn to the equilibrium analysis of our model. We first derive firms’ equilibrium profit as a function of its assets. We then study (1) the merger market equilibrium, which
implies an assignment of abilities to varieties, and (2) the equilibrium location of production.
Preliminaries. Solving the representative consumer’s utility maximization problem, we
obtain the following demand for variety ζ:
x(ζ) = R

m(ζ)p(ζ)−σ
,
m(ζ 0 )p(ζ 0 )1−σ dζ 0

where p(ζ) is the price of variety ζ.

Profit maximization implies that each firm charges a fixed markup, and so the price of
variety ζ, when produced in country i, is given by p(ζ) = ci (ζ)/ρ, where ci (ζ) is the unit cost
of production. Hence, the gross profit of a firm producing variety ζ in country i is given by
Sm(ζ)ci (ζ)1−σ ,
where the markup-adjusted residual demand level S is given by
· Z
¸−1
1−σ
S = σ m(ζ)ci (ζ) dζ
.

(2)

ζ

11

A firm that has conducted greenfield FDI will have a variety-specific plant in both countries, but — since

product markets are perfectly integrated — will only produce in one of them, namely in the plant located in the
low-wage country 2.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

10

Writing gross profits as a function of entrepreneurial ability a, mass appeal m, demand level
S, and location of production i, we have:

 θSam for i = 1,
Πi (a, m) =
 Sam for i = 2,

(3)

< 1. The parameter θ captures the cost disadvantage of producing in country
where θ ≡ ω1−σ
1
1. Observe that the profit function is supermodular in a and m, reflecting that entrepreneurial
ability and the variety’s mass appeal are complementary in generating profits. Note also that a
firm with an entrepreneur of ability a could generate the same profit when producing a variety
of mass appeal m in country 1 and when producing a variety of mass appeal θm in country 2.
Equilibrium assignment and location of production. Equilibrium in the merger market induces an assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties. We now investigate this equilibrium assignment, and the equilibrium location of production, holding fixed the markup-adjusted residual
demand level S. For the equilibrium assignment, the country of origin of an entrepreneur is
irrelevant: an entrepreneur can manage production (provide headquarter services) equally well
in both countries, independently of his country of origin. Since firms are profit-maximizers
and the merger market is perfectly competitive, equilibrium must have the property that the
assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties and the location of production maximize firms’ joint
profits, holding S fixed.
We first consider the equilibrium location of production of a variety of mass appeal m. Two
immediate observations can be made. First, no variety that originated in country 2 will be
produced in country 1. To see this, note that no firm would want to move production from
a low-cost location to a high-cost location, given that there is a global pool of entrepreneurs.
Second, there must exist a threshold m ≤ ∞ such that a variety of mass appeal m that
originated in country 1 will be produced in country 2 (incurring a fixed cost φ of building a
new variety-specific plant) if m > m, and in country 1 if m < m.12
12

To see this, suppose otherwise that, in equilibrium, there exist two firms, (a0 , m0 ) and (a00 , m00 ), whose va-

rieties m0 and m00 < m0 originated in country 1, and firm (a0 , m0 ) locates production in country 1, while firm
(a00 , m00 ) locates in country 2. The resulting joint profits of the two firms are S [θa0 m0 + a00 m00 ] − φ. However, this allocation does not maximize joint profits. If the better of the two entrepreneurs, max{a0 , a00 },

purchases the more popular variety m0 and locates production in country 2, while the other entrepreneur
purchases variety m00 and locates production in country 1, then the two firms’ joint profits are given by

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

11

We now turn to the equilibrium assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties. Let ai (m) denote
the set of abilities of entrepreneurs who will manage a variety of mass appeal m originating in
country i, for any given (endogenous) threshold m. It is straightforward to show that a2 (·) is
a strictly increasing function: there is positive assortative matching between entrepreneurial
ability and the mass appeal of a variety. This follows from three observations. First, the profit
function Π2 (a, m) is supermodular in a and m. Second, Gi and H are strictly increasing and
continuous distribution functions. Third, all varieties originating in country 2 will be produced
in country 2.
From the profit function (3) and the location of production, we obtain two no-arbitrage
conditions that link a1 (·) and a2 (·). All varieties of mass appeal m < m will be produced in
their country of origin, and an entrepreneur of ability a makes the same profit when managing
a variety of mass appeal m in country 1 and when managing a variety of mass appeal θm in
country 2. Hence,
a1 (m) = a2 (θm) for all m < m.

(4)

All varieties of mass appeal m > m will be produced in country 2, independently of their
country of origin. Hence,
a1 (m) = a2 (m) for all m > m.

(5)

An immediate implication of equation (4) is that the threshold m must be finite.13 From
the no-arbitrage conditions (4) and (5), it follows that a1 (m) is single-valued and strictly
increasing in m for m < m and for m > m. Further, a1 (m) has two elements, namely a2 (θm)
and a2 (m). Since a2 (θm) < a2 (m), it follows that a1 (·) has an upward jump at m in the sense
that limm↑m a1 (m) < limm↓m a1 (m).
We are now in the position to derive ai (·). In light of the no-arbitrage conditions (4) and
(5), which link a1 (·) and a2 (·), we will focus on a2 (·). First, we derive a2 (m) for m > m.
Since all varieties of mass appeal m > m will be produced in country 2, independently of their
country of origin, and since there is positive assortative matching between a and m, we have
(E1 + E2 ) [1 − G(a2 (m))] = (E1 + E2 ) [1 − H(m)] for m ≥ m,
S [θ min{a0 , a00 }m00 + max{a0 , a00 }m0 ] − φ, which is greater than the joint profit in the candidate equilibrium.
13
To see this, suppose otherwise that no firm from country 1 builds a new plant in country 2, m = ∞. However,
for m suﬃciently large, firm (a1 (m), m, 1) could then make a larger profit by building a new plant in country 2:
Π1 (a1 (m), m) = Π1 (a2 (θm), m) < Π2 (a2 (θm), m) − φ. A contradiction.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

12

where G ≡ [E1 G1 + E2 G2 ] /(E1 + E2 ) is the global distribution function of entrepreneurial
abilities. The term on the l.h.s. represents the mass of entrepreneurs with ability of at least
a2 (m), while on the r.h.s. is the mass of varieties of mass appeal m and greater. Solving for
a2 (m), yields
a2 (m) = G−1 (H(m)) for m ≥ m.

(6)

Next, we derive a2 (m) for θm ≤ m ≤ m. From the no-arbitrage condition (4), a1 (m) =
a2 (θm) for m < m. Hence, all entrepreneurs of ability a2 (θm) ≤ a ≤ a2 (m) will manage
production in country 2, independently of their country of origin. We thus have
(E1 + E2 ) [G(a2 (m)) − G(a2 (m))] = E2 [H(m) − H(m)] for m ∈ [θm, m] .
Since (6) implies G(a2 (m)) = H(m), we obtain
µ
¶
−1 E1 H(m) + E2 H(m)
a2 (m) = G
for m ∈ [θm, m] .
E1 + E2

(7)

Finally, we derive a2 (m) for m < θm. We have
(E1 + E2 )G(a2 (m)) = E1 H(m/θ) + E2 H(m) for m < θm.
The term on the l.h.s. represents the mass of entrepreneurs from both countries who have
ability less than or equal to a2 (m). The second term on the r.h.s. is the mass of varieties of
mass appeal m or less that locate (and originate) in country 2. Since a2 (m) = a1 (m/θ), the
first term on the r.h.s. represents the mass of varieties that locate (and originate) in country
1 and that are managed, in equilibrium, by entrepreneurs of ability a2 (m) or less. Solving the
equation for a2 (m) yields
−1

a2 (m) = G

µ

E1 H(m/θ) + E2 H(m)
E1 + E2

¶

for m ≤ θm.

(8)

Summarizing, the function a2 (·) is defined, over the relevant domains, by equations (6),
(7), and (8). The function is strictly increasing, continuous, and diﬀerentiable except at θm
and m. Observe also that a2 (·) depends on m; we will later analyze how this function changes
with m.
The equilibrium assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties originating in country 1, summarized by a1 (·), follows immediately from a2 (·) and the no-arbitrage conditions (4) and (5):

³
´
 G−1 E1 H(m)+E2 H(θm)
for m < m,
E1 +E2
a1 (m) =
.
(9)

G−1 (H(m))
for m > m.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

13

Hence, a1 (·) is a strictly increasing and diﬀerentiable function, except at m, where it exhibits
an upward jump.
Equilibrium price schedules. Having analyzed the equilibrium assignment and location of
production (as a function of S), we can now determine the equilibrium price schedules for
varieties and entrepreneurs on the international merger market, for any given markup-adjusted
residual demand level S.
Consider first the equilibrium gross profit Π2 (a2 (m), m) of a firm that produces a variety
of mass appeal m in country 2 and is managed by an entrepreneur with ability a2 (m). The
gross profit can be decomposed as
¸
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z) ∂a2 (z) ∂Π2 (a2 (z), z)
+
dz
Π2 (a2 (m), m) = Π2 (a2 (0), 0) +
∂a
∂z
∂z
0
Z m
Z m
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z) ∂a2 (z)
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z)
dz +
dz,
=
∂a
∂z
∂z
0
0
Z

m·

(10)

where the second equality follows from the observation that Π2 (a2 (0), 0) = 0. On the other
hand, the return of an entrepreneur of ability a2 (m) is the diﬀerence between the firm’s gross
profit and the equilibrium price of variety m, i.e.,
V (a2 (m)) = Π2 (a2 (m), m) − W2 (m).

(11)

Since Π2 (a2 (0), 0) = 0, the market values of the worst varieties and entrepreneurs are zero, i.e.,
W2 (0) = 0 and V (a2 (0)) = V (0) = 0. We can now decompose the gross profit as follows:
Π2 (a2 (m), m) = V (a2 (m)) + W2 (m)
Z m
Z m
∂a2 (z)
dz +
=
V 0 (a2 (z))
W20 (z)dz.
∂z
0
0

(12)

Comparing the two decompositions, (10) and (12), we obtain
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z)
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z)
= V 0 (a2 (z)) and
= W20 (z).
∂a
∂z
Since Π2 (a2 (m), m) = Sa2 (m)m, the equilibrium price schedules can be written as
Z m
Z m
∂Π2 (a2 (z), z)
dz
W20 (z)dz =
W2 (m) = W2 (0) +
∂z
0
0
Z m
= S
a2 (z)dz,
0

(13)

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment
and, using (11),

·
Z
V (a2 (m)) = S a2 (m)m −

m

14
¸

a2 (z)dz .

0

Consider now the equilibrium price schedule for varieties created in country 1. From the
no-arbitrage condition (4), a variety of mass appeal m < m from country 1 generates the same
profit as a variety of mass appeal θm from country 2. Hence,
W1 (m) = W2 (θm) for m ≤ m.

(14)

W1 (m) = W2 (m) − φ for m ≥ m

(15)

Furthermore, we obtain

since, in equilibrium, the production of all varieties of mass appeal m > m will be located in
country 2, which requires incurring the fixed cost φ.
From equations (14) and (15), it follows that
W2 (θm) = W2 (m) − φ.

(16)

Consider a variety of mass appeal m originating in country 1. If this variety is produced in
country 1, it will be managed by an entrepreneur of ability a2 (θm), and its value is thus W2 (θm).
On the other hand, if this variety is produced in country 2, a new variety-specific plant needs
to be built in that country (at cost φ), and production will be managed by an entrepreneur of
ability a2 (m). Hence, in this case, the value of the variety is W2 (m) − φ. By definition of m,
the two usages of the variety must generate the same value, W2 (θm) = W2 (m) − φ.
Using (13), the indiﬀerence condition (16) can be rewritten as
S

Z

m

a2 (m)dm = φ.

(17)

θm

The l.h.s. of this equation is the profit increase from a relocation of production of a variety of
mass appeal m (originating in country 1) to country 2, taking into account that the equilibrium
assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties depends on the location of production. From the
viewpoint of maximizing profits (holding S fixed), moving variety m from country 1 to country
2 implies that an entrepreneur of ability a2 (θm) is freed up in country 1 to manage production
of variety θm in country 2, which in turn allows a re-assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties
in country 2: all varieties of mass appeal between θm and m will now be managed by more

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

15

able entrepreneurs, which generates additional profit. On the r.h.s. of equation (17) is the cost
of such a relocation of production.
The markup-adjusted residual demand level. So far, we have derived the equilibrium assignment and location of production for a given markup-adjust residual demand level S. However,
S is endogenous and determined jointly with the (endogenous) threshold m. From equation
(2) and the equilibrium assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties derived above, the markupadjusted residual demand level is given by
·
Z
Z m
−1
E1 θ
ma1 (m)dH(m) + E2
S = σ
0

+(E1 + E2 )

Z

∞

m

m

ma2 (m)dH(m)

(18)

0

¸−1
ma2 (m)dH(m)
.

Combining this equation with the equilibrium condition for m, equation (17), we can write
the equilibrium threshold m as a function of the exogenous variables θ, σ, φ, ω2 , E1 , and E2
(as well as the distribution functions G and H):
·
Z m
Z m
ma1 (m)dH(m) + E2
ma2 (m)dH(m)
0 = σφ E1 θ
0
0
¸ Z m
Z ∞
ma2 (m)dH(m) −
a2 (m)dm.
+(E1 + E2 )
m

(19)

θm

It can be established that the r.h.s. of (19) is continuous and strictly decreasing in m. Furthermore, the r.h.s. is strictly positive for m = 0, and becomes negative for m suﬃciently large.14
Hence, there exists a unique threshold quality m, implicitly defined by equation (19).
Endogenous cross-country diﬀerences in the distribution of firm eﬃciencies. The equilibrium assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties and the equilibrium location of production have
important consequences for cross-country diﬀerences in the distribution of firm eﬃciencies.
In our framework, it is natural to define the intrinsic eﬃciency of a firm of type (a, m, i) by
ϕ (a, m, i) = am since the firm’s gross profit is proportional to am. This definition of intrinsic
eﬃciency controls for wage (and technology) diﬀerences across countries.
Proposition 1 In equilibrium, the eﬃciency distribution of firms producing in country 2 firstorder stochastically dominates that of firms producing in country 1.
14

As m → ∞, the term in brackets remains bounded, while the second term on the r.h.s. tends to −∞.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

16

Proof. See appendix.
This result follows from two observations. First, in equilibrium, the production of all of
the most popular varieties will be located in country 2. Second, in equilibrium, a variety of
any given mass appeal m will be managed by a more able entrepreneur in country 2 than in
country 1, a2 (m) > a1 (m) for m < m. Hence, it is not only the endogenous change in the
location of production that causes aggregate eﬃciency diﬀerences between countries, but also
the re-assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties through the market for corporate assets. The
proposition shows that the empirical research on the sources of comparative advantage needs
to take the “selection eﬀect” of FDI into account.

4

Foreign Direct Investment

In the previous section, we derived the equilibrium assignment of entrepreneurs to varieties and
the equilibrium location of production. What still needs to be analyzed is the implied equilibrium pattern of trade and FDI. In this section, we interpret the assignment of entrepreneurs to
varieties and the location of production in terms of choice of FDI mode. We then present two
key results. First, all greenfield FDI is one-way: from the high cost to the low cost country,
while cross-border acquisitions occur in both directions. Second, in the limit as factor price
diﬀerences between countries vanish, all FDI takes the form of cross-border acquisitions.
Types of FDI. In our model, the identity of a firm is linked to its entrepreneur. In this
sense, it will be the entrepreneurs that buy or sell varieties, rather than the reverse. Greenfield
FDI from country i to country j occurs whenever an entrepreneur from country i relocates
production of a variety from country i to country j by building a new plant in country j. Crossborder acquisition from country i to country j occurs whenever an entrepreneur from country
i purchases a variety from country j, independently of where this variety will be produced.
Two types of cross-border acquisitions are possible, dependent on whether the acquired variety
will be produced in its country of origin, or whether local production will be closed down and
transferred to the entrepreneur’s home country.
Equilibrium selection. Both the assignment of entrepreneurial types to types of varieties and
the location of production by mass appeal of variety are uniquely pinned down in equilibrium.
However, in the absence of any mobility costs for entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs of any given

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

17

ability but originating in diﬀerent countries are perfect substitutes. Consequently, there is
indeterminacy in the equilibrium gross flows of FDI. Since the assumption of no frictions in
the market for cross-border acquisitions may be viewed as a limiting case where such frictions
become small, we henceforth confine attention to the equilibrium pattern of FDI that minimizes
the volume of cross-border acquisitions.
Composition of international commerce. We are now in the position to provide a first
characterization of FDI flows. Since all varieties originating in country 2 are produced in that
country, any greenfield FDI must be one-way, namely from country 1 to country 2. Any variety
of mass appeal m > m that originated in country 1 will be produced in country 2. This
relocation of production may be accomplished in two ways: (i) an entrepreneur from country
1 may engage in greenfield FDI in country 2 by building a new plant in that country, or (ii) an
entrepreneur from country 2 may purchase that variety, close down production in country 1,
and build a new plant in country 2. Since we restrict attention to the equilibrium pattern of
FDI that minimizes the volume of cross-border acquisitions, the latter will occur only if there
is an insuﬃcient number of entrepreneurs of ability a1 (m) originating in country 1 to manage
production of varieties of mass appeal m from their home country. In contrast, all varieties of
mass appeal m < m from country 1, and all varieties from country 2, will be locally produced.
These varieties will be acquired by a local entrepreneur of ability ai (m), or else if the local
supply of such entrepreneurs is too small, by a foreign entrepreneur.
More formally, let ψ i (m) denote the ratio between the number of entrepreneurs, originating
in country i, who in equilibrium will be assigned to a variety of mass appeal m, and the number
of varieties of that mass appeal originating in the same country. If ψ i (m) < 1, then a fraction
1 − ψ i (m) of these varieties must be acquired by foreign firms (entrepreneurs). A variety of
mass appeal m from country i will be managed by an entrepreneur of ability ai (m), and so
Ei [Gi (ai (m + ∆)) − Gi (ai (m))]
∆→0
Ei [H(m + ∆) − H(m)]
gi (a1 (m)) 0
ai (m).
=
h(m)

ψ i (m) =

lim

Hence, using equations (6) through (9),

h
i
E1
θE2 h(θm)
 g1 (a1 (m))
if m ≤ m,
+
E1 +E2 h(m)
g(a1 (m)) E1 +E2
ψ 1 (m) =
g1 (a1 (m))

otherwise,
g(a1 (m))

(20)

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment
and
ψ 2 (m) =











h

g2 (a2 (m))
E1 /θ h(m/θ)
E2
g(a2 (m)) E1 +E2 + E1 +E2 h(m)
h
i
g2 (a2 (m))
E2
g(a2 (m)) E1 +E2
g2 (a2 (m))
g(a2 (m))

i

18

if m ≤ θm,
if m ∈ (θm, m],

(21)

if m > m.

Observe that both functions ψ 1 and ψ 2 are continuous, except that ψ 1 has a discontinuity at m,
while ψ 2 exhibits discontinuities at θm and m. Note also that the value of ψ i (m) depends directly on the relative supply of firms in country i, Ei /(E1 +E2 ), factor price diﬀerences, as summarized by θ, and the relative supply of managerial abilities in country i, gi (ai (m))/g(ai (m));
it also depends on the assignment function ai (m), provided there are cross-country diﬀerences
in the distributions of entrepreneurial abilities, i.e., gi 6= g.
Using the functions ψ 1 and ψ 2 , we can derive aggregate statistics of FDI flows. Let γ i and
µi denote the fractions of entrepreneurs (firms) from country i who will engage in greenfield
FDI and cross-border acquisitions, respectively. Since all greenfield FDI is directed toward the
country with the comparative advantage in production, γ 2 = 0. On the other hand,
Z ∞
min {ψ 1 (m), 1} dH(m)
γ1 =

(22)

m

since a fraction min {ψ 1 (m), 1} of a variety of mass appeal m > m originating in country 1
will be produced in country 2 as part of greenfield FDI (while the remaining fraction max{1 −
ψ 1 (m), 0} will be acquired and relocated by entrepreneurs from country 2).
As regards cross-border acquisitions, we have
Z
E2 ∞
max {1 − ψ 2 (m), 0} dH(m).
µ1 =
E1 0

(23)

To see this, note that if ψ 2 (m) < 1, there is an insuﬃcient number of entrepreneurs from
country 2 that have the “right” ability to manage production of varieties with mass appeal m
in country 2, and so a fraction 1 − ψ 2 (m) will to be acquired by entrepreneurs from country 1.
Similarly, we have
µ2 =

E1
E2

Z

0

∞

max {1 − ψ 1 (m), 0} dH(m).

(24)

We can now make two important observations. First, the flows of cross-border acquisitions
will be balanced in equilibrium,
E1 µ1 = E2 µ2 .

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

19

Balancedness obtains since, in each country, the mass of entrepreneurs is equal to the mass
of varieties, both before the merger market opens as well as after the merger market closes.
Moreover, each greenfield investment involves one entrepreneur and one variety from the same
country. Second, all entrepreneurs from country 1 who are of ability a ∈ (a2 (θm), a2 (m)) will
be engaged in cross-border acquisitions in country 2, and so µ1 = (E2 /E1 )µ2 > 0.
We summarize our results in the following proposition.
Proposition 2 In equilibrium, greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions co-exist. All greenfield FDI is one-way: from country 1 to country 2, but not in the reverse direction. In contrast,
cross-border acquisitions are two-way: from country 1 to country 2, and from country 2 to
country 1.
Existing models of vertical FDI (e.g., Helpman, 1984) predict that, at any given production
stage, all FDI flows are one-way: the only receiving country is the one that has a comparative
advantage in that stage of production. Yet, there is overwhelming empirical evidence showing
that FDI flows are generally two-way. In light of this stylized fact, trade theorists have relied
on models with transport costs to generate two-way FDI. As proposition 2 shows, transport
costs are not necessary to generate this stylized fact.
There is ample evidence that many governments are wary of foreign acquisitions of domestic
establishments that result in the closure of local production. Our model can indeed generate
such FDI. The measure of firms involved in such FDI is
Z ∞
max {1 − ψ 1 (m), 0} dH(m),
E1
m

which is positive if and only if g1 (a) < g2 (a) for some a > a2 (m). Interestingly, if foreign
acquisitions result in the closure of local production, they involve the more popular varieties
(of mass appeal m > m) from country 1.
Vanishing factor price diﬀerences. As figure 2 has revealed, cross-border acquisitions are
the dominant mode of FDI between the richest and most developed countries (where, arguably,
factor price diﬀerences are not very large). In contrast, a much larger fraction of FDI flows
from the rich and developed countries to the poor and developing countries (where, arguably,
factor price diﬀerences play an important role) involve greenfield.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

20

To explain these findings within our model, we analyze the composition of FDI in the limit
as factor price diﬀerences become small, i.e., as θ → 1. An immediate observation is that the

quality threshold m → ∞ as θ → 1.15 Consequently, greenfield FDI disappears as factor price
diﬀerences become small: γ 1 → 0 as θ → 1. Next, as can be seen from equation (21), for any
m,
ψ 2 (m) →

g2 (a2 (m))
as θ → 1.
g(a2 (m))

However, generically, we have g2 (a) 6= g(a) for (almost) any a. Hence, µ1 and µ2 are bounded
away from zero, even as θ → 1. We therefore obtain the following key result.
Proposition 3 There always exist cross-border acquisitions in both directions, independently
of factor price diﬀerences. In contrast, greenfield FDI disappears in the limit as factor price
diﬀerences vanish. Hence, as θ → 1, all FDI takes the form of cross-border acquisitions.
What this propositions highlights is that there are two reasons for cross-border acquisitions,
but only one reason for the existence of greenfield FDI. In our model, greenfield FDI occurs
only because firms want to exploit factor price diﬀerences by relocating production from a high
cost to a low cost location. In contrast, cross-border acquisitions not only exist because of
factor price diﬀerences, but also because the distribution of entrepreneurial abilities (or, more
generally, of firm-specific assets) varies from one country to another.16
More generally, the following features of our model are necessary to obtain two-way crossborder acquisitions in the absence of factor price diﬀerences: there must be heterogeneity in
both types of corporate assets (entrepreneurial abilities and the mass appeal of varieties), and
these corporate assets must be complementary, and there must be distributional diﬀerences
across countries in at least one of the two types of corporate assets. This highlights the
importance of “two-sided” heterogeneity in our assignment model.
15

To see this, suppose otherwise that m is bounded from above, independently of θ. But then, the r.h.s. of

equation (19) is strictly positive for θ suﬃciently close to one, while the l.h.s. is identical to zero; a contradiction.
16
This may be reminiscent of Grossman and Maggi (2000), where trade between countries occurs because of
diﬀerences in the distributions of workers’ talent.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

5

21

Firm Eﬃciency and Choice of FDI Mode

In this section, we further explore the mapping from a firm’s eﬃciency to its choice of FDI mode.
For this purpose, we impose additional structure on the distributions of entrepreneurial abilities.
We then obtain another key result: firms that engage in greenfield FDI are systematically more
eﬃcient than those that engage in cross-border acquisitions. Moreover, we show that, under
some modest regularity condition on the distribution of varieties’ mass appeal, the probability
that an entrepreneur from country 1 engages in FDI is weakly increasing in the entrepreneur’s
ability.
Eﬃciency diﬀerences: greenfield FDI vs. cross-border acquisitions. As figure 1 has revealed,
U.S. firms engaging in greenfield FDI are systematically more eﬃcient than U.S. firms engaging
in cross-border acquisitions. Our model generates this result under a variety of distributional
assumptions. A natural restriction on the distribution of entrepreneurial abilities that allows
us to obtain this result is the following symmetry condition.
(C1) The distributions of entrepreneurial abilities are the same in both countries: G1 ≡ G2 .
Given this symmetry in entrepreneurial abilities across countries, all FDI is motivated
by factor price diﬀerences. As can be seen from equations (20) and (21), (C1) implies that
ψ 1 (m) = ψ 2 (m) = 1 for all m ≥ m. Hence, all cross-border acquisitions involve varieties
of mass appeal m < m, while all greenfield FDI still involves only varieties of mass appeal
m > m. Positive assortative matching between a and m in each country then implies the
following proposition.
Proposition 4 Firm engaging in greenfield FDI are more eﬃcient than firms engaging in
cross-border acquisitions.
If we were to relax the symmetry condition (C1), we would still obtain that firms engaging in
greenfield FDI are, on average, more eﬃcient than firms engaging in cross-border acquisitions.
To see this, note that, even in the absence of (C1) greenfield FDI involves only entrepreneurs of
abilities exceeding a2 (m) and varieties of mass appeal exceeding m, while cross-border acquisitions are the only FDI mode associated with less able entrepreneurs and less popular varieties.
To violate our weaker prediction, one would thus need a very strong departure from symmetry,
namely that one country has a much larger supply of the very best entrepreneurs than another.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

22

Through the lens of this proposition, it may become apparent why the governments of many
host countries appear to favor greenfield FDI over cross-border acquisitions. Policymakers may
perceive two important diﬀerences between the two FDI modes. First, greenfield FDI involves
the creation of new plants. Second, greenfield FDI involves the best foreign firms, and therefore
a large number of workers.
Eﬃciency diﬀerences: cross-border acquisitions vs. domestic production. To further tighten
our predictions on the eﬃciency diﬀerences between firms engaging in diﬀerent modes of serving
the world market, we impose a mild regularity condition on the distribution of varieties’ mass
appeal.
(C2) The elasticity of the density function h,
mh0 (m)
h(m)
is strictly decreasing in m.
It can easily be verified that condition (C2) is satisfied by a number of standard distribuα

tions, e.g., by the two-parameter family of Weibull distributions, H(m) = 1 − e−(m/β) , α > 0,
β > 0 (which includes the exponential distribution as a special case with α = 1) and the
two-parameter family of Gamma distributions (which includes the chi-squared distribution as
a special case). Henceforth, we will assume that both distributional conditions, (C1) and (C2),
hold.
(C1) implies that ψ 1 (0) < 1 < ψ 2 (0). Moreover, (C1) and (C2) imply that ψ1 (·) is strictly
increasing on [0, m], and ψ 2 (·) is strictly decreasing on [0, θm), has a downward jump at θm,
b
and is constant on [θm, m]. It will prove useful to define a second threshold mass appeal, m.

b is such that ψ 1 (m)
b = 1; otherwise, m
b = m. Hence,
If limm↑m ψ 1 (m) > 1, the threshold m

 ψ −1 (1) if lim
m↑m ψ 1 (m) > 1,
1
(25)
m
b =

m
otherwise.

Using this threshold m
b and equations (22) to (24), we can summarize the relationship between
firm eﬃciency and FDI mode choice as follows.

Proposition 5 Consider the mapping from entrepreneurial ability to mode of FDI. For entreb = a1 (m),
b all FDI involves cross-border acquisitions in country 1.
preneurs of ability a < a2 (θm)

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

23

b a2 (m)), all FDI involves cross-border acquisitions in
For entrepreneurs of ability a ∈ (a2 (θm),

country 2. For entrepreneurs of ability a > a2 (m), all FDI involves greenfield FDI in country

2.

b = a2 (θm),
b he will
Consider an entrepreneur of ability a from country 1. (i) If a ≤ a1 (m)

not engage in FDI. (ii) If a ∈ (a2 (θm),
b a2 (θm)), the entrepreneur will, with positive probability,

acquire a variety in country 2. The probability that a country-2 variety of mass appeal m ∈

(θm,
b θm) will be acquired by a foreign entrepreneur is 1 − ψ 2 (m) ≥ 0, and is strictly increasing

in m. Positive assortative matching between a and m then implies that the probability that a
b a2 (θm)) engages in cross-border acquisitions is
country-1 entrepreneur of ability a ∈ (a2 (θm),

strictly increasing in a. (iii) If a > a1 (m) = a2 (θm), the entrepreneur will engage in FDI with
probability one, namely in cross-border acquisitions if a ∈ (a2 (θm), a2 (m)), and in greenfield
FDI if a > a2 (m).
We thus obtain the following monotonicity result.
Proposition 6 The probability that an entrepreneur from country 1 engages in FDI is weakly
increasing in his ability a.
Proposition 6 implies, in particular, that in the high-cost country, firms engaging in crossborder acquisitions are, on average, more eﬃcient than firms producing domestically.

6

Comparative Statics

In this section, we further explore the workings of our model. We generate a number of
additional predictions by analyzing the eﬀects of changing various exogenous variables on the
equilibrium assignment and location of production, and the aggregate statistics of FDI.
Throughout this section, we assume that conditions (C1) and (C2) hold. Using equations
(20) and (25), the aggregate statistics of FDI, (22) to (24), then simplify to
µ1 =
and

E2
E2
µ2 =
[H(m)
b − H(θm)]
b ,
E1
E1 + E2
γ 1 = 1 − H(m).

(26)

(27)

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

24

The fixed cost of building a plant. We now want to explore the eﬀects of changing the fixed
cost φ of building a new plant in country 2. Intuitively, one would expect that an increase
in φ raises the threshold m, and hence reduces the share γ 1 of entrepreneurs from country 1
engaging in greenfield FDI in country 2. Indeed, this can easily be established using equation
(19). Further, m → 0 as φ becomes small, and m → ∞ as φ becomes large. Next, note that
b is implicitly defined by θh(θm)/h(
b
m)
b = 1, and hence (locally) independent of φ;
if m
b < m, m

b is strictly increasing in φ. We thus have the following lemma.
otherwise m
b = m, and so m

Lemma 1 The threshold m is strictly increasing in φ, m → 0 as φ → 0, and m → ∞ as

b is (locally) independent of φ. Hence, there exists a unique
φ → ∞. Further, if m
b < m, then m
b and m
b
b > 0 such that m
b = m for all φ ≤ φ.
φ
b < m for all φ > φ,
Since m is strictly increasing in φ, it follows immediately from equation (27) that the

fraction γ 1 of entrepreneurs from country 1 engaging in greenfield FDI is decreasing in φ. The
b
eﬀect of φ on the cross-border acquisition volume, however, depends on whether or not φ > φ,

as the following proposition shows.

Proposition 7 A small increase in the fixed cost φ of building a plant, dφ > 0, has the
following eﬀects:
dγ 1 < 0,
Proof. See appendix.


 > 0 if φ < φ
b
E2
dµ1 =
dµ2
 = 0 otherwise.
E1

This proposition shows that the total number of cross-border acquisitions can be independent of the cost and volume of greenfield FDI, namely whenever the fixed cost φ is suﬃciently
large (and the volume of greenfield FDI small). However, even in this case, the composition of
cross-border acquisitions from country 1 to country 2 is not independent of φ in the sense that
a change in φ aﬀects the set of entrepreneurs from country 1 who will engage in cross-border
mergers.
Country characteristics. We now want to investigate the eﬀects on the equilibrium of
varying country characteristics: the factor price diﬀerential, as measured by θ, and the numbers
of entrepreneurs in each country, E1 and E2 . For simplicity, we will confine attention to the
b
case φ > φ.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

25

Consider first an increase in θ, i.e., a reduction in the factor price diﬀerence between the two
countries. Under condition (C1), FDI is ultimately driven by factor price diﬀerences. Hence,
one would expect the volume of FDI to decrease as the countries become more similar. Indeed,
this intuition is correct, as the following proposition shows.
Proposition 8 A reduction in the factor price diﬀerence between the two countries, dθ > 0,
has the following eﬀects:
dγ 1 < 0 and dµ1 =

E2
dµ < 0.
E1 2

Proof. See appendix.
Consider now a small decrease in the number of entrants in country 2, E2 , holding the
total number of entrants in the two countries, E1 + E2 , fixed. That is, the aggregate mass of
varieties and entrepreneurs is held constant, while varieties and entrepreneurs from country 2
are becoming relatively more scarce. We obtain the following proposition.
Proposition 9 A small decrease in the number of entrants in country 2, E2 , holding the total
number of entrants, E1 + E2 , fixed, has the following eﬀects:
dγ 1 > 0 and dµ1 = −dµ2 < 0.
Proof. See appendix.
Intuitively, a relative decrease in the number of entrants in country 2 implies that there are
fewer attractive corporate assets in country 2 that entrepreneurs from country 1 can acquire.
Hence, as E2 /(E1 + E2 ) decreases, entrepreneurs from country 1 will substitute away from
cross-border acquisitions in favor of greenfield FDI. This eﬀect is reinforced by the indirect
eﬀect through the markup-adjusted residual demand level: the shift in endowments in favor of
the high-cost country raises S, which further increases the incentive for firms from the highcost country to engage in greenfield FDI. In the limit as the relative number of entrants from
country 2 goes to zero, all FDI from country 1 to country 2 will be in the form of greenfield
FDI, i.e., µ1 → 0, while γ 1 is bounded away from zero. This is an alternative explanation
for the observation (summarized by figure 2) that U.S. MNEs are much more likely to choose
greenfield FDI when engaging in FDI in poor, developing countries (where, arguably, there are
fewer attractive target firms) than when engaging in FDI in rich, developed countries.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

26

A small decrease in the fraction of entrants who originate in country 2 makes the countries
“more similar” if E1 < E2 , and “more dissimilar” if the reverse inequality holds. An interesting
question is whether the aggregate number of cross-border acquisitions, E1 µ1 + E2 µ2 , increases
or decreases as the two countries become more similar. From equations (23) and (24), we have
E1 µ1 + E2 µ2 =

2E1 E2
[H(m)
b − H(θm)]
b .
E1 + E2

Recall that m
b is independent of the number of entrants. Hence, the aggregate volume of crossborder acquisitions follows a gravity-type equation: it increases as the two countries become
more similar in terms of their populations of entrants.

Corollary 1 Consider a small increase in the number of entrants in country 1, E1 , holding the
total number of entrants, E1 + E2 , fixed. Then, the aggregate number of cross-border mergers,
E1 µ1 + E2 µ2 , increases if E1 < E2 , and decreases if E1 > E2 . Hence, the aggregate number of
cross-border mergers is maximized when E1 = E2 .
Does the aggregate volume of cross-border acquisitions increase or decrease as the two
countries become more similar? As proposition 8 and corollary 1 show, the answer depends on
which set of country characteristics one considers. As countries become more similar in terms of
production costs, the aggregate two-way volume of cross-border acquisitions decreases, whereas
the opposite result obtains as countries become more similar in terms of their populations of
entrants.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we have developed an assignment theory to analyze both the volume of foreign direct investment and its composition between cross-border acquisitions and greenfield
investment. In our model, a firm consists of a bundle of heterogeneous and complementary
corporate assets. The merger market allows firms to trade these corporate assets to exploit
complementarities. A cross-border acquisition involves purchasing foreign corporate assets,
while greenfield FDI involves building production capacity in the foreign country to allow the
firm to deploys its corporate assets abroad. Equilibrium in the merger market is the solution
to the associated assignment problem.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

27

There are two countries that can freely trade with one another. Factor price diﬀerences
between countries give rise to greenfield FDI and to cross-border acquisitions, while crosscountry diﬀerences in entrepreneurial abilities give rise only to cross-border acquisitions. In
equilibrium, greenfield FDI is always one way: from the high-cost to the low-cost country,
while cross-border acquisitions are always two-way. Hence, our model can generate two-way
FDI flows even in the absence of transport costs and factor price diﬀerences.
Firms’ choice between the two modes of FDI, and the re-assignment of corporate assets on
the international merger market have an important impact on aggregate productivity. While
FDI may positively aﬀect the distribution of firm eﬃciencies in one country, it may have the
opposite eﬀect in the other country. Indeed, if productivity is measured at the plant level,
cross-border acquisitions tend to reduce the observed productivity of the plants in the highcost country.
We have derived the following key predictions. (1) Firms engaging in greenfield FDI are
systematically more eﬃcient than those engaging in cross-border acquisition. As we have shown,
this is consistent with the data. (2) As factor price diﬀerences between countries vanish, all FDI
takes the form of cross-border acquisitions. This prediction is consistent with our observation
that U.S. multinationals are more likely to favor cross-border acquisitions over greenfield FDI in
high-wage rather than low-wage countries. (3) As the relative supply of corporate assets in the
low-wage country decreases, firms in the high-wage country substitute away from cross-border
acquisitions in favor of greenfield FDI. Again, this is consistent with our observation that the
share of cross-border acquisition in total U.S. FDI is decreasing in the host country’s level of
development.
While outside the scope of this paper, our model may also fruitfully be used as a framework
for policy analysis. For instance, it would be interesting to compute the welfare implications of
various policy experiments, such as restrictions on cross-border acquisitions or greenfield FDI.
From the host country’s point of view, cross-border acquisitions involve a change in ownership
of local production (and may even lead to the closure of local production), while greenfield
FDI involves the opening of a new establishment. In this sense, cross-border acquisitions bring
“less” to the host country’s economy than greenfield FDI. Moreover, greenfield FDI involves
better foreign firms than cross-border acquisitions. Hence, the optimal government policy
toward foreign direct investment should be tailored to the particular mode of FDI: greenfield

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

28

FDI vs. cross-border acquisitions. We believe this to be an exciting avenue for future research.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

29

Appendix: Empirics
This appendix serves two purposes. First, we explain the data used to construct figures 1 and
2. Second, we present an econometric analysis of the composition of a U.S. multinational’s
mode choice as a function of firm and country characteristics.
Our firm-level data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which each year
conducts a mandatory survey of all U.S. firms with foreign aﬃliates above a certain size threshold. (The size threshold ensures that the dataset does not contain “empty shells”, i.e., legal
entities without employees.) Firms that come to own a new enterprise abroad are required to
report (i) whether that enterprise was obtained through cross-border acquisition or greenfield
FDI, (ii) in which industry that enterprise produces, and (iii) in which country that enterprise
is located. From this database, we collected every recorded investment by those multinationals
whose mainline of business is a traded good over the five-year period 1994-1998. The BEA
dataset also contains a wide range of data on the characteristics of the parent firms that are
conducting FDI abroad, which are used as explanatory variables in our analysis.
Construction of figures 1 and 2. Our two measures of a firm’s eﬃciency are (i) the logarithm
of sales of the U.S. parent firm in the United States (USSALE ), and by (ii) the logarithm of
the parent firm’s value-added per employee (VADDPW ). In order to sort firms in diﬀerent
industries into eﬃciency groups, we must make eﬃciency data comparable across industries.
Using data for 1994, we calculate the diﬀerence between the eﬃciency of firm i in industry k and
the industry k average, and normalize this diﬀerence by the standard deviation in eﬃciency
across firms in industry k. On the basis of relative eﬃciency, we sort firms into the three
equally-sized groups, aggregate investment counts over firms within a group, and calculate the
share of investments taking the form of cross-border acquisitions by eﬃciency group.
To construct the data in figure 2, countries are sorted into three equally-sized groups on
the basis of their real GDP per capita in 1994, and on the basis of the average wage paid
by multinationals in that country in 1994. These data come from the Summers and Heston
dataset and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, respectively.
Econometric model. To assess the robustness of the relationships shown in figures 1 and 2,
we estimate a logit model that relates a firm’s mode choice across countries and industries to
a variety of firm and country characteristics. The dependent variables takes the value of one

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

30

if the firm chooses cross-border acquisition, and zero otherwise. The key explanatory variables
are the two measures of firm eﬃciency described above (USSALES and VADDPW ) and the
host country’s level of development. In addition to including a variety of firm and country
control variables, we also control for fixed eﬀects by parent industry.
In the construction of our sample, we classified investments to facilitate interpretation of
the results. In particular, we aggregated a firm’s investments over the sample period 1994-1998
so that, for each firm, a country-industry pair appears at most once. For firms that made
more than one investment in a particular country and industry, a country-industry observation
for a firm was coded as a cross-border acquisition only if all investments made over the fiveyear period in that country-industry cell were cross-border acquisitions, and was coded as a
greenfield investment otherwise.17 To ensure comparability across firms, the 1994 value of each
parent firm’s characteristic is used to predict that firm’s investment behavior over the whole
five-year period.
We consider six specifications. In three of these specifications, our measure of firm eﬃciency
is USSALES. In the other three, we measure firm eﬃciency using VADDPW and control for
firm size using EMP, the number of workers employed by the parent.18 We include four firmlevel controls. First, we include RDSALE, which is the logarithm of a firm’s R&D expenditures
to its total sales. Second, we include DIV, which is a measure of a firm’s diversification across
industries.19 Third, to quantify a parent firm’s previous experience in a foreign country, we
include an indicator variable, EXP, which is equal to one if the parent firm owned an enterprise
in that country prior to the sample period, and is zero otherwise. Fourth, we include the variable
INTRAIM, which is the ratio of a parent firm’s intra-firm imports to total imports so as to
measure the extent of the firm’s international vertical integration. In all six specifications, we
include measures of three country characteristics: a host country’s level of development, its
17

Almost all industry-country pairs were either entirely characterized by cross-border acquisition or greenfield.

Only a handful of country-industry pairs in the sample involved both cross-border acquisitions and greenfield
FDI. The results that obtain from estimating the same model on the raw data oﬀer very similar results.
18
The correlation between USSALES and VADDPW is 0.46.
19
DIV is defined as:
$−1
#
[ 2
spj
,
log
j

where spj is the share of the parent firm’s sales in industry j, and the sum is over the eight largest industries in
which the parent firm sells.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics.
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Description

ACQ

0.435

0.496

Indicator for Acquisition

U SSALE

15.2

1.61

Sales in U.S.

V ADDP W

4.45

0.523

(Gross Product)/Employees

EM P

10.0

1.44

Employees

DIV

-1.01

0.658

Herfindahl Index for Parent Firm Sales

R&D

-.389

1.32

(R&D Expenditure)/Sales

EXP

0.696

0.460

Indicator for Previous Country Experience

IN T RAIM

0.610

0.336

(Intra-Firm Imports)/(Total Imports)

RGDP P C

9.81

0.723

Real GDP per Capita

AV W AGE

3.1

0.75

Average Wage

P OP

16.7

1.38

Population

OP EN

3.94

0.648

(Exports plus Imports)/GDP

All continuous variables (except INT RAIM) in logarithms.
All firm data is from the BEA’s confidential dataset.
Country level data is from the Penn World Tables.

31

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

32

market size, and its degree of openness to international trade. To gauge a host country’s level
of development in a parsimonious fashion, we include RGDPPC, which is the logarithm of real
GDP per capita. A country’s market size is captured by POP, which is the logarithm of the
country’s population. Finally, we include OPEN, which is a measure of a country’s openness to
international trade (the sum of exports and imports, divided by GDP). Descriptive statistics
are presented in table 1.
The results are shown in table 2, where the heading of each column indicates the measure of
productivity used in that specification. The columns are organized by the number of controls
included in the analysis with the first two corresponding to the most parsimonious specifications, the next two corresponding to specifications including the firm level controls, and the
last two corresponding to specification that also include fixed eﬀects by aﬃliate industry. All
six specifications include parent industry fixed eﬀects. Standard errors (shown in parentheses)
are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering by firm.
The results provide evidence that the relationships reported in figures 1 and 2 are robust to a
wide range of firm and industry controls. In all six specifications, the coeﬃcient on the eﬃciency
measure is negative and statistically significant, indicating that the more eﬃcient firms enter
foreign markets through greenfield FDI rather than through cross-border acquisition. Firms
do not perceive cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI as perfect substitutes.20 Further,
in all six specifications the coeﬃcient on RGDPPW is positive and statistically significant,
indicating that firms tend to enter rich, developed countries through cross-border acquisition
rather than through greenfield FDI.

20

Our empirical results complement those of Blonigen (1997), who provides indirect evidence suggesting that

greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions are diﬀerent in nature.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

33

Table 2: Greenfield FDI vs. Cross-Border Acquisitions as a Function of Firm and Country
Characteristics.

Eﬃciency

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

U SSALE

V ADDP W

U SSALE

V ADDP W

U SSALE

V ADDP W

-0.211

-0.932

-0.280

-1.128

-0.301

-1.287

(0.074)

(0.308)

(0.103)

(0.374)

(0.122)

(0.504)

EM P

-0.141

-0.111

-0.077

(0.076)

(0.115)

(0.167)

DIV

R&D

EXP

IN T RAIM

RGDP P C

-0.026

-0.298

-0.431

-0.766

(0.317)

(0.317)

(0.412)

(0.437)

0.038

0.099

0.009

0.068

(0.127)

(0.143)

(0.170)

(0.196)

0.187

0.190

0.539

0.542

(0.243)

(0.244)

(0.282)

(0.281)

-0.306

-0.569

-0.783

-1.062

(0.459)

(0.487)

(0.617)

(0.663)

0.662

0.613

0.564

0.533

0.550

0.502

(0.156)

(0.154)

(0.175)

(0.173)

(0.214)

(0.219)

0.037

0.057

0.004

0.015

-0.134

-0.120

(0.092)

(0.097)

(0.100)

(0.103)

(0.124)

(0.124)

-0.626

-0.551

-0.591

-0.573

-0.947

-0.918

(0.185)

(0.189)

(0.202)

(0.207)

(0.280)

(0.284)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

Obs.

856

849

724

725

641

642

Log-likelihood

-488

-480

-412

-407

-305

-302

P OP

OP EN

FE: Parent
Industry
FE: Aﬃliate
Industry

Standard errors (shown in parenthesis) are robust to heteroskedasticity and allow for clustering by parent firm.
The correlation between U SSALE and V ADDP W is 0.46.
The eﬃciency measure corresponding to each specification is shown under the column number.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

34

Appendix: Proofs
Proof of proposition 1. Let λi (ϕ) denote the fraction of firms producing in country i that
are of eﬃciency less than or equal to ϕ. We need to show that λ1 (ϕ) > λ2 (ϕ) for all ϕ > 0.
For ϕ ≥ ma1 (m), we have
λ1 (ϕ) = 1 > λ2 (ϕ).
Consider now 0 < ϕ < ma1 (m), and let mi (ϕ) be such that ϕ = mi (ϕ)ai (mi (ϕ)), i.e., mi (ϕ) is
the mass appeal of the variety that will, in equilibrium, be produced by a firm of eﬃciency ϕ
in country i. We have
λ1 (ϕ) ≡
>
>

E1 H(m1 (ϕ))
E1 H(m)
H(m1 (ϕ))
1 + (E1 /E2 ) [1 − H(m)]
E2 H(m2 (ϕ))
≡ λ2 (ϕ),
E2 + E1 [1 − H(m)]

where the second inequality follows from the observation that m1 (ϕ) > m2 (ϕ).
Proof of proposition 7. An increase in φ induces an increase in the threshold m (see lemma
1), which in turn leads to an increase in γ 1 (see equation (27)).
Consider now the eﬀect of an increase of φ on µi . Let ϕ(m) ≡ h(m) − θh(θm). Further, let

m
e be defined by ϕ(m)
e = 0. To see that m
e is unique, note that
Further,

if and only if

e = h0 (m)
e − θ2 h0 (θm).
e
ϕ0 (m)
e < θ2 h0 (θm)
e
h0 (m)

mh
e 0 (m)
e
e
mθh
e 0 (θm)
<
h(m)
e
h(θm)
e

since h(m)
e = θh(θm).
e
However, the last inequality must hold by condition (C2). Hence,

ϕ0 (m)
e < 0, and so ϕ(m) > 0 for any m < m,
e and ϕ(m) < 0 for any m > m.
e
b then m
b = m,
e and so an increase in
From (20) and (25), we have m
b = min{m,
e m}. If φ ≥ φ,
b then m
b = m < m.
e
φ has no eﬀect on m,
b and hence (by equation (26)) no eﬀect on µi . If φ < φ,

From lemma 1, it follows that a small increase in φ leads to an increase in m. Using equation

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

35

(26) and the implicit function theorem, an increase in m induces an increase in µi if ϕ(m) ≡
b it follows indeed that ϕ(m) > 0.
e if φ < φ,
h(m) − θh(θm) > 0. However, since m < m

Proof of proposition 8. We first want to show that m is increasing in θ. Let ϕ(θ, m) denote
the r.h.s. of equation (19). Since ∂ϕ(θ, m)/∂m < 0, we need to show that ∂ϕ(θ, m)/∂θ > 0.

From (19), we obtain
∂ϕ(θ, m)
∂θ

· Z
= σφ E1

Z m
∂a1 (m)
dH(m)
ma1 (m)dH(m) + E1 θ
m
∂θ
0
0
¸
Z θm
∂a2 (m)
+E2
m
dH(m) + a2 (θm)m
∂θ
0
· Z m
Z m
E2 h(θm)h(m)
dm
= σφ E1
ma1 (m)dH(m) + E1 θ
m2
[E1 + E2 ] g(a2 (θm))
0
0
¸
Z θm
2 E1 h(m/θ)h(m)
dm + a2 (θm)m.
−E2
(m/θ)
[E1 + E2 ] g(a2 (m))
0
m

Changing variables, this expression can be rewritten as
Z m
∂ϕ(θ, m)
= σφE1
ma1 (m)dH(m) + a2 (θm)m
∂θ
0
> 0.
Hence, dm/dθ > 0. From (27), it then follows immediately that dγ 1 /dθ < 0.
Consider now the share µ1 of entrepreneurs from country 1 who engage in cross-border
mergers in country 2. From equation (26), we obtain
¾
½
E2
dm
b
dµ1
=
.
−mh(θ
b
m)
b + [h(m)
b − θh(θm)]
b
dθ
E1 + E2
dθ

b by assumption, m
Since φ > φ
b is defined by h(m)
b − θh(θm)
b = 0. Hence, the above expression
simplifies to

Similarly,

dµ1
E2
=−
mh(θ
b
m)
b < 0.
dθ
E1 + E2

dµ2
E1
=−
mh(θ
b
m)
b < 0.
dθ
E1 + E2
Proof of proposition 9. Observe that the eﬀect of an decrease in E2 , holding E1 + E2 fixed,
is equivalent to the eﬀect of increasing E1 , holding E1 + E2 fixed. Hence, we need to prove that
dγ 1 /dE1 > 0 and dµ1 /dE1 < 0. To this end, we first show that m is decreasing in E1 , holding

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

36

E1 + E2 fixed. Let ϕ(E1 , m) denote the r.h.s. of equation (19). Since ∂ϕ(E1 , m)/∂m < 0, we
need to show that ∂ϕ(E1 , m)|E1 +E2 =const. /∂E1 > 0. From (19), we obtain
¯
· Z m
Z m
∂ϕ(E1 , m) ¯¯
=
σφ
θ
ma
(m)dH(m)
−
ma2 (m)dH(m)
1
¯
∂E1
0
0
E1 +E2 =const.
¯
Z m
∂a1 (m) ¯¯
+E1 θ
m
dH(m)
∂E1 ¯E1 +E2 =const.
0
#
¯
Z m
∂a2 (m) ¯¯
m
dH(m)
+E2
∂E1 ¯E1 +E2 =const.
0
¯
Z m
∂a2 (m) ¯¯
−
dm.
∂E1 ¯E1 +E2 =const.
θm

(28)

The sum of the third and fourth terms in brackets can be rewritten as
Z θm
Z m
H(m) − H(θm)
H(m/θ) − H(m)
dH(m) + E2
dH(m)
m
m
E1 θ
[E
+
E
]
g(a
(θm))
[E
1
2
2
1 + E2 ] g(a2 (m))
0
0
Z m
H(m) − H(m)
+E2
dH(m).
m
[E1 + E2 ] g(a2 (m))
θm
Changing variables, we obtain
Z m
Z m
E1 h(m) + θE2 h(θm)
H(m) − H(m)
θ
dm + E2
dH(m).
m [H(m) − H(θm)]
m
[E
+
E
]
g(a
(θm))
[E
1
2
2
1 + E2 ] g(a2 (m))
0
θm
Integrating by parts yields
θm [H(m) − H(θm)] a2 (θm) − θ

Z

0

m

a2 (θm) {[H(m) − H(θm)] + m [h(m) − θh(θm)]} dm

Z m
−θm [H(m) − H(θm)] a2 (θm) −
a2 (m) {[H(m) − H(m)] − mh(m)} dm
θm
Z m
Z m
Z θm
= −θ
a1 (m) [H(m) − H(θm)] dm − θ
ma1 (m)dH(m) +
ma2 (m)dH(m)
0
0
0
Z m
Z m
a2 (m) [H(m) − H(m)] dm +
ma2 (m)dH(m),
−
θm

θm

where the equality follows again from integrating by parts. Substituting this expression for the

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

37

third and fourth terms in brackets in equation (28), we obtain that
¯
· Z m
∂ϕ(E1 , m) ¯¯
= σφ −θ
a1 (m) [H(m) − H(θm)] dm
¯
∂E1
0
E1 +E2 =const.
¯
¸ Z m
Z m
∂a2 (m) ¯¯
−
a2 (m) [H(m) − H(m)] dm −
dm
∂E1 ¯E1 +E2 =const.
θm
θm
½Z m
= −σφθ
a1 (m) [H(m) − H(θm)] dm
0
¾ Z m
Z m
H(m) − H(m)
dm,
a2 (m) [H(m) − H(m)] dm −
−
θm
θm [E1 + E2 ] g(a2 (m))
which is clearly negative. From (27), it then follows that γ 1 is increasing in E1 , holding E1 +E2
fixed.
b by assumption, we obtain from (26)
Observing that m
b is independent of E1 (since φ > φ

that

and

¯
dµ1 ¯¯
H(m)
b − H(θm)
b
=−
< 0,
¯
∂E1 E1 +E2 =const.
E1 + E2
¯
dµ2 ¯¯
H(m)
b − H(θm)
b
=
> 0.
∂E1 ¯E1 +E2 =const.
E1 + E2

References
Antras, P. (2003): “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1374—1418.
Antras, P., L. Garicano, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2004): “Outsourcing in a Knowledge
Economy,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Antras, P., and E. Helpman (2004): “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 112,
553—580.
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity
in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268—1290.
Blonigen, B. (1997): “Firm-Specific Assets and the Link Between Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 447—465.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

38

Caves, R. E. (1998): “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(4), 1947—1982.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2004): “Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries, and
Export Destinations,” NBER Working Paper 10344, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (2004): “Managerial Incentives and the International Organization of Production,” Journal of International Economics, Forthcoming.
Grossman, G. M., and G. Maggi (2000): “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic
Review, 90(5), 1255—1275.
Hanson, G. H., R. J. Mataloni, and M. J. Slaughter (2003): “Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms,” NBER Working Paper 9723, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Helpman, E. (1984): “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy, 92(3), 451—471.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and S. Yeaple (2004): “Exports versus FDI with Heterogeneous
Firms,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 300—316.
Maksimovic, V., and G. Phillips (2001): “The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages
in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Eﬃciency Gains?,” Journal of Finance, 55(6),
2019—2065.
Mataloni, R. J. J., and D. R. Yorgason (2002): “Operations of U.S. Multinational Companies: Preliminary Results from the 1999 Benchmark Survey,” Survey of Current Business,
82(3), 24—54.
Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695—1725.
Neary, P. (2004): “Cross-Border Mergers as Instruments of Comparative Advantage,” CEPR
Discussion Paper 4325, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment

39

Nocke, V., and S. Yeaple (2004): “Mergers and the Composition of International Commerce,” NBER Working Paper 10405, National Bureau of Economic Analysis.
United Nations Center for Transnational Corporations (1999): World Investment
Report.

