                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CULTURAL BIASES IN ECONOMIC EXCHANGE

                                              Luigi Guiso
                                             Paola Sapienza
                                             Luigi Zingales

                                         Working Paper 11005
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11005


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




We would like to thank Giuseppe Nicoletti for providing the OECD dataset, Michele Gambera for providing
the Morningstar portfolio data, and Roc Armenter for excellent research assistantship. We also thank
Franklin Allen, Marianne Baxter, Patricia Ledesma, Mitchell Petersen, Andrei Shleifer, Rene Stulz, and
Samuel Thompson for very helpful comments. We benefited from the comments of participants to seminars
at the European University Institute, Wharton, Northwestern University, the University of Chicago,
University of Wisconsin, NBER Corporate Finance, International Trade, and Behavioral Meetings. Luigi
Guiso acknowledges financial support from MURST, and the EEC. Paola Sapienza acknowledges financial
support from the Center for International Economics and Development at Northwestern University. Luigi
Zingales acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research on Security Prices and the Stigler
Center at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 11005
December 2004
JEL No. G0, G3, F1

                                             ABSTRACT

How much do cultural biases affect economic exchange? We try to answer this question by using
the relative trust European citizens have for citizens of other countries. First, we document that this
trust is affected not only by objective characteristics of the country being trusted, but also by cultural
aspects such as religion, a history of conflicts, and genetic similarities. We then find that lower
relative levels of trust toward citizens of a country lead to less trade with that country, less portfolio
investment, and less direct investment in that country, even after controlling for the objective
characteristics of that country. This effect is stronger for good that are more trust intensive and
doubles or triples when trust is instrumented with its cultural determinants. We conclude that
perceptions rooted in culture are important (and generally omitted) determinants of economic
exchange.

Luigi Guiso
University of Chicago GSB
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
lguiso@gsb.uchicago.edu

Paola Sapienza
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

Luigi Zingales
University of Chicago GSB
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@chicagogsb.edu
        We always have been, we are, and I hope that we always shall be detested in France.

                                                                                  Duke of Wellington

      The Webster dictionary defines culture as “the customary beliefs, social forms, and material
traits of a racial, religious, or social group.” In this paper we focus on the first dimension of
culture (i.e., customary beliefs) and we ask how these customary beliefs (as those expressed by
the Duke of Wellington) impact economic choices.
      In doing so we face both a theoretical and an empirical challenge. From the theoretical point
of view, we need to explain how these customary beliefs may enter into the standard economic
model. Since Muth (1960, 1961) and Lucas (1976) nearly all research in economics has endog-
enized beliefs, under the rational expectations assumption that subjective and objective beliefs
coincide. But the assumption that agents share common prior beliefs (necessary for rational
expectations) is increasingly under attack. The common-prior assumption is quite restrictive
and does not allow agents to ”agree to disagree” (Aumann (1976)). Perfectly rational people
might have different priors. In fact, the common use of the word rational only requires beliefs
to be Bayesian. But the Bayesian paradigm does not address the question of the rationality of
prior beliefs (Gilboa, Postlewaite, and Schmeidler, 2004). One possible way out is to develop a
framework for a rational choice of prior beliefs by an individual. This is the avenue pursued by
Brunnermeier and Parker (2004) in their optimal expectation approach. Alternatively, one can
analyze empirically how these prior beliefs are influenced by culture. Paraphrasing Einstein we
identify culture as ”the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen.”1 . This is the avenue
we will follow in this paper.
      In particular, we focus on the effect that customary beliefs have on international trade and
investments via the effect they have on the degree of trust citizens of a country have toward
citizens of other countries. In a world where contract enforcement is imperfect and/or where
it is impossible or prohibitively expensive to write all future contingencies into contracts, the
degree of mutual trust is an essential component in any economic exchange. Lack of trust will
prevent otherwise profitable trade and investment opportunities. In relational contracts what
matters is personalized trust, the mutual trust people developed through repeated interactions
(Grief, 1993). For the development of anonymous markets, however, what matters is generalized
trust, the trust people have toward a random member of an identifiable group (e.g., McEvily et

  1
      On the economic effect of prejudice see the pioneer work of Becker (1957)


                                                        1
al. (2002) and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (GSZ)(2004)). In this paper, we focus on the role
customary beliefs have on trust and argue that culture plays a role in the formation of trust,
beyond what objective considerations would justify. We then, show how these cultural biases
impact international trade and investments.
      From an empirical point of view, the challenge we face is how to separate customary beliefs
from rational expectation beliefs. We do so in two steps. First, we use a rich dataset that
reports the trust that individuals in a set of countries have towards generic individuals in each
country that belongs to the set. Under rational expectations, a country of destination fixed effect
captures the true trustworthiness of the citizens of that country. This allows us to separate the
objective characteristics from customary beliefs.
      To see how it works consider a recent survey carried out by the 3i/Cranfield European
Enterprise Center, where European managers of five different nationalities were asked to rank
managers of the same five countries on the basis of their trustworthiness.2 The average results,
which are summarized in the table below, highlight three facts.

                                     Britain   Germany    France    Italy   Spain
                   British view         1            2       4       5       3
                   German view          2            1       3       5       4
                   French view          4            1       2       5       3
                   Italian view         3            1       2       4       5
                   Spanish view         2            1       4       5       3

First, there seems to be some common views, which in a rational expectations world coin-
cide with the objective characteristics of the country being trusted. Everybody ranks German
managers relatively high, while Italian ones relatively low. Second, there seems to be a “home-
country effect” in expectations: manager trusts fellow-countrymen relatively more than what
managers from other countries rank them. Italian managers, for instance, rank themselves
fourth in trustworthiness, while they are ranked fifth (last) by every other group. Third, there
are match-specific attitudes. French managers, for instance, rate British managers much lower
than any other ones except the Italians. This seems inconsistent with the ranking chosen by
every other group. British managers reciprocate (as the duke of Wellington’s opening quote

  2
    In total 1,016 managers (managing companies under 500 employees) responded from five major EC
countries: Britain (433 responses), France (127), Germany (135), Italy (185) and Spain (136).  See
http://www.cranfield.ac.uk/docs/spss/spss.html.


                                                 2
seems to suggest).
    These facts are not peculiar to this dataset. As we will show, they are exactly replicated
in an independent and broader survey (Eurobarometer). Hence, we will use the idiosyncratic
component of trust in this larger dataset as a proxy for the “customary beliefs.”
    Even this measure of ”customary beliefs” , however, could be contaminated by other factors.
For example, the average Canadian has more information about Americans than the average
Japanese and this better information can significantly affect (upward or downward) her degree
of trust.
    Hence, the second step in our procedure is to regress the residual trust on a series of variables
that proxy for difference in information and another set that proxy for culture.
    As measures of information we use the geographical distance between the two countries, their
proximity, and the commonality between the two languages.3 We also collected the number of
times a country name appears in the headlines of the major newspaper in each country, as a
measure of the degree of information this country has. These variables seem to have limited
power to explain why some countries trust others more. If anything better newspapers’ coverage
leads to less trust.
    A variable that could proxy both for information and for culture is the commonality in the
legal systems. We find that citizens from a country trust more citizens from another when the
two countries share the same type of legal system (i.e., both have a civil code or both a common
law system).
    But we also find more convincing evidence of the effect of cultural stereotypes on trust. For
example, we know that people with similar cultural backgrounds and similar appearances tend
to trust each other more (McPherson et al. 2001). As a measure of similarity in culture that is
unrelated to better objective reasons to trust we use commonality of religion. As a measure of
somatic similarities, we use the genetic distance between indigenous populations, as computed
by Cavalli Sforza et al. (1993). While genetic distance does not necessarily express itself in
somatic differences, it does represent the evolutionary distance between two populations.
    We find that both these variables are important in explaining trust, not only from a statistical
point of view, but also from an economic one. Commonality of religion has a positive impact
and its effect is important: compared to a case where religion is not shared, a match where 90

    3
      In fact, the commonality between the two languages is also a proxy for a common culture. Thus, by attributing
all its effect to information we are biasing our results against finding any effect of culture.



                                                        3
percent of the citizens share the same religion (e.g. Italy and Spain) raises trust by 6 percent
of its sample mean. Citizens of a country also tend to trust more citizens of countries that are
genetically closer. One standard deviation increase in genetic distance lowers bilateral trust by
6 percent of the sample mean.
   To capture the implicit positive or negative bias against other nations present in a country’s
cultural tradition, we also use its history of wars. People’s priors can be affected by their
education and in particular by the history they study in school. Italian education, for instance,
emphasizes the struggles that lead to the reunification of the country in the 19th century.
Since the major battles during this period have been fought against Austria, Italian students
may develop, as our data show, a negative image of Austrians. These findings are consistent
with Bornhorst et al (2004), who find that cultural stereotypes affect the level of trust in an
experimental setting.
   Having established an effect of ”culture” on priors, we then use these cultural variables as
instruments to show how culture affects economic exchange between two countries through its
impact on trust.
   We find that a higher level of relative trust can explain cross country trade beyond what
extended gravity models can account for. At sample means, a one standard deviation increase
in the trust of the importer toward the exporter raises exports by 32 percent.
   To gain more confidence on the causal nature of this result, we investigate whether the
magnitude of this effect changes as theory predicts. If trust is an important component in
the decision to buy a foreign good, it should matter the most for sophisticated goods, which
greatly differ on quality. For this reason, we split the sample according to Rauch (1999) goods
classification. Consistent with trust causing trade, the effect is much stronger for differentiated
goods than for commodities.
   That culture affects trust and, through it, trade does not necessarily imply that culture
affects it through its impact on people’s prior. An alternative interpretation is that it works
through preferences. If, for cultural reasons, British derive a special pleasure from hurting
French, it is rational for the French to mistrust them. This cultural bias would lead to lower
trust and lower trade. If this were the case, however, the more information a French has about
British, the less he will trust them. By contrast, if culture works through priors, the more
information, the less its role in affecting trade should be. Consistent with our hypothesis that
culture works through people’s priors, we find that the effect of trust is reduced if a country is


                                                4
more exposed to the news of another country.
   We also show that the degree of relative trust affects the pattern of international diversifi-
cation. Portfolio investments are heavily tilted toward countries whose citizens are considered
relatively more trustworthy: one-standard deviation increase in trust doubles the average share
of investment in a country.
   We find the same results when we analyze the pattern of foreign direct investments. A coun-
try is more willing to make foreign direct investment in a country whose citizens it trusts more.
Hence, the correlation between trust and economic exchange seems to be both economically
important and pervasive.
   We then instrument trust with its cultural components (the history of wars, and the com-
monality in religion and in ethnic origin), which are also the drivers of stereotypes. Since these
factors are unlikely to have been driven by recent trade or investment flows, we can exclude the
reverse causality question. In fact, to be sure, we drop the wars during the last 200 years, the
ones that are more likely to have affected today’s trade patterns, and find even stronger effects.
   Our IV estimates are between two and three times larger than our OLS one. Hence, not only
trust is an important factor in determining the pattern of economic exchange, but its cultural
component seems to be particularly important.
   While several papers have tried to explain the average level of trust in a country (e.g., la
Porta et al. (1997) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2002)), we are the first to estimate and try to
explain the relative levels of trust across different nations. Such difference is important because
countries differ widely in their institutional settings and institutional characteristics tend to be
highly correlated, so it is extremely difficult to disentangle the driving force. By contrast, we
can perfectly control for all country specific factors through country fixed effects and focus on
the characteristics of the match.
   In our attempt to explain several international exchange puzzles, our paper is similar to
Portes and Rey (2002). As a key determinant, however, they do not consider trust, but dif-
ferences in information, which they measure as telephone traffic between two countries and as
number of local branches of foreign banks. Our paper is also related to Morse and Shive (2004),
Cohen (2004), De Groot et al. (2003) and Vachlos (2004). Morse and Shive (2004) relate port-
folio choices to the degree of patriotism of a country. Cohen (2004) shows that employees’ bias
toward investing in their own company is not due to information, but to some form of loyalty
toward their company. Both these papers, thus, illustrate one specific dimension in which cul-


                                                 5
tural biases can affect economic choices. Our paper uses a broader definition of cultural bias
and tries to show the pervasiveness of its effects. On the other hand, De Groot et al.(2003)
and Vachlos (2004) study the effect of institutional quality and regulatory homogeneity on in-
ternational exchange. While their findings can be explained in term of similar cultures breeding
higher trust, they are also consistent with other, more traditional explanations (information,
ease of access to legal remedies, etc.). We go beyond these results and show that trust matters
even after we account for these institutional similarities.
    Finally, our paper can be seen as a generalization of Rauch and Trindade (2002). They find
that the percentage of ethnic Chinese in a country help predicts the level of trade beyond the
standard specification. We show this result is not specific to ethnic networks. Any cultural
barrier (or lack of thereof) significantly impacts trade and investments.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I presents a very simple model of the
reason why trust might be so important. Section II introduces our data and shows that 40%
of the variation in trust is not due to objective characteristics, but to idiosyncratic opinions.
Section III relates relative trust to information and cultural variables. Section IV studies the
effect of relative trust on trade, Section V on portfolio investments, and Section VI on foreign
direct investments. Finally, Section VII concludes.


I    Theoretical Framework

How does trust enter economic decisions? One way to model trust is as degree of precision. In
assessing their opportunities to trade and invest economic agents make some estimates on the
value of these opportunities. The higher the trust on the counterpart, the better the precision
of the estimate is. In such a case, the role played by trust would be second order: except for
very high level of risk aversion, trust modelled in this way is bound to have very little impact
on decisions.
    Alternatively, trust (or at least the cultural component of trust) can be modelled as a prior
affecting people’s decisions. To see how trust can have a first order effect through this channel
we present an extremely simple model, based on a variation of Anderlini and Felli (2002).
    Consider two parties, A and B, who can engage in some profitable trade. Let assume that
A has to spend a cost c to find out whether the total value created by this trade opportunity
is V h > 0 (with probability p) or V l < 0 (with probability 1 − p). After the cost c is paid,


                                                 6
the value V i becomes known (to both parties) with certainty. Thus, if the value is found to be
V l < 0, the trade opportunity will not be pursued.
      If both parties behave properly, the value created by this opportunity is equally split between
them. There is, however, the possibility that B behaves opportunistically (Williamson (1985)
would say with guile) and succeeds in appropriating the whole surplus. For example, early
investors in Russia, such as Kenneth Dart, experienced at their own expenses the creativity of
local managers in expropriating shareholders. One example was the organization of a shareholder
meeting in a small town in the middle of Siberia after all the air tickets to that destination had
been purchased. Another example is the aggressive use of reverse stock splits (when all Yukos
capital got consolidated into 10 shares) to squeeze out minority investors. Note that both these
tricks are technically legal, thus a good legal system might be insufficient in protecting against
these extreme forms of opportunism.
      We assume that A attributes probability π to this set of events. For simplicity, we ignore
the similar problem faced by B. Then, the ex ante payoff of A is



                                                        Vh
(1)                                          p[1 − π]      − c.
                                                        2

      Of course, A will pay the investigation cost c and exploit the opportunity (when profitable)
if and only if (1) is positive. Hence, we have
      Proposition Regardless how big the trade opportunity V h is and regardless how small the
cost of investigation c is, if the level of trust [1 − π] is sufficiently low, the trade opportunity will
never be investigated and hence undertaken.
      A good example of Proposition 1 is provided by the unrealized meeting between Steve Jobs
and IBM. According to Steve Job memoirs, when in 1980 IBM was desperately looking for an
operating system for PCs, it looked at Apple and invited him to a meeting. Steve Jobs, fearing
that IBM would extract all the surplus from any possible negotiation, declined to go and, in so
doing, missed the opportunity to become a Microsoft.4 Hence, lack of trust may lead to first
order losses.
      Thus far, we have only shown that if A expects to be taken advantage of by B with high
probability is unlikely to enter any economic transaction with B. The relevant question, then,

  4
      We thank Luca Anderlini for suggesting this example.


                                                        7
is how A will form an expectation about this probability π. Note that the event “being taken
advantage of” is not an easy one to document. If B takes advantage of her superior knowledge of
her country legal code to “trick” A and appropriate all the surplus, this event will not appear in
the official statistics as a crime, not even as a contractual violation. Hence, A will be forced to
use a generic prior on the trustworthiness of citizens of country B, which he is going to update
with his personal experience. We assume that people use their (possibly updated) priors in
answering the Eurobarometer question on trust.
   The question, then, is how do people form their priors. In GSZ (2004) we find that people’s
expectations are deeply affected by the area where they were born, even if this differs from the
area in which they live. Hence, it is logical to assume that education plays a big role in forming
these expectations. Furthermore, in GSZ (2003) we find that religious believes of the trusting
person affect how much a person trusts another. Hence, religion should definitely play a role.
   Note that none of these forces is properly ”economic” in its nature. Hence, there is no reason
to assume that these priors are necessarily unbiased. Take for example, the above-mentioned
case of Italian historical education. The purpose of the teaching is to breed a sense of national
identity. The Austrians are simply the necessary villain. Hence, the dislike toward Austrians is
not the calculated result of a policy, but its undesired side effect: there are no heroes without
villains. In other cases, the bias might be the real goal of a political maneuver (Glaeser, 2003).
In both cases, however, the cultural forces that shape the formation of priors introduce a bias.
In this paper, we will try to estimate the importance of this cultural bias in trust and its effects
on economic exchange.
   Note also that our beliefs are perfectly rational, in the common use of the word rational,
which requires beliefs to be Bayesian. In fact, the Bayesian paradigm does not deal with the
process of belief formation and does not address the question of the rationality of beliefs (Gilboa,
Postlewaite, and Schmeidler, 2004).
   Finally, negative priors are unlikely to be corrected fast. If (1) is negative, A will never try
to trade with B and hence will never collect enough data to overturn her prior. In fact, equation
(1) provides a simple rationale for why it pays to build trust through team work or through
trust-building exercises. If two people are put in the condition to interact when c is zero or
they are forced to interact (under the threat of being fired) in situations where (1) is negative,
they will start collecting data on the trustworthiness of their partners and possibly overcome
some biased negative prior. They then will carry and apply this knowledge in future voluntary


                                                 8
interactions.
     In sum, the message of this extremely simple model is that lack of trust, which can be
rooted more in cultural traditions than in reality, can cause first order economic losses and,
furthermore, is likely to persist over time.


II     Bilateral trust

A     Measuring trust

We obtain our measures of trust from a set of surveys conducted by Eurobarometer and spon-
sored by the European Commission. The surveys were designed to measure public awareness
of, and attitudes toward, the Common Market and other European Community institutions,
in complementary fashion (see the Data Appendix for details). They have been conducted on
samples of about 1,000 individuals per country in a set of the European countries. The number
of countries sampled varies over time: they were 5 in 1970 (France, Belgium, The Netherlands,
Germany and Italy), when the first survey was conducted, and have grown to 18 in 1995, the
last survey to which we have access (besides the 5 countries above, included are Luxembourg,
Denmark, Britain, Northern Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, East Germany, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, and Austria).
     One distinct and unique feature of these surveys is that respondents have been asked to
report how much they trust their fellow citizens and how much they trust the citizens of each
of the countries belonging to the European Union. More specifically, they have been asked the
following question: ”I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have in people
from various countries. For each, please tell me whether you have a lot of trust, some trust, not
very much trust or no trust at all”.
     In some of the surveys this same question was also asked with reference to citizens of a
number of non EU countries, which include the United States, Russia, Switzerland, China,
Japan, Turkey, and some Eastern and Central European countries (Bulgaria, Slovakia, Romania,
Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and Czech Republic).
     As in every survey, there may be some doubts about the way people interpret the question.
First, there is some ambiguity on how to interpret the answer. In a trust game, the level of trust
maps into the amount of money you are willing to put at risk. Here, this mapping is missing.
Second, we are concerned whether a high level of trust reflects a high trust in a generic citizen


                                                9
of a different country or a better ability to identify the trustworthy people in a different country,
which translates into a higher willingness to trust them.
   To address these doubts in a separate survey we asked a sample of 1,990 individuals both
this question and the two following others: 1) ” Suppose that a random person you do not
know personally receives by mistake a sum of 1000 euros that belong to you. He or she is aware
that the money belongs to you and knows your name and address. He or she can keep the
money without incurring in any punishment. According to you what is the probability (number
between zero and 100) that he or she returns the money?” 2) ”How good are you (4 categories)
in detecting people who are trustworthy?”(Guiso et al. (2005)). We find that the first question
is highly statistically correlated with the measure of trust used in this paper, while the second
one not (the sign is actually negative, albeit not statistically significant). Hence, in the rest of
the paper we feel legitimated to assume that the reported level of trust reflects the subjective
probability that a random person is trustworthy
   For our purposes, we have first re-coded the answers to the trust question setting them =1 (
no trust at all), = 2 (not very much trust), =3 (some trust), =4 (a lot of trust). We have then
aggregated responses by country and year computing the mean value of the responses to each
survey. The result is a rectangular matrix of trust from European countries to European and
non European countries which varies over time and in size. Obviously, for the EU countries the
matrix is symmetric in each given sample year.
   Table 1 shows two measures of cross-national trust for the all the years in the sample. Panel
A shows the average level of trust that citizens from each country have toward citizens of other
countries. Panel B shows the percentage fraction of citizens that report that they trust a lot
their fellow citizens and the citizens of the other countries. Three features are noteworthy.
First, there is considerable variation in the amount of individuals who in each country trust
other individuals in other countries. For example, the average level of trust ranges from a
minimum trust of 1.33 (this is the average trust of Greek citizens toward Turks) to a maximum
of 3.69 (the average trust of Finns toward Finns).
   Second, individuals tend to trust more their fellow citizens, as the larger values on the main
diagonal show. But there are exceptions to this pattern. For instance, Danish and Swedish trust
their neighbors from Norway even more then themselves! This is hardly consistent with differ-
ences in trust being driven by differences in information concerning the other countries citizens
(which should decay with distance), but can be explained by opinions on trustworthiness being


                                                 10
highly affected by cultural stereotypes. Similarly, it is hard to explain only with information
the fact that the British tend to trust the French even less than they trust the Italians and the
Spanish (only 8 percent of the British trust fully the French) and much less than they trust the
Belgians and the Dutch; and even more difficult would be to reconcile with information the fact
that the French reciprocate, trusting the British as much as they trust (little) the Greeks.
   Finally, it is clear that there are systematic differences in how much a given country trusts
and how much is trusted by others (see the last row and last column of Table 1, Panel A).
For instance, the Portuguese are those who trust the least (only 10 percent report that they
trust a lot on average) and the Swedish those who trust the most (40 percent report they trust
others a lot on average); furthermore, the Turkish are the least trusted (6 percent trust them
fully on average) and citizens of Switzerland the most (29 percent trust them fully on average).
Obviously, these ”country of origin” and ”country of destination” effects may easily reflect
systematic features of the country that trusts or is trusted. If all (or almost all) the variation
in the data were explained by the attitude citizens of a country have to trust (being trusted),
there would be little hope for relative trust to be able to affect the patterns of bilateral trade.
However, country of origin effects and country of destination effects leave al lot of variation
unexplained.
   This effect is visible in Table 2 - Panel A that shows the results of a regression of the
average trust of a country versus others when full sets of country of origin dummies, country of
destination dummies, and years dummies are inserted.
   In Figure 1 we report the level of the country of origin dummy relative to Ireland. A Swedish
citizens trusts others 16 percent more on average than an Irish citizen and 26 percent more than
a Greek. Figure 2 reports the country of destination fixed effect relative to Ireland. On average
a Swiss is trusted 15 percent more than an Irish and 42 percent more than a Turk. Interestingly,
there is a correlation between trusting and being trusted. Nordic countries, for instance, are at
the top of the level of trustworthiness and tend to trust others the most. While not a proof,
this fact is suggestive that people excessively extrapolate the level of trustworthiness of their
own countrymen to people from other countries. This result is also consistent with experimental
evidence in Glaeser et al. (2000).
   Characteristics of the country expressing and receiving trust can (controlling for time vari-
ation) at most explain between 44 and 64% of the variability in trust depending on how the
aggregate trust of a country’s citizens is computed. There remains a considerable portion of the


                                                11
trust to citizens of a country that cannot be explained by characteristics of either one of the
two countries. Table 2- Panel B shows the matrix of the residual of the regression. It is this
residual variation we are interested in explaining.


III      What explains relative trust?

The amount of trust a citizen of a country has towards his fellow citizens and the citizens of
other countries will in general depend on general ”objective” features of the country that gives
and the country that receives trust as well as by some ”subjective” view that are specific to
the country pair. In order to capture ”objective” determinants of trust we include a full set
of country of origin (the country that expresses trust) and country of destination (the country
that receives trust) fixed effects as already done in Table 2. These fixed effects will capture any
variable that is specific to the country and affects its average trust and trustworthiness, such as
the level of protection that contracts receive, the enforcement granted by social punishment, the
constraints that individuals in a country have in their behaviors due to binding cultural norms.
By controlling for fixed effects of origin and destination in trust, we are left with the relative
trust.
    Relative trust among each pair of countries will be affected by match-specific variables that
impinge on the view that the citizens of the two countries have of each other. In particular, a
citizen’s prior about the reliability of another country citizen could reflect both specific infor-
mation and cultural ”stereotypes” assimilated at school or informally through word-of-mouth
in society.


A     Proxies for information

As measures of information we use the geographical distance between the two countries, their
proximity, and the commonality between the two languages. The geographical distance between
two countries is the log of distance in kilometers between the major cities (usually the capital) of
the respective countries.5 We also add a dummy variable to indicate when two countries share
a common land border (Frankel et al. (1995)). As measure of language commonality we use

   5
     This measure is from Frankel et al. (1995). We also tried our regressions with alternative measures of distance
between two countries and the results did not change substantially. Specifically, we used distance in radians of
the unit circle between country centroids (Boisso and Ferrantino, 1997)) and great circle between largest cities
(Fitzpatrick and Modlin, 1986).



                                                        12
the products of the percentage of people who speak the same language in each pair of countries,
summed across all primary languages spoken in those two countries.6
        To measure the level of information citizens of one country have of citizens of other countries
we follow Rey and Portes (2002) and collect the number of times a country name appears in
the headlines of a major newspaper in another country. For each country we searched the most
diffused newspaper present in Factiva. For each pair of country i and j we recorded the number
of articles in the newspaper of country i that mentioned country j or citizens of country j in
the headline. We divided this number by the number of total news on foreign countries.
        In addition to these measures we use La Porta et al. (1998) classification of legal origin
and construct a dummy variable equal to one when the legal system of two countries has a
common origin (both common law or both coded law). Commonality in legal origin may in
principle reflect the fact that citizens of countries having similar legal systems trust themselves
more because it is easier for them to obtain legal justice in case of deviation from the legal
contract.7 However, common law is likely to be correlated with other cultural variables and
common heritages, which may affect cultural biases. For example, in our sample common law
is highly correlated with common origin of the language, an indicator variable that is equal
to one if the countries belong to the same hindo-european family of languages (Encyclopedia
Britannica, 2004).


B        Proxies for cultural stereotypes

We measure cultural stereotypes with three variables, the history of wars between two countries
in the last millennia, the commonality in religion, and the similarity in ethnic origin.
        The first measure is the number of years a country pair has been engaged in a war since
the end of the first millennium until 1970, where we use today’s borders to decide whether a
country was engaged in a war against another. Precisely, we construct two measures. The first
one measures the number of years at war between each pair of countries from 1000 till 1815
(Congress of Vienna) and the second one measures the same variable for the period 1815-1970.
Presumably, countries that have a long history of wars and conflict will mistrust each other. For

    6
     See Boisso and Ferrantino (1997).     We use as alternative an indicator variable equal to one
if the pair of countries share an official language. This variable is from Jon Haveman’s website:
http://www.macalester.edu/research/economics/PAGE/HAVEMAN/Trade.Resources/TradeData.html. The re-
sults remain substantially unchanged.
   7
     See Cornell and Welch (1996)



                                                    13
instance, the clear tendency of the French to trust the British less than any other country, as
Table 2 shows, may reflect the 198 years these two countries have been in war since year 1,000.
Interestingly, cultural formation at school not only is a vehicle for prolonging the memory of
facts that took place many years ago (this is why we count wars over almost a millennium), but
it also shapes a citizen opinion and contribute to today’s stereotypes. Furthermore, historical
facts are interpreted with the lenses of the currently ruling group (and this is why we reconstruct
wars using today’s borders).8 .
       The second measure of cultural biases is an indicator of religious similarity equal to the
empirical probability that two randomly chosen individuals in two countries will share the same
religion. We obtain this measure by taking the product of the fraction of individuals in country
j and in country i that have religion k and then summing across k (k = Catholic, Protestant,
Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, Orthodox, no-religion, other affiliation). To calculate this
variable we use the percentage of religious and non-religious people belonging to each country
from the WVS.
       Our third measure is the commonality in ethnic origin. To measure this last variable we use
the genetic distance between indigenous population as developed by Cavalli-Sforza et. al.(1996).9
This measure is based on the existence of genetic or DNA polymorphism (a situation in which
a gene or a DNA sequence exist in at least two different forms (alleles)). A simple example of
polymorphism is the ABO blood groups classification which was discovered at the beginning of
last century. While ABO alleles are present in all population, the frequency of each allele varies a
lot across populations. For example, the O allele is frequent in 61 percent of African population
and 98 percent in American Natives populations. These differences in alleles hold true for other
genes or DNA sequences, as well. As a first approximation, Cavalli-Sforza measure of genetic
distance sums the differences in frequencies of these polymorphisms to derive a measure of how
different the genetic composition of two population is.
       We use genetic distance because it correlates with anthropometric traits (Cavalli-Sforza et al.
(1996) and Gonzalez-Jose et al. (2004)). That people “love those who are like themselves” was

   8
     For instance, the history that we are taught at school gives a certain representation of the facts that charac-
terize the evolution of our nation vis--vis the other countries, and this representation typically reflects the point
of view of the winner. This manipulation is clearly manifest in non-democratic governments which typically
exercise a strong control on what is taught in school - particularly history - in order to manipulate their citizen’s
opinions. For example, in Egypt they celebrate the “victory” against Israel in the Kippur War. But some form
of manipulation is present also in democratic societies
   9
     For a more detailed description of this measure see the Appendix.



                                                         14
already recognized by Aristotle. In our sample we can see that this love for similar translates into
higher levels of trust: in almost all the countries people trust much more a generic fellow citizen
than a generic citizen of any other country. The only exceptions are Scandinavian countries were
sometimes they trust countrymen from another Scandinavian country than a fellow citizen.
       Summary statistics on these variables and trust are reported in Table 3, Panel A. Their
cross correlation matrix (after controlling for country of origin and destination fixed effects) is
shown in Panel B.


C       Empirical results

In Table 4 we report the results of our estimates on the determinant of relative trust. Our
dependent variable is average trust.10 To avoid understating the standard errors due to repeated
observations, we follow Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) and collapse the data by
taking time averages of our right and left-hand side (after partialling out time effects). Panel
A shows the result for the whole sample, while Panel B focuses on the set of European Union
countries that we will use in our trade regressions.
       The first column in Panel A reports the results of regressing the average level of trust of
citizens of country i to citizens of country j on the information proxies. In principle, it is
not obvious what the effects of these variables should be. For instance, geographical proximity
may give rise to more frequent interactions between two country citizens and sustain trust this
way; but common borders may be the origin of frictions and expose populations to wars, which
cause mistrust. Alternatively, distance may be a proxy for information, as it may be common
language, and information may affect trust. Even in this case, however, the correlation is far
from obvious: more information allows to make more precise inference but does not necessarily
imply more or less trust on average. The estimates are consistent with these conjectures: neither
distance nor common border affects the trust of a country towards another. Common language
instead has a positive and statistically significant effect: two countries with the same primary
language trust each other 9 percent more.
       Commonality of legal origin has a positive effect on trust: citizens of countries that have
a similar legal system tend to trust each other more. The effect is small, but economically
significant: other things being equal moving from a different legal system to a common one

  10
    We obtained similar results (not reported) when we use as dependent variable the percentage of individuals
trusting a lot.


                                                     15
increases the amount of relative trust by 3.6 percent of its sample mean.
       In column 2 we introduce cultural variables. The results show that cultural factors are overall
important and their effect decreases the role of the information-based variables. Commonality
of religion has a positive impact: compared to a case where religion is not shared, a match where
90 percent of the citizens share the same religion (e.g. Italy and Spain) raises trust by 6 percent
of its sample mean. The coefficient of genetic distance shows that citizens of a country tend to
trust more citizens of countries who are genetically closer. A one standard deviation increase in
genetic distance lowers bilateral trust by more than 8 percent of the sample mean. The number
of years two countries have been at war has a negative effect on match-specific trust, though in
this specification is significant only at the 15 percent level.
       In column 3 we break down the history of wars into wars of the last two hundred years (after
the Vienna Congress) and those between 1000 and 1815. As one would expect if these cultural
biases against an enemy fade over time, the impact of recent wars is five times that of distant
wars. In the whole sample, neither effect is significant, but when we restrict it to European
countries (Panel B) the effect of recent wars is twice as large and significant at the 5 percent
level.
       These effects are not driven by the home bias in trust. In fact, in regressions 1-3 we insert a
variable equal to one when the country trusting is equal to the country trusted. In the remaining
regression, the diagonal is dropped since the variable press coverage is not defined for the home
country.
       In column 4 we add to the previous specification a direct measure of the knowledge that
citizens of country i have of citizens of country j measured by newspaper coverage. The coeffi-
cient is negative but not statistically significant. This result suggests that it is not true that on
average people trust more whom they know better. In fact, conditional on the other factors, if
anything there is a positive bias in trust for people from countries we do not know much of. This
bias, then, is corrected as more information becomes available. Another possible interpretation
is that newspapers tend to report bad news and this tend to create a negative bias, which is
stronger the more news about a country are reported.11

  11
    To understand whether relative trust is driven by information or, alternatively, some perception of the
pleasantness of individual in other countries we construct a variable that measures perceived pleasantness. In
Eurobarometer 38.0 survey respondents from five European countries (France, West Germany, Great Britain,
Northern Ireland, Spain, and Italy) were asked to rank citizens from other 12 European countries in terms of
their perceived pleasantness. The following question was asked: “Which countries of the European Community
are in your opinion the most pleasant (maximus 3 answers possible)?”. We coded 1 if country j was mentioned


                                                     16
    Alesina and La Ferrara (2002) document that in the United States differences in income
are important factors in explaining trust within a community. For this reason, in column V
we insert as additional control the absolute difference in GDP per capita between each country
pair. As implied by Alesina and La Ferrara (2002), this variable has a negative and statistically
significant effect on average trust, but the impact of all the other variables remains unchanged.
    Finally, in Panel B we re-estimate all the above specifications restricting the sample to
European Union countries, which we will use in our trade and investment analysis. The effects
are very similar to the one found in the whole sample. The main difference is that the effect of
wars is significant.


IV      The Effect of Trust on Trade

Now that we have a better sense of the determinants of relative trust we can explore what its
effects are. Is it true, as the model in section 1 suggests, that trust (or lack of thereof) can have
first order economic effects? More importantly, can we establish that the cultural bias in trust
have an impact on economic exchange? To do so we try to see what is the effect of relative trust
when inserted in traditional models of economic exchange across countries. We start with trade
of good and services.


A     Data

The first variable we use is data on trade of goods and services assembled by the Statistics of
Canada. The World Trade Database is derived from United Nations COMTRADE data. Its
advantages over other datasets is that it provides bilateral trade statistics at the 4-digit SITC
level.12 This database provides time-series of trade value, disaggregated according to trading
partner and 4-digit SITC level, for the period 1970-1996. Of this long panel we only use data
for the years when trust survey data are available (1970, 1976, 1980, 1986, 1990, 1993, 1994,
and 1996).

by citizen of country i and we use the percentage of times in which country j was mentioned by all the citizens
of country i, as a measure of how much citizens of country i think citizens of country j are pleasant people.
Interestingly, when we introduce the percentage of citizens of country i that have mentioned citizens of country j
(non reported regression) as the most pleasant citizens in European Union, we find that the coefficient of perceived
pleasantness is positive and significant.
  12
     We also used an aggregate OECD dataset, based on custom data, and found very similar results.




                                                        17
    To ensure complete homogeneity of the sample as far as bilateral trade conditions are con-
cerned, we restrict our sample to countries belonging to the European Union (16 countries). For
the countries that entered the European Union after 1970 we include observations only after the
admission date (for example, Greece is included in the sample only for the years after 1981).
    The sample statistics for the data are reported in Panel C of Table 3.


B    Empirical Results

Table 5- Panel A estimates the effect of relative trust on the amount of trade between two
countries. The dependent variable is logarithm of export from country i to country j.
    Column 1 presents the standard gravity regression (e.g. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)),
with the addition of our measure of trust of the importing country toward the exporting one
and of fixed effects for both the importing and the exporting countries, as well as year dummies
and 4-digit SITC industry dummies.13 The standard errors reported in brackets are clustered
by exporting country.
    As in the standard gravity equation, the distance between two countries negatively affects
the level of export, while the presence of a common border, of a common language positively
affect it.
    Unlike the standard gravity equation, the GDP of the importing country and the GDP of the
exporting country are not very economically significant. But in our specification we control for
exporting and importing country fixed effects. Hence, the coefficient on the GDP only captures
the effect of the time series variation in these variables.
    Most importantly (from our point of view), after controlling for all these variables our
measure of trust has a positive and statistically significant effect on trade.
    There are at least three reasons to worry about this OLS result. First, while it is possible
that trust fosters trade, it is equally possible that trade breeds trust. In fact, even our simple
model in section 1 suggests that interaction can breed trust. The second problem is that relative
trust can capture the effect of other omitted variables (for example the existence of established
trading outposts, as suggested by Rauch and Trindade (2002)). Finally, measurement error in
the variable trust may affect our results. To address these concerns we instrument our trust
variable.

 13
    Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) argue against the insertion of “remoteness” into the gravity equation.
Our results are unchanged if we add a measure of remoteness.


                                                   18
       As instruments we use the cultural determinants of trust (history of war, commonality of
religion, and genetic distance). Since we have already shown that these variables are correlated
with relative trust, these will be valid instruments if we can argue that they do not have a direct
effect on trade.
       Among these instruments, the most problematic one is the history of wars. It is not only
possible, but also plausible that wars may disrupt trade (or even foster it). For this reason,
we use as an instrument only the number of years of wars until 1815, with the understanding
that the direct effect of distant wars has faded away, while the cultural effect is more persistent.
Interestingly, the number of years at war till 1815 and between 1815 and 1970 is not significantly
correlated (point estimate of 0.06). Alternatively, we drop this instrument all together.
       Commonality of religion is unlikely to have a direct effect on trade, especially once we control
for distance, commonality of language, and common border. Poland, for instance, is not Catholic
because it traded with Rome more than with Berlin. In fact, Poland embraced the Reformation
and returned to Catholicism only when Jesuits succeeded in converting its King.
       Also genetic distance is unlikely to have a direct effect on trade, except if it is a proxy
for well established routes of communication. One can argue that populations move along the
same routes traders use. While possible, we regard this possibility as unlikely. The genetic
differences captured by Cavalli-Sforza measure reflect Neolithic migration into the continent
(Menozzi et al., (1978) and Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza (1985)).14 His studies suggest that
despite more recent invasions from external populations (such as the Moors and the Mongols)
and many large-scale internal population movements, today’s European genetic map still reflects
earlier migrations from Asia and Africa. For example, even if the Huns arrived in France
and Italy relatively recently (450 A.D.) and the Turks arrived in Austria at the end of the
eighteenth century, the distribution of genes in Europe shows that these incursions had few
genetic consequences (Cavalli-Sforza, 2000). Since genetic differences reflect the history of very
ancient migrations from Asia and Africa (using genetic material researcher have been able to
establish that Europeans are about two-thirds Asian and one third African) we regard it as
unlikely that they are correlated with today’s patterns of trade.
       The second column of Table 5- Panel A shows the IV estimates, when all these three in-

  14
    These studies show genetic evidence consistent with archeological evidence that various group of Neolithic
individuals, while admixing with local hunter-gather population, bore a significant fraction of the genes of today’s
European populations.




                                                        19
struments are used.15 Not only the effect of trust remains significant, but its magnitude more
than doubles: one-standard deviation increase in trust leads to an increase in trade of about 30
percent.
      This result suggests that our measure of trust is a noisy measure of the true trust between
two countries and when we instrument we reduce the downward-bias effect of this noise. One
potential concern with our instrumental variable regression is that our instruments may be only
weakly correlated with trust. If this is the case then the two stage least squares regressions
will be biased and the standard errors misleading. To address this concern we compute the F
statistics for the joint hypothesis that the instruments’ coefficients are zero in the first stage
regression. We find that the significance level is higher than 3% , where Stock and Yogo (2002)
recommend an F test with at least a 5% significance level.
      In Column III and IV we re-estimate the OLS and IV introducing our proxy for information
(newspaper coverage). As discussed in Portes and Rey (2003), information is positively associ-
ated with trade, although the direction of causality is questionable. The coefficient, however, is
not statistically significant. After controlling for the availability of information, trust remains
an important determinant of trade patterns.
      Finally, in column V and VI we introduce an indicator variable equal to one if two countries
both have a coded law or a common law (see La Porta et al. (1998)). Common origin of law
has a positive and significant effect on trade. This result can be seen as evidence that similar
institutions foster more trade because they provide more guarantee to the parties involved (De
Groot et al, (2003) and Vachlos (2004)).
      In Table 5- Panel B we test whether the impact of trust on trade varies according to what
theory would suggest. According to our simple model, the importance of trust, as initial prior
about a group, should be stronger when people lack information and it should progressively
fade away as more direct information becomes available. If we use news coverage as a proxy
for information, then, we expect that the impact of trust should decline at higher level of news
coverage. This is exactly what we see. Computed at the average level of coverage, the effect
of trust is 25 percent higher than before and this effect is statistically significant in the IV
regression.
      This evidence can help us distinguish our hypothesis from a possible alternative. Culture

 15
      When we drop the history of wars the results are unchanged.




                                                      20
could have an effect through preferences. The citizens of a country (e.g., the French) may
mistrust those of another (e.g., the British) because they rationally anticipate that the latter
will derive a special pleasure from hurting them. If this were the case, more information will
not alleviate this mistrust (in fact it might exacerbate it). Since we find that more information
does weaken the effect of trust, we can dismiss this alternative.
    To gain more confidence on the causal interpretation of our results, in Table 5- Panel C
we look at whether the effect of trust differs according to what our hypothesis predicts. Our
hypothesis predicts that trust should matter more for goods whose quality can differ greatly.
For these goods, contracts are more difficult to write and hence they are more likely to leave
gaps, where trust plays a very important role. For this reason, we split the sample according to
Rauch (1999) goods classification. Rauch distinguishes between goods traded in an organized
exchange, goods with a reference price, and differentiated goods. Clearly, goods can be traded
in an organized exchange only if they are very homogenous in quality. Similarly, they can have
a reference price, only if they are not too dissimilar in their intrinsic quality. Hence, Rauch’s
classification can also be interpreted as a classification of the degree of trust-intensiveness of
the different goods.16 The first four columns of Table 5- Panel C presents our basic regressions
(both OLS and IV) for the subgroup of industries classified as organized exchange goods, while
the last four columns present the results for industries classified as differentiated goods. The
effect of trust is consistently stronger for differentiated goods: trade increases 36 percent versus
16 percent in response to one-standard deviation increase in trust. The magnitude of this
effect is not very different from the one found by Rauch and Trindade (2002). They find that
the presence of ethnic Chinese networks increases the amount of bilateral trade by 60 percent.
Consistent with Rauch (1999) we also find that press coverage have differential impact on the
two types of goods.


V      International Portfolio Diversification

The second type of international exchange where we want to explore the effect of trust is portfolio
diversification. In deciding where to invest its savings each individual and/or institution face a
wide arrays of countries to choose from. In this choice there are at least two factors where trust

  16
     Rauch(1999) made a ”conservative” and a ”liberal” classifications of industries. To minimize ambiguity we
excluded industries that were classified in different ways under the two classifications and run our regressions
only for organized exchange goods and differentiated goods.


                                                      21
might play a role: an investor should trust the reliability of the accounting numbers released
by companies located in that country and it should trust the Government of that country not
to expropriate his investment. Since we will control for country of destination fixed effects,
the ”objective” trustworthiness should already be controlled for. Hence, our measure of trust
will capture either some differences in the information sets or some idiosyncratic biases in the
expectations.


A      Data

Ideally, we would like to have data on the international diversification of individual investors.
These data, however, are not available on a consistent basis. Hence, we resort to portfolio data
from institutional investors. Since we expect institutions to be more informed and less affected
by cultural biases, our data is biased against finding any effect of cultural variables.
      The data we use is from Morningstar, which has kindly provided us with the geographical
breakdown of equity investment of European mutual funds disaggregated by country of origin.17
We exclude funds located in Luxembourg and Ireland when they are affiliated with companies
located in other European countries.
      This dataset include all funds that report their positions to Morningstar (including bal-
anced and flexible funds, for example). Bonds investments, however, are not included. Sample
statistics are reported in Panel D of Table 3.


B      Empirical Results

Table 6 investigates the effects of trust on portfolio allocations. The dependent variable is the
percentage of the equity portfolio of mutual funds located in country i that is invested in equity
of country j, where i 6= j.18 Panel A presents the basic regressions, while Panel B repeat them
adding the interaction between trust and press coverage.
      A traditional portfolio model would only include the inverse of the covariance of stock market
returns and the weight of the stock market of country i in the world portfolio. Since we include
country fixed effects, this latter variable is absorbed by the country fixed effects.
      To this benchmark we add the standard proxies for information: a dummy for common
borders, the product of the percentage of people speaking the same language, and the logarithm

 17
      We thank Michele Gambera for providing us with the data.
 18
      With this data we are unable to address the home bias portfolio puzzle.


                                                       22
of the distance between the two capitals.
    None of these information variables is statistically significant (column 1). Only the trust
of the investing country has a positive and statistically significant effect on the percentage of
equity invested in a country. One standard deviation increase of the trust of people in country i
toward people in country j increases the portfolio share of country i in country j by 3 percentage
points, which corresponds to a an 84 percent increase in the mean share.
    In column 2 we instrument our measure of trust with the three cultural instruments (wars,
commonality of religion, and genetic distance). The coefficient of trust doubles.19
    In columns 3 and 4 we re-estimate the same regression respectively by OLS and IV after
inserting two additional controls: press coverage and a dummy for similarity in the legal system.
Press coverage has a positive and statistically significant effect on the portfolio share. Needless to
say, this correlation could reflect the incentives that national press has in reporting information
about countries where national investors invest more. Controlling for these additional variables,
however, does not affect the previous results.
    Panel B inserts the interaction between press coverage and trust to see whether it is true that
the effect of trust is weaker when investors have access to better information. The coefficient of
the interaction is consistently negative in all specifications although it is not precisely estimated.
The direct effect of trust, however, retains statistical significance and its size is very similar (in
fact, slightly higher) than in the previous case.


VI       Foreign direct investment

Finally, we study the effect of trust on foreign direct investments (FDI).


A     Data

Statistics on FDI transactions and positions are based on the OECD database developed by the
Directorate for Financial, Fiscal and Enterprise Affairs. These statistics are compiled according
to the concept used for balance and payments (flows) and international investment positions
(stocks) statistics. We only use data for countries that belong to the European Union for the
years when trust survey data are available (1970, 1976, 1980, 1986, 1990, 1993, 1994, and 1996).

   19
      The F-test on the coefficients of the instruments in the first stage regression is equal to F(3,10)=35.19, ruling
it out the problem of weak instruments.



                                                          23
       FDI is a category of international investment made by a resident entity in one country. Ac-
cording to the classification used in the balance of payment accounts, a foreign direct investment
enterprise is an incorporated enterprise in which a foreign investor has at least 10% of the shares
or voting power. As for trade, we restrict our attention to countries members of the European
Union, where the same rules for FDI apply. Summary statistics are reported in Table 3, Panel
E.


B       Empirical Results

Table 7 reports the effect of trust of people of country i towards people of country j on the
foreign direct investments of country i in country j. The dependent variable is measured as the
log of the stock of FDI from country i to country j.
       Column 1 of Panel A reports the basic specification where in addition to mean trust we have
country fixed effects, border, language, distance, and press coverage. The impact of trust is
positive and statistically significant. One standard deviation increase in trust raises the level of
FDI by 25 percent. This effect more than triples when we use instrumental variables (column
2).20
       That the magnitude of the impact of trust on FDI is twice as large as the impact on trade
is not surprising. Since FDI are long-term investments, they are more subject to contract
incompletness than any trade, even the trade of differentiated goods. As such they become very
trust intensive.
       The effect of trust is substantially unchanged when we add a dummy for a common legal
system (column 3 and 4).
       Panel B of Table 7 re-estimate the same regressions after inserting an interaction between in-
formation and trust. As for the case of trade, the direct effect of trust is positive and statistically
significant, while the interaction between trust and press coverage is negative and statistically
significant, suggesting that the effect of trust fades away when the information about a country
increases.

  20
       The F-test on the coefficients of the instruments in the first stage regression is equal to F(3,13)=12.08.




                                                           24
VII      Conclusions

In this paper we show that culture plays a role in the formation of trust, beyond what objective
considerations would justify. Even after controlling for a country’s objective characteristics and
for differences in the information sets, historical and cultural variables affect the propensity of
the citizens of a country to trust the citizens of another country.
   We also document that these differences in trust affect the level of economic exchange be-
tween two countries: trade, portfolio investments and foreign direct investments. This effect
fades as more information about the country to be trusted becomes available in the trusting
country. This is consistent with our conjecture that culture plays a role in shaping priors in the
absence of data.
   While our results are suggestive that these effects can be economically important, they do
not allow us to derive any welfare conclusion. First, we identify these effects by looking at the
impact of relative trust on the relative level of trade. As a result, our methodology cannot
identify the impact of the average level of trust on trade and hence the welfare implications
of our results. If we assume that the effect estimated using within country variations apply
also between countries, we have that the level of trustworthiness makes Switzerland trade 40
percent more than Ireland and Turkey 73 percent below. Second, we document only effects on
quantities not on welfare. If it is costless for British to substitute French cheese with identical
cheese coming from other countries they trust more, then the utility loss they suffer could be
minimal. If that is not the case, then the welfare losses can be substantial. Only future research
will be able to tell.




                                                25
                                      References

Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara , 2002, ”Who Trusts Others?”, Journal of Pub-
     lic Economics, 85(2), 207-34.

Ammerman, Albert, J., and Luca L. Cavalli-Sforza , 1985 “The Neolithic Transition
     and the Genetics of Populations in Europe” Princeton. Princeton University Press.

Anderlini, Luca and Leonardo Felli , 2001, “Costly Bargaining and Renegotiation”, Econo-
     metrica 69: 377-411.

Anderson James, E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2003, “Gravity with Gravitas: a Solution to
     the Border Puzzle”, American Economic Review, 93: 170-92 .

Becker, Gary. , 1957, ”The economics of Discrimination” Chicago. University of Chicago
     Press.

Boisso, Dale, and Michael Ferrantino , 1997 “Economic Distance, Cultural Distance,
     and Openness: Empirical Puzzles,” Journal of Economic Integration 12: 456-484.

Bornhorst, Fabian, Andrea Ichino, Karl Schlag and Eyal Winder , 2004 , “Trust
     and Trustworthiness among Europeans: South-North Comparison”, European University
     Institute.

Cavalli Sforza, Luca L. 2000, ”Genes, People, and Languages” Berkeley. University of
     California Press.

Cavalli-Sforza, Luca L., Paolo Menozzi and Alberto Piazza “The History and Ge-
     ography of Human Genes”Princeton. Princeton University Press.

Cochrane, John. 1996,“A cross-sectional test of an investment- based asset pricing model.”
     Journal of Political Economy, 104: 572.621.

Cohen, Laurent 2003 “Loyalty Based Portfolio Choice” working paper University of Chicago.

Cornell, Brad, and Ivo Welch 1996 “Culture, Information and Screening Discrimination.”
     The Journal of Political Economy, 104-3: 542-571.

Fitzpatrick, Gary L., and Marilyn J. Modlin , 1986 Direct-Line Distances, Lanham, MD.
     The Scarecrow Press.

                                            26
Frankel, Jeffrey, Ernesto Stein, and Shang-jin Wei , 1995 “Trading blocs and the
     Americas: The natural, the unnatural, and the super-natural.” “The Journal of Develop-
     ment Economics, 47:61-95.

French, Kenneth and Poterba, James. 1996, “A cross-sectional test of an investment-
     based asset pricing model.” Journal of Political Economy, 104: pp. 572.621.

Gilboa, Itzhak, Andrew Postlewaite, and David Schmeidler 2004, “Rationality of Be-
     lief. or: Why Bayesianism is Neither Necessary nor Sufficient for Rationality” working
     paper University of Pennsylvania.

Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jos A. Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter , 2000,
     “Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 811-846.

Greif, Avner 1993,“Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
     Maghribi Traders’ Coalition.” American Economic Review, 83: 525-48.

Gonzalez-Jose, Rolando, Silvina Van der Molen, Emili Gonzalez-Perez, and Miquel Hernandez,
     2004, “Patterns of Phenotypic Covariation and Correlation in Modern Humans as Viewed
     From Morphological Integration” American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 123:69-77.

Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola, Zingales, Luigi. 2003, ”People’s opium?         Religion and
     Economic Attitudes” Journal of Monetary Economics 50:225-282.

Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola, Zingales, Luigi. 2004, ”The Role of Social Capital in Fi-
     nancial Development” The American Economic Review.94: 526-556

Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola, Zingales, Luigi. 2005, ”Trust and Ambiguity Aversion”,
     University of Chicago.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer
     1997, ”Trust in Large Organizations,” American Economic Review.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer
     1998, ”Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106: 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer 2005, ”What Works
     in Security Laws?”, Journal of Finance, forthcoming


                                            27
McCallum, John. “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns” Amer-
     ican Economic Review. 1995, 85: 615-23.

McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin and James Cook , 2001 “Birds of a feather: Ho-
     mophily in social networks”,Annual Review of Sociology 27:415-445.

Menozzi, P., A. Piazza, and Luca L. Cavalli-Sforza , 1978 “Syntethic maps of human
     genes frequencies in Europe.” Science, 201:786-92.

Morse, Adair and Shive, Sophie “Patriotism in your Portfolio ”, 2003, working paper Uni-
     versity of Michigan.

Nicita, Alessandro and Olarreaga, Marcelo . “Trade and Production, 1976-1999.” World-
     Bank.

Obsfeld, Maurice and Rogoff, Kenneth. “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroe-
     conomics: Is There a Common Cause?.” in Bernanke, Ben S.; Rogoff, Kenneth, eds. NBER
     macroeconomics annual , 2001. Volume 15. Cambridge and London. MIT Press, pp. 339
     90.

OECD. “Policies and International integration: influences on trade and foreign direct invest-
     ment. Annex 2: Foreign Direct Investments and other miscellaneous data”, OECD, Paris.

Rauch, James. , 1999, “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics, 41: 7-35.

Rauch, James and Vitor Trindade , 2002, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade”,Review
     of Economics and Statistics, 84: 116-130.

Reynolds, Weir, and Cockerham , 1983, “Estimation of the Coancestry Coefficient: Basis
     for a short term genetic distance”, Genetics, 105: 767-779.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo , 2002, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
     Regression”, NBER Technical Working Paper No. 284




                                             28
                                        Data Appendix


   A.1. - The Eurobarometer surveys
   The Eurobarometer surveys are the products of a unique program of cross national and cross tem-
poral social science research. The effort began in early 1970, when the Commission of the European
Community sponsored simultaneous surveys of the publics of the European Community. These surveys
were designed to measure public awareness of, and attitudes toward, the Common Market and other
European Community institutions, in complementary fashion. They also probed the goals given top pri-
ority for one’s own nation. These concerns have remained a central part of the European Community’s
research efforts – which were carried forward in the summer of 1971 with another six-nation survey that
gave special attention to agricultural problems. These themes were of central interest again in a survey
of the publics of the European Community countries – then nine in number – carried out in September
1973. After 1973, the surveys took on a somewhat broader scope in content as well as in geographical
coverage, with measures of subjective satisfaction and the perceived quality of life becoming standard
features of the European Community public opinion surveys. In 1974, the Commission of the European
Community launched the Eurobarometer series, designed to provide a regular monitoring of the social
and political attitudes of the publics of the nine member-nations: France, Germany, the United Kingdom,
Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, Luxembourg. These Eurobarometer are carried out
in the spring and fall of each year. In addition to obtaining regular readings of support for European
integration and the perceived quality of life, each of the Eurobarometer has explored a variety of special
topics. Also, attitudes toward the organization and role of the European Parliament have been explored
in each Eurobarometer beginning with Barometer 7 in the spring of 1977. The Eurobarometer surveys
have included Greece since Autumn 1980, Portugal and Spain since Autumn 1985, the former German
Democratic Republic since 1990, Norway (irregularly) since the fall of 1990, Finland since the spring of
1993, and Sweden and Austria since the fall of 1994. Table A1 shows the number of observations from
each country in our dataset, the number of years the country was samples and the years in which was
sampled.




                                                   29
Code   Country sampled    Number of observations   N. of years present in survey   Years present


1      France             11,464                   8                               1970,1976,1980,1986, 1990,1993,1994, 1995
2      Belgium            9,693                    8                               1970,1976,1980,1986, 1990,1993,1994, 1995
3      The Netherlands    10,123                   8                               1970,1976,1980,1986, 1990,1993,1994, 1995
4      Germany            11,332                   8                               1970,1976,1980,1986, 1990,1993,1994, 1995
5      Italy              11,016                   8                               1970,1976,1980,1986, 1990,1993,1994, 1995
6      Luxembourg         3,173                    7                               1976,1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
7      Denmark            7,020                    7                               1976,1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
8      Ireland            7,014                    7                               1976,1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
9      Great Britain      7,498                    7                               1976,1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
10     Northern Ireland   2,158                    7                               1976,1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
11     Greece             6,014                    6                               1980,1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
12     Spain              5,031                    5                               1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
13     Portugal           4,995                    5                               1986,1990,1993,1994, 1995
14     East Germany       3,210                    3                               1993,1994, 1995
15     Norway             994                      1                               1993
16     Finland            2,065                    2                               1993, 1995
17     Sweden             1,010                    1                               1995
18     Austria            1,995                    1                               1995




                                                       30
      A.2. - Genetic distance
      Measures of genetic distance between two populations, p1 and p2 , are based on the difference between
the frequencies of alleles in the two populations. We use a measure of genetic distance, called Fst,
(Reynolds, 1983) that is also called coancestry coefficient (not a very good term, because it seems to
indicate a measure of similarity, while it is really a measure of distance).
      Consider m loci, i alleles and define p1mi the frequency of the i-th allele at the m-th locus in population
1 and p2mi the frequency of the i-th allele at the m-th locus in population 2.
      Fst for 2 populations is



                                                   [p1mi − p2mi ]2
                                             P P
(2)                                   F st = Pm i P
                                            2 m [1 − i p1mi p2mi ]

      where m is measured over loci, and i over alleles at the mth locus. We use the above formula that
has been calculated for 28 population with an average number of 88 genes.
      The calculation of a genetic distance between two populations gives a relative estimate of the time
that has passed since the populations have existed as single cohesive units, under some assumptions of
evolution. When two populations are genetically isolated, the two processes of mutation and genetic
drift lead to differentiation in the allele frequencies at selectively neutral loci. As the amount of time
that two populations are separated increases, the difference in allele frequencies should also increase
until each population is completely fixed for separate alleles. The Fst measure assume that there is no
mutation, and that all gene frequency changes are by genetic drift alone. However, it does not assume
that population sizes have remained constant and equal in all populations.




                                                        31
                                                                  Table 1:


                                                     The trust matrix

     The matrix in panel A shows the average trust from citizens of a given country to citizens of other countries. Trust is calculated by


taking the average response to the following question: ”I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have in people from


various countries. For each, please tell me whether you have a lot of trust, some trust, not very much trust or no trust at all”. The answers


are coded in the following way:=1 ( no trust at all), = 2 (not very much trust), =3 (some trust), =4 (a lot of trust). The last row is the


average trust that of citizens of a given country toward all the other countries; the last column shows the average trust that citizens of a given


country receive from all the other countries. It gives a summary measure of how trustworthy are the citizens of the country in each raw. The


matrix in panel B shows the percentage share of citizens of a given European country who report they trust a lot their fellow citizens and


citizens of the other European countries. The last row is the average percentage share of those that in a given country report they trust a lot


and gives a summary measure of how much citizens of a given country trust citizens of their own or other countries; the last column shows


the average share of the citizens of different countries that trust a lot citizens of the country in each given row. It gives a summary measure


of how trustworthy are the citizens of the country in each row.




                                                                       32
     Panel A:
                                                                         Trust from:
                Aus    Bel    UK     Den    NL     E Ger   Fin    Fra       W. Ger     Gre     Ire    Ita   Lux    Nor    Por    Spa    Swe    Average
     Aus        3.56   2.83   2.89   3.22   2.90    3.26   3.29   2.70       2.98      2.32   2.93   2.66   2.95     .    2.13   2.65   3.53    2.93
     Bel        2.95   3.28   2.91   3.18   3.18    2.93   3.07   3.07       2.84      2.60   2.93   2.64   2.82   3.18   2.66   2.73   3.23    2.95
     UK         2.61   2.84   3.29   3.22   3.00    2.89   3.18   2.55       2.69      2.34   2.81   2.51   2.58   3.27   2.66   2.31   3.43    2.83
     Den        2.95   3.01   3.13   3.39   3.29    3.10   3.30   2.96       2.97      2.56   2.99   2.70   2.86   3.53   2.66   2.73   3.57    3.04
     NL         2.95   2.90   3.16   3.33   3.28    3.07   3.14   2.94       2.90      2.55   3.00   2.77   2.97   3.26   2.70   2.85   3.33    3.01
     E Ger        .    2.59   2.57   2.86   2.75      .      .    2.56       2.99      2.57   2.69   2.56   2.42     .    2.57   2.36     .     2.62
     Fin        2.94   2.92   2.98   3.20   3.25    2.97   3.69   2.91       2.85      2.42   2.92   2.78   2.94     .    2.18   2.71   3.49    2.95
     Fra        2.62   2.92   2.32   2.86   2.72    3.00   2.92   3.18       2.85      2.78   2.81   2.66   2.83   2.93   2.91   2.37   3.04    2.81
     W. Ger     3.09   2.75   2.62   3.12   2.84    3.39   2.89   2.74       3.50      2.31   2.78   2.63   2.76   2.99   2.54   2.66   3.13    2.87
     Gre        2.52   2.45   2.54   2.61   2.59    2.53   2.68   2.53       2.51      3.21   2.50   2.40   2.53   2.52   2.41   2.47   2.88    2.58
     Ire        2.55   2.75   2.61   3.02   2.80    2.45   2.92   2.72       2.59      2.55   3.33   2.37   2.55   3.01   2.51   2.57   3.26    2.74
     Ita        2.43   2.40   2.51   2.53   2.35    2.42   2.51   2.43       2.36      2.33   2.65   2.80   2.54   2.65   2.55   2.61   2.81    2.52
     Lux        3.07   3.30   2.96   3.23   3.29    3.04   3.06   3.09       2.99      2.56   2.96   2.62   3.46   3.20   2.71   2.71   3.31    3.03
     Nor        3.00   2.91   3.06   3.50   3.30    3.06   3.48   2.97       2.92      2.40   2.93   2.78   2.91     .    2.22   2.79   3.65    2.99
     Por        2.50   2.53   2.74   2.67   2.74    2.40   2.67   2.59       2.48      2.60   2.65   2.32   2.56   2.60   3.29   2.51   2.97    2.64
     Spa        2.58   2.59   2.47   2.66   2.64    2.55   2.61   2.68       2.66      2.71   2.64   2.64   2.65   2.56   2.59   3.32   2.86    2.67
     Swe        3.05   2.99   3.03   3.41   3.34    3.14   3.35   2.99       2.99      2.51   2.92   2.89   2.98     .    2.24   2.84   3.59    3.02
     Rus        1.76   2.01   2.17   2.32   2.20    2.03   1.90   2.03       1.93      2.38   2.10   2.16   2.00   2.52   2.13   2.29   2.45    2.14
     Slo        1.98   2.17   2.49   2.51   2.43    2.18   2.53   2.22       1.80      2.27   2.52   2.10   2.06     .    1.79   2.27   2.79    2.26
     CH         3.24   3.16   3.18   3.28   3.26    3.24   3.37   3.03       3.25      2.89   3.05   2.85   3.09     .    2.79   2.79   3.50    3.12
     Tur        1.78   1.90   2.17   2.27   2.31    1.66   2.13   1.95       2.05      1.33   2.16   1.74   1.98     .    2.05   1.96   2.39    1.99
     US         2.57   2.80   2.87   2.93   2.96    2.64   2.86   2.63       2.95      2.18   2.94   2.87   2.99   3.14   2.70   2.28   3.20    2.79
     Bul          .    2.46   2.56   2.70   2.70      .      .    2.49       2.16      2.05   2.60   2.32   2.39     .    2.47   2.15     .     2.42
     Chi          .    1.88   2.34   2.60   2.03      .      .    2.05       1.94      2.45   2.20   2.14   2.07     .    2.34   2.42     .     2.21
     Cec        2.05   2.40   2.66   2.71   2.73    2.33   2.64   2.44       2.10      2.39   2.59   2.34   2.36     .    2.17   2.27   2.88    2.44
     Hun        2.31   2.47   2.68   2.75   2.74    2.34   2.87   2.53       2.33      2.37   2.67   2.38   2.38     .    2.18   2.22   2.87    2.51
     Jap        2.49   2.44   2.48   2.92   2.72    2.69   3.05   2.28       2.69      2.60   2.61   2.86   2.54   3.09   2.42   2.55   3.19    2.68
     Pol        2.07   2.50   2.83   2.76   2.77    1.92   2.59   2.56       1.94      2.35   2.74   2.43   2.38     .    2.21   2.32   2.69    2.44
     Rom          .    2.52   2.59   2.65   2.70      .      .    2.49       2.07      2.38   2.56   2.44   2.37     .    2.46   2.23     .     2.45




33
     Average    2.62   2.64   2.72   2.91   2.82    2.69   2.91   2.63       2.60      2.45   2.73   2.53   2.62   2.96   2.46   2.52   3.12
     Panel B:
                                                         Trust   from:
                Fra   Bel   NL   Ger   Ita   Lux   Den   Ire     UK      Gre   Spa   Por   Nor   Fin   Swe   Aus   Average
     Fra        33    23    12   21    12     21    18   15        8     26     14   21    21    23     34   17      20
     Bel        23    40    29   17     9     16    30   15       17     19     17   10    31    29     42   25      23
     NL         18    24    37   22    14     22    40   20       29     21     20   11    37    33     48   23      26
     Ger        16    19    15   57    19     18    30   18       15     18     20   11    27    27     41   36      24
     Ita         7     8     4    8    19     11    11   10        8     12     15    7    12    10     24   12      11
     Lux        23    39    34   24    10     53    32   15       17     18     17   11    32    27     45   30      27
     Den        23    23    35   23    13     17    46   18       27     21     17   10    57    42     63   21      29
     Ire        18    15    15   13     8     11    26   43       15     17     14    7    27    25     45   15      20
     UK         10    18    21   15    11     12    35   18       39     16     10   12    38    34     53   15      22
     Gre         9     9     8   11     7      9    14    9       11     51     13    6    14    15     31   15      15
     Spa        12    11     8   14    11     12    13   10        8     21     49   13    13    12     29   14      16
     Por        11    10     9   11     5     12    13   10       12     17     14   44    13    13     33   14      15
     Nor        19    19    34   24    15     19    54   14       22      9     19    6    61    55     69   27      29
     Fin        16    18    30   20    16     19    34   13       18     10     14    6     .    72     59   24      25
     Swe        20    20    36   26    18     19    47   13       20     13     20    6     .    47     64   29      27
     Aus        11    18    14   26    11     22    34   14       15      8     13    5          41     58   65      24
     US         12    10     4    7     9     6     6     7        8     38     28   13    2      5     3    15      11
     Bul         9    11     6    4     5      8    10    9        7      8     2     7     .     .      .    .       7
     Chi         5     5     4    5    10      7    16    8        9     22     15    7     .     .      .    .       9
     Cze         9    11     8    6     5      8    14    9        9     10     4     4     .    14     31    6      10
     E Ger      12    15     8   28     9      6    14   11        7     15     4     7     .     .      .    .      11
     Hun        10    12     9   10     6     8     14    9        9      9     4     5     .    21     31   10      11
     Jap        10    13    14   17    26     12    23   15       12     23     16    9    34    29     42   14      19
     Pol        12    14    12    4     8      9    16   12       15     10     5     6     .    12     26    6      11
     Rom        10    12     8    4     8      8    10    9        7     12     3     7     .     .      .    .       8
     Rus         5     5     5    5     8      5    9     7        6     18     11    5    12     5     21    6       8
     Slo         7     7     4    3     2      6    12    7        8      7     6     3     .    11     29    6       8
     Swi        25    34    35   40    26     32    38   22       31     34     22   19     .    49     56   43      34
     Tur         5     5     5    6     2      7    10    6        5      3     8     4     .     8     22    4       6




34
     Average    14    16    16   16    11     14    23   13       14     17     14   10    27    26     40   20
                                                                  Table 2:



             Bilateral trust and country of origin and destination
                                 characteristics

     Panel A shows how much of the trust of the average trust of a country’s citizens versus the other countries citizens is explained by


observed and unobserved characteristics of the country receiving and giving trust. ”Mean trust” is the average trust across individuals of


a given country; ”median trust” uses the median to aggregate across individuals; ”share of individuals trusting a lot” is the fraction of


interviewed individuals in a given country that report they trust a lot the citizens of another country. Besides country of origin and country of


destination fixed effects, the regression include a year fixed effect. The omitted country is Ireland. The standard errors reported in parenthesis


are corrected for the potential clustering at the country of destination level. Panel B is the matrix of the residuals in the regression of the


first column of Panel A.




                                                                       35
Panel A:
                                                                 Fraction of individuals
                                     Mean trust   Median trust       trusting a lot
Origin country (base=Ireland)
Fra                                   -0.0847*      -0.1211**            -0.0041
                                      (0.0496)       (0.0438)           (0.0225)
Bel                                    -0.0555     -0.1262***            0.0274
                                      (0.0488)       (0.0449)           (0.0259)
NL                                      0.0729        -0.0814             0.0173
                                      (0.0494)       (0.0512)           (0.0254)
Ger(west)                              -0.0756       -0.1504*             0.0272
                                      (0.0649)       (0.0780)           (0.0295)
Ita                                  -0.1872***    -0.2392***            -0.0281
                                      (0.0582)       (0.0749)           (0.0220)
Lux                                    -0.0873      -0.1627**            0.0071
                                      (0.0553)       (0.0717)           (0.0297)
Den                                  0.1647***        0.0119           0.0827***
                                      (0.0452)       (0.0534)           (0.0238)
UK                                     -0.0353        -0.0873            0.0059
                                      (0.0603)       (0.0525)           (0.0226)
NorthIre                             -0.1134***     -0.1071**          -0.0331**
                                      (0.0352)       (0.0398)           (0.0129)
Greece                               -0.2586***    -0.2878***           0.0568*
                                      (0.0844)       (0.0918)           (0.0326)
Spain                                -0.2169***    -0.2843***            0.0175
                                      (0.0702)       (0.0744)           (0.0300)
Portugal                             -0.2150***    -0.2426***            -0.0329
                                      (0.0644)       (0.0577)           (0.0297)
Ger(East)                              -0.0460      -0.2109**            0.0491
                                      (0.0767)       (0.0950)           (0.0297)
Norway                                0.1272**        0.0317           0.0884***
                                      (0.0612)       (0.0982)           (0.0306)
Finland                              0.2170***       0.1393**          0.1320***
                                      (0.0562)       (0.0668)           (0.0331)
Sweden                               0.4301***      0.3393***          0.2678***
                                      (0.0439)       (0.0981)           (0.0293)
Austria                                -0.0668      -0.2207**           0.0651**
                                      (0.0654)       (0.1050)           (0.0301)
Destination country (base=Ireland)
Fra                                  0.0540***     -0.0442***          0.0095***
                                      (0.0046)       (0.0072)           (0.0009)
Bel                                  0.2009***      0.0591***          0.0292***
                                      (0.0000)       (0.0000)           (0.0000)
NL                                   0.2543***      0.0161***          0.0630***
                                      (0.0000)       (0.0000)           (0.0000)
Ger(west)                            0.0802***      0.0534***          0.0486***
                                      (0.0045)       (0.0071)           (0.0009)
Ita                                  -0.2168***    -0.2619***          -0.0752***
                                      (0.0047)       (0.0073)           (0.0009)
Lux                                  0.2855***      0.1022***          0.0703***
                                      (0.0000)       (0.0000)           (0.0000)
Den                                  0.2574***      0.0806***          0.0612***
                                      (0.0000)       (0.0000)           (0.0000)
UK                                   0.0790***     -0.0665***          0.0240***
                                      (0.0056)       (0.0089)           (0.0011)
Greece                               -0.1667***    -0.0995***          -0.0492***
                                      (0.0042)       (0.0080)           (0.0006)
Spain                                -0.0731***    -0.0513***          -0.0363***
                                      (0.0042)       (0.0080)           (0.0006)
Portugal                             -0.1033***    -0.1236***          -0.0476***
                                      (0.0042)       (0.0080)           (0.0006)
Germany (East)                       -0.1813***    -0.2408***          -0.0776***
                                      (0.0180)       (0.0336)           (0.0042)
Norway                               0.3171***      0.2436***          0.0901***
                                      (0.0125)       (0.0183)           (0.0029)
Finland                              0.2676***      0.1848***          0.0627***
                                      (0.0125)       (0.0183)           (0.0029)
Sweden                               0.3359***      0.1259***          0.0858***
                                      (0.0125)       (0.0183)           (0.0029)
Austria                              0.2500***      0.1259***          0.0631***
                                      (0.0125)       (0.0183)           (0.0029)




                                       36
Panel A: (continues)
Destination country (base=Ireland)
US                                        0.0803***              -0.0410***            -0.0617***
                                           (0.0056)                (0.0089)              (0.0011)
Bulgaria                                  -0.3725***             -0.4716***            -0.1169***
                                           (0.0180)                (0.0336)              (0.0042)
China                                     -0.5415***             -0.7934***            -0.0865***
                                           (0.0131)                (0.0220)              (0.0025)
Czech Republic                            -0.2887***             -0.3663***            -0.0911***
                                           (0.0100)                (0.0163)              (0.0025)
Hungary                                   -0.2284***             -0.2997***            -0.0802***
                                           (0.0100)                (0.0163)              (0.0025)
Japan                                     -0.1271***             -0.0787***            -0.0141***
                                           (0.0040)                (0.0079)              (0.0011)
Poland                                    -0.2569***             -0.3330***            -0.0770***
                                           (0.0100)                (0.0163)              (0.0025)
Romania                                   -0.3423***             -0.3947***            -0.1071***
                                           (0.0180)                (0.0336)              (0.0042)
Russia                                    -0.5854***             -0.8369***            -0.1016***
                                           (0.0056)                (0.0089)              (0.0011)
Slovenia                                  -0.4064***             -0.5211***            -0.0984***
                                           (0.0125)                (0.0183)              (0.0029)
Switzerland                               0.3979***               0.1215***             0.1371***
                                           (0.0090)                (0.0150)              (0.0015)
Turkey                                    -0.7266***             -1.0172***            -0.1241***
                                           (0.0087)                (0.0146)              (0.0017)
Constant                                  2.6779***               2.9303***             0.1313***
                                           (0.0353)                (0.0476)              (0.0153)
Year fixed effect                            YES                     YES                   YES
Dummies for country                  F( 17, 1964) = 31.84   F( 17, 1964) = 9.49   F( 17, 2764) = 25.98
of origin: F-test                       p-value=0.000          p-value=0.000         p-value=0.000
Dummies for country                   F(28, 1964) =88.41     F( 8,1964) =39.51    F( 28, 1964) = 33.67
of destination: F-test                  p-value=0.000          p-value=0.000         p-value=0.000
Observations                                 1747                    1747                  1747
R-squared                                    0.647                  0.447                 0.454




                                                     37
     Panel B: Matrix of residuals
                                                                                  Trust from
                Fra     Bel      NL     W Ger     Ita    Lux     Den     Ire     UK       N Ire    Gre     Spa     Por    E Ger    Nor     Fin     Swe     Aus
     Fra       0.43     0.16    -0.16    0.11    0.04   0.09    -0.14   -0.03   -0.48     -0.22   0.18    -0.27   0.26     0.21   -0.08   -0.06   -0.15   -0.07
     Bel       0.17     0.35    0.13    -0.07   -0.16   -0.08    0.04   -0.05   -0.04     -0.03   -0.14   -0.06   -0.13   -0.01    0.01   -0.05   -0.10   0.11
     NL        -0.01   -0.08    0.18    -0.06   -0.08   0.02     0.13   -0.03    0.16      0.06   -0.24    0.00   -0.15    0.08    0.05   -0.03   -0.05   0.06
     W Ger     -0.01   -0.03    -0.08    0.71   -0.02   -0.01    0.09   -0.08   -0.21     -0.22   -0.31   -0.01   -0.14    0.57   -0.05   -0.11   -0.08   0.37
     Ita       -0.03   -0.08    -0.26   -0.10    0.42   0.06    -0.20   0.09    -0.02     -0.01   0.01     0.23   0.17    -0.10   -0.10   -0.20   -0.11   0.01
     Lux       0.11     0.28    0.15     0.00   -0.26   0.48     0.00   -0.11   -0.07     -0.09   -0.26   -0.16   -0.17    0.02   -0.05   -0.15   -0.11   0.14
     Den       0.01     0.02    0.18     0.01   -0.15   -0.09    0.18   -0.05    0.13      0.03   -0.23   -0.12   -0.19    0.11    0.31    0.12    0.18   0.05
     Ire       0.02     0.02    -0.06   -0.11   -0.22   -0.14    0.07   0.55    -0.14      0.19   0.01    -0.02   -0.08   -0.29    0.04    0.00    0.13   -0.09
     UK        -0.21    0.06    0.09    -0.07   -0.14   -0.20    0.20   -0.05    0.46      0.29   -0.28   -0.37   -0.01    0.07    0.23    0.18    0.22   -0.11
     N Ire       .        .       .        .       .      .        .      .        .                .        .      .        .       .       .       .      .
     Gre       -0.02   -0.13    -0.12   -0.04   -0.04   -0.02   -0.19   -0.13   -0.06     -0.17   0.84     0.04   -0.02   -0.04   -0.27   -0.08   -0.09   0.05
     Spa       0.04    -0.08    -0.16    0.01    0.10   0.01    -0.23   -0.08   -0.22      0.04   0.25     0.80   0.07    -0.12   -0.33   -0.24   -0.20   0.02
     Por       -0.02   -0.11    -0.03   -0.14   -0.18   -0.05   -0.19   -0.04    0.08     -0.01   0.16     0.02   0.79    -0.23   -0.26   -0.14   -0.06   -0.04
     E Ger     -0.06   -0.05    -0.03    0.36    0.04   -0.20   -0.01   -0.02   -0.10      0.01   0.12    -0.12   0.08       .       .       .       .      .
     Nor       0.04    -0.05    0.21    -0.02   -0.05   -0.03    0.32   -0.09    0.07     -0.04   -0.36   -0.01   -0.59    0.08      .     0.24    0.20   0.05
     Fin       0.02     0.00    0.21    -0.05    0.00   0.06     0.06   -0.06    0.04     -0.06   -0.29   -0.05   -0.58    0.04      .     0.50    0.09   0.03
     Swe       0.04     0.01    0.23     0.03    0.03   0.03     0.20   -0.12    0.03      0.01   -0.27    0.01   -0.58    0.14      .     0.09    0.12   0.08
     Aus       -0.17   -0.07    -0.13    0.11   -0.10   0.08     0.10   -0.03   -0.03      0.10   -0.37   -0.09   -0.61    0.35      .     0.12    0.14   0.68
     US        -0.13    0.02    0.05     0.19    0.22   0.22    -0.10   0.08     0.04      0.14   -0.44   -0.39   0.03    -0.18    0.09   -0.14   -0.01   -0.15
     Bul       0.06     0.00    0.11    -0.28   -0.01   -0.03   0.02    0.08    0.08      -0.04   -0.20   -0.15   0.17       .       .       .       .      .
     Chi       -0.07   -0.26    -0.24   -0.19    0.12   -0.08    0.20   -0.04    0.13      0.10   0.44     0.33   0.25       .       .       .       .      .
     Cze       0.02    -0.05    0.15    -0.33    0.02   -0.06    0.04   0.09     0.19      0.14   0.14    -0.02   -0.12   -0.04      .     0.01    0.03   -0.30
     Hun       0.05    -0.04    0.10    -0.16    0.00   -0.10   0.02    0.10    0.15      -0.22   0.06    -0.13   -0.17   -0.09      .     0.18   -0.04   -0.09
     Jap       -0.30   -0.18    -0.02    0.09    0.38   -0.04    0.09   -0.06   -0.15      0.20   0.19     0.09   -0.04    0.08    0.26   0.26     0.19   -0.02
     Pol       0.11     0.02    0.16    -0.52    0.08   -0.07    0.06   0.20     0.33      0.09   0.07     0.00   -0.12   -0.48      .    -0.07   -0.19   -0.31
     Rom       0.03     0.03    0.08    -0.40    0.09   -0.09   -0.06   0.01     0.09     -0.06   0.09    -0.10   0.13       .       .       .       .      .
     Rus       -0.06   -0.11    -0.04   -0.17    0.18   -0.10   -0.04   -0.09    0.01      0.22   0.42     0.29   0.12    -0.12    0.14   -0.43   -0.10   -0.29
     Slo       0.01    -0.08    0.06    -0.43   -0.01   -0.15    0.05   0.23     0.23      0.02   0.23     0.19   -0.29   -0.07      .     0.01    0.06   -0.25
     Swi       -0.02    0.08    0.05     0.19   -0.10   0.01    -0.05   -0.12    0.05      0.22   -0.03   -0.19   -0.19    0.18      .     0.05   -0.03   0.20




38
     Tur       -0.04   -0.12    0.16     0.05   -0.15   -0.01    0.03   0.08     0.13             -0.48    0.11   0.19    -0.27      .    -0.07   -0.02   -0.13
                                               Table 3:



                                    Summary Statistics
     Panel A contains summary statistics for trust and for the bilateral controls. Trust is calculated by
taking the average response to the following question: ”I would like to ask you a question about how
much trust you have in people from various countries. For each, please tell me whether you have a lot
of trust, some trust, not very much trust or no trust at all”. The answers are coded in the following
way:=1 ( no trust at all), = 2 (not very much trust), =3 (some trust), =4 (a lot of trust). The sample
statistics presented here for trust is obtained after collapsing the data by taking time averages (after
partialling out time effects). Distance is the log distance between the capital of two countries. Border
is a dummy variable equal to one if two countries share at least one border (it is coded one, if countries
are the same). Common language is the percentage of people that speak the same language in each
pair of countries (Boisso and Ferrantino (1997)). Common origin of the law is a dummy variable that
is equal to one if two countries share the same origin of law (common or civil law). Religious similarity
measures the fraction of people with the same religious faith in the two countries. Genetic distance is
the coancestry coefficient (Reynolds, 1983) calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et. al. (1996). Number of years
at war have been calculated using the current nations borders as definition of the countries. Information
is the number of times a country name appears in the headlines of the major newspaper in each country
over the total number of foreign news. The cross correlation matrix of the variables included in Panel A,
obtained after controlling for country of origin and destination fixed effects, is shown in Panel B. Panel
C show summary statistics for the trade dataset. Panel D shows summary statistics for the portfolios
datasets. Panel E shows summary statistics for the foreign direct investment data. Detailed description
of the variables is in the Appendix.


                                                             Mean      Median    Std. Dev.      Min    Max     Observations
 Average trust                                                0.073     0.058       0.382     -1.348   1.033       319
 Median trust                                                 0.071     0.195       0.428     -1.813   1.247       319
 Fraction of individuals trusting a lot                       0.030    -0.016       0.136     -0.156   0.554       319
 Log of distance                                              7.018     7.274       1.783      0.000   9.320       319
 Common Border                                                0.160     0.000       0.367      0.000   1.000       319
 Common Language                                              0.074     0.000       0.252      0.000   1.000       319
 Common origin of the law                                     0.759     1.000       0.429      0.000   1.000       319
 Religious similarity                                         0.307     0.256       0.289      0.000   1.000       319
 Genetic distance ( FS T values x10,000)                     86.086    61.000     145.995      0.000   1,244       267
 Number of years countries have been at war (1000-1970)      13.386     1.000      28.618      0.000    198        319
 Number of years countries have been at war (1815-1970)       1.442     0.000       3.202      0.000     20        319
 Number of years countries have been at war (1000-1815)      11.944     0.000      28.069      0.000    197        319
 Press coverage                                               0.043     0.020       0.068      0.000   0.440       262
 Differences in gdp procapita (percentage)                    0.585     0.473       0.565      0.000   4.083       319




                                                   39
     Panel B: Matrix of correlations
                                       Average   Common      Log of    Common    Common       # of years   Religious    Genetic     Differences
                                        trust    Language   distance    Border   origin of    countries    similarity   distance   in per capita
                                                                                 the law        at war                                 GDP
                                                                                             (1000-1970)
     Average trust

     Common Language                    0.52
     P-values                          (0.00)
     Observations                       319

     Log of distance                    -0.58      -0.82
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)
     Observations                        319        319

     Common Border                      0.39       0.61       -0.65
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
     Observations                       319        319         319

     Common origin of the law           0.12       0.52       -0.24      0.30
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
     Observations                       319        319         319       319

     Number of years countries          -0.07      -0.11      0.09       0.11      0.02
     have been at war (1000-1970)      (0.20)     (0.044)    (0.12)     (0.04)    (0.77)
     Observations                        319        319       319        319       319

     Religious similarity               0.47       0.46       -0.61      0.45      0.06         0.10
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.28)       (0.07)
     Observations                       316        316         316       316       316          316

     Genetic distance                   -0.50      -0.48      0.58       -0.42     -0.30        -0.07        -0.41




40
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)       (0.25)       (0.00)
     Observations                        267        267       267         267       267          267          265

     Differences in per capita GDP      -0.43      -0.28      0.32       -0.31     -0.08        -0.05        -0.28        0.30
     P-values                          (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.17)       (0.42)       (0.00)       (0.00)
     Observations                        319        319       319         319       319          319          316         267

     Press coverage                     0.05       0.36       -0.37      0.46      0.37         0.30         0.16         -0.30        -0.16
     P-values                          (0.40)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.01)       (0.00)       (0.01)
     Observations                       262        262         262       262       262          262          260           218          262
                                              Panel C: Statistics of Canada Trade data
                                                             Mean       Median     Std. Dev.      Min       Max      Observations
Log of export to partner country                           7.363287    7.567863    2.566298        0      15.73282     220428
Average trust from importer to exporter                    2.733109    2.737242    0.280657    1.99384    3.569197     220428
Press coverage                                             0.044245    0.023036    0.052138        0      0.313644     220428
Log of distance                                            6.738852    6.959621    0.703892    5.156525   8.121116     220428
Common Border                                              0.268986        0       0.443434        0          1        220428
Common Language                                            0.080312        0       0.271776        0          1        220428
Common origin of the law                                   0.682291        1       0.465587        0          1        220428
Religious similarity                                        0.3325     0.330315    0.237958        0      0.82643      220428
Genetic distance (FS T values x10000)                      51.6095        38        39.6923        9         289       220428
Numbers of Years the two countries were at war 1000-1815   28.19641        9       40.59319        0         197       220428
Gdp of importing country                                   660.3096     501.749    604.8912      9.596    2384.115     220428
Gdp of exporting country                                   542.8481     296.081    568.1425      9.596    2384.115     220428


                                                Panel D: Porfolio data (Morningstar)
                                                             Mean       Median     Std. Dev.     Min        Max      Observations
Percentage invested in partner country                     0.038747    0.030742    0.028719    0.001898   0.141822       118
Inverse Covariance of stock market returns                  -0.0704     -0.0405    0.152723    -0.58964   0.128104       118
Press coverage                                             0.037208    0.021825    0.038247        0      0.179437       107
Common Border                                              0.228814         0       0.42186        0          1          118
Common Language                                            0.039502         0      0.161499        0          1          118
Log of distance                                            6.786523    6.957813    0.621142    5.156525   7.861671       118
Average trust from investing country to partner            2.908322    2.900849    0.301368    2.305565   3.650389       118
Religious similarity                                        0.31798    0.322374    0.236312    0.011738   0.874539       118
Genetic distance (FS T values x10000)                      40.5339         36       24.1745        9         99          118
Numbers of Years the two countries were at war 1000-1815   29.50848        14      39.77689        0         197         118
Common origin of the law                                   0.822034         1      0.384115        0          1          118
Distance in the characteristics of security laws (LLSV)    13.71983      14.295    2.323434       8.6       19.17        118


                                            Panel E: Foreign Direct Investments (OECD)
                                                             Mean       Median     Std. Dev.     Min        Max      Observations
Outward stock of FDI (log)                                 21.13226    21.58054     2.09734    12.41738   24.17526       309
Average trust from country to each partner                  2.77174    2.774275     0.26325    2.103876   3.527406       309
Press coverage                                             0.048132    0.037093    0.051395        0      0.313644       309
Log of distance                                            6.774316    6.971646    0.694258    5.156525   8.121116       309
Common Border                                              0.245955        0        0.43135        0          1          309
Common Language                                            0.043698        0        0.18394        0          1          309
Common origin of the law                                   0.666667        1       0.472169        0          1          309
Religious similarity                                        0.35226    0.333012    0.219992    0.014418   0.82643        307
Genetic distance (FS T values x10000)                      50.4304        43        33.2395        9         223         309
Numbers of Years the two countries were at war 1000-1815   27.93528        9       40.25232        0         197         309




                                                               41
                                                                Table 4:


                                               Determinant of Trust

     The dependent variable is the average trust across individuals of a given country toward citizens of other countries. To appropriately


estimate the standard errors we first regressed the observation on year fixed effects, then we took the residual and collapsed the observations


by year. The regressions include country of origin and country of destination. Trust is calculated by taking the average response to the


following question: ”I would like to ask you a question about how much trust you have in people from various countries. For each, please


tell me whether you have a lot of trust, some trust, not very much trust or no trust at all”. The answers are coded in the following way:=1


( no trust at all), = 2 (not very much trust), =3 (some trust), =4 (a lot of trust). Distance is the log distance between the capital of two


countries. Border is a dummy variable equal to one if two countries share at least one border (it is coded one, if countries are the same).


Common language is the percentage of people that speak the same language in each pair of countries (Boisso and Ferrantino (1997)). Common


origin of the law is a dummy variable that is equal to one if two countries share the same origin of law (civil or common law). Religious


similarity measures the fraction of people with the same religious faith in the two countries. Genetic distance is the coancestry coefficient


(Reynolds, 1983) calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et. al. (1996). Number of years at war have been calculated using the current nations borders


as definition of the countries and include the period between 1000 and 1970. Information measure the geographical coverage of some main


European newspapers were obtained searching the Factiva search engine. For each pair of countries, A and B, it is the percentage of news in


the selected newspaper of country A about country B. The standard errors reported in parenthesis are corrected for the potential clustering


at the country of destination level. Panel A shows the results for the entire sample, while Panel B shows the results restricted to countries


belonging to the European Union.




                                                                     42
Panel A: Whole sample
                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
Common language                              0.2411**      0.2085**      0.1900*     0.3613***    0.3227***
                                              (0.0916)     (0.0932)      (0.1033)     (0.0593)     (0.0661)
Log (distance)                                 -0.0874      -0.0273       -0.0268      -0.0199      -0.0148
                                              (0.0557)     (0.0486)      (0.0487)     (0.0430)     (0.0367)
Common border                                  -0.0256       0.0144       0.0208        0.0306       0.0297
                                              (0.0551)     (0.0524)      (0.0517)     (0.0593)     (0.0537)
Common origin of the law                     -0.0978**    -0.1204**     -0.1205**    -0.2245***   -0.2057**
                                              (0.0409)     (0.0544)      (0.0546)     (0.0736)     (0.0763)
Number of years at war 1000-1970                            -0.0007                    -0.0007      -0.0006
                                                           (0.0007)                   (0.0005)     (0.0005)
Number of years at war 1000-1815                                          -0.0007
                                                                         (0.0007)
Number of years at war 1815-1970                                          -0.0035
                                                                         (0.0051)
Religious similarity                                       0.1671**      0.1641**     0.2208***    0.1979**
                                                           (0.0732)      (0.0755)      (0.0657)    (0.0705)
Genetic distance (FS T )                                 -13.0305***   -13.0572***   -12.7962**   -11.5463**
                                                           (3.2644)      (3.2474)      (4.5149)    (4.5902)
Dummy equal to one if country of origin is    -0.2549       -0.0579       -0.0430
equal to country of destination              (0.3683)      (0.3207)      (0.3194)
Press coverage                                                                         -0.5536      -0.6570
                                                                                      (0.5938)     (0.5459)
Differences in gdp procapita (percentage)                                                          -0.0833*
                                                                                                   (0.0406)
Country of origin fixed effects                YES          YES           YES          YES           YES
Country of destination fixed effects           YES          YES           YES          YES           YES
Observations                                    319          265           265          216           216
R-squared                                      0.824        0.815         0.815        0.843         0.850




                                                43
Panel B: European Sample
                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)
Common language                                 0.1453      0.1676      0.1209     0.3261***    0.2923***
                                              (0.1118)    (0.1118)     (0.1178)      (0.0700)    (0.0784)
Log (distance)                               -0.1340**   -0.0865**    -0.0872**     -0.0793**    -0.0481*
                                              (0.0497)    (0.0379)     (0.0374)      (0.0333)    (0.0252)
Common border                                  -0.0327     -0.0210      -0.0033       -0.0130     0.0006
                                              (0.0521)    (0.0423)     (0.0393)      (0.0420)    (0.0311)
Common origin of the law                      -0.0766*     -0.0747      -0.0746    -0.2009***   -0.1817**
                                              (0.0401)    (0.0482)     (0.0483)      (0.0670)    (0.0693)
Number of years at war 1000-1970                           -0.0010                  -0.0011**    -0.0009*
                                                          (0.0007)                   (0.0005)    (0.0005)
Number of years at war 1000-1815                                        -0.0009
                                                                       (0.0008)
Number of years at war 1815-1970                                       -0.0077*
                                                                       (0.0041)
Religious similarity                                      0.1883**      0.1785*    0.2281**      0.2107**
                                                          (0.0863)     (0.0891)     (0.0806)     (0.0846)
Genetic distance (FS T )                                 -9.6330***   -9.7343***   -8.6155**    -7.8335**
                                                          (3.1921)     (3.1942)     (3.0332)     (3.4517)
Dummy equal to one if country of origin is    -0.4926      -0.4147      -0.3930
equal to country of destination              (0.3358)     (0.2403)     (0.2355)
Press coverage                                                                       -0.1401      -0.3266
                                                                                    (0.5352)     (0.4598)
Differences in gdp procapita (percentage)                                                       -0.1153**
                                                                                                 (0.0512)
Country of origin fixed effects                YES         YES          YES          YES           YES
Country of destination fixed effects           YES         YES          YES          YES           YES
Observations                                    222         219          219          177           177
R-squared                                      0.801       0.815        0.817        0.848         0.858




                                                44
                                                                   Table 5:


                                              Effect of Trust on Trade

     The dependent variable is the log of the export volume. Panel A and B show the results for the entire sample. In panel C the first


4 columns present the results for industries that produce goods traded in organized exchanges. The last four columns of Panel C includes


industries producing differentiated goods. The classification of goods follows Rauch (1999). Distance is the log distance between the capital


of two countries. Border is a dummy variable equal to one if two countries share at least one border (it is coded one, if countries are the


same). Common language is the percentage of people that speak the same language in each pair of countries (Boisso and Ferrantino (1997)).


Common origin of the law is a dummy variable that is equal to one if two countries share the same origin of law. The instruments include


number of years the two countries were at war between 1000 and 1815, religious similarity, and genetic distance. Religious similarity measures


the fraction of people with the same religious faith in the two countries. Genetic distance is the coancestry coefficient (Reynolds, 1983)


calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et al.(1996). Information measure the geographical coverage of some main European newspapers were obtained


searching the Factiva search engine. For each pair of countries, A and B, it is the percentage of news in the selected newspaper of country A


about country B. All regressions include fixed effects for the country of origin and for the destination country. The standard errors reported


in parentheses are corrected for the potential clustering of the residual at the country level. The symbols ***, **,* mean that the coefficient


is statistically different from zero respectively at the 1,5, and 10 percent level.




 Panel A:
                                                             OLS                IV            OLS              IV                OLS               IV
 Mean trust of people in importing                        0.3173***          0.8703**     0.3322***        1.0151**          0.3962***         1.1335**
 country to people in exporting country                    (0.0912)          (0.3922)      (0.0949)        (0.4192)           (0.0772)         (0.4727)
 Press coverage                                                                              0.9797         1.3588              0.3023           0.5085
                                                                                           (0.7952)        (0.8852)           (0.9443)         (1.0020)
 Log (distance)                                          -0.5960***        -0.5770***    -0.5817***       -0.5531***        -0.6124***       -0.5908***
                                                           (0.0703)          (0.0619)      (0.0674)        (0.0593)           (0.0623)         (0.0552)
 Common border                                            0.7376***         0.7123***     0.7109***       0.6695***          0.6543***       0.5945***
                                                           (0.0899)          (0.0843)      (0.0991)        (0.0970)           (0.0974)         (0.0978)
 Common language                                          0.8008***         0.7567***     0.7413***       0.6642***          0.5813***       0.4541***
                                                           (0.1804)          (0.1877)      (0.1918)        (0.2132)           (0.1232)         (0.1296)
 Output exporter                                         -0.0002***        -0.0001***    -0.0002***       -0.0001***        -0.0002***        -0.0001**
                                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)      (0.0000)        (0.0000)           (0.0000)         (0.0001)
 Output importer                                            -0.0000           -0.0001       -0.0000         -0.0001            -0.0000          -0.0001
                                                           (0.0001)          (0.0001)      (0.0001)        (0.0001)           (0.0001)         (0.0001)
 Common origin of the law                                                                                                     0.3351*          0.4315**
                                                                                                                              (0.1566)         (0.1612)
 Exporting country fixed effects                             YES               YES           YES              YES                YES              YES
 Importing country fixed effects                             YES               YES           YES              YES                YES              YES
 Years fixed effects                                         YES               YES           YES              YES                YES              YES
 Industry fixed effects                                      YES               YES           YES              YES                YES              YES
 Observations                                               220428            220428        220428           220428            220428           220428
 R-squared                                                   0.582             0.581         0.582            0.580              0.583            0.581




                                                                        45
Panel B:
                                             OLS            IV         OLS            IV
Mean trust of people in importing        0.4473***     2.0168***    0.4456***   1.8249***
country to people in exporting country    (0.0903)      (0.4095)     (0.0892)     (0.4265)
Press coverage                              8.8380     43.5430**      4.1393    36.8666**
                                          (4.9810)     (19.2712)     (4.6784)    (15.2511)
Interaction effect between press           -2.8815     -15.3885*      -1.3841   -13.0930**
coverage and trust                        (1.7254)      (7.1844)     (1.6007)     (5.7179)
Log (distance)                           -0.5716***   -0.4823***   -0.6047***   -0.5115***
                                          (0.0654)      (0.0618)     (0.0593)     (0.0538)
Common border                            0.7220***     0.7051***    0.6648***   0.6757***
                                          (0.1041)      (0.1379)     (0.0951)     (0.1339)
Common language                          0.7733***     0.7916**     0.6114***   0.7002***
                                          (0.2028)      (0.3135)     (0.1313)     (0.2050)
Output exporter                          -0.0002***    -0.0002**   -0.0002***    -0.0002**
                                          (0.0000)      (0.0001)     (0.0000)     (0.0001)
Output importer                             0.0000       -0.0000      -0.0000      -0.0000
                                          (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)     (0.0001)
Common origin of the law                                             0.3043*       0.1693
                                                                     (0.1636)     (0.2392)
Exporting country fixed effects            YES          YES            YES          YES
Importing country fixed effects            YES          YES            YES          YES
Years fixed effects                        YES          YES            YES          YES
Industry fixed effects                     YES          YES            YES          YES
Observations                              220428       220428         220428       220428
R-squared                                  0.582        0.573          0.583        0.576




                                               46
     Panel C:
                          (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
                                      Organized exchange                                Differentiated product
                          OLS           IV          OLS           IV         OLS           IV           OLS           IV
     Mean trust          0.2079       0.4311      0.2376*      0.5652*     0.3622**     1.1618**     0.4380***     1.2834*
     imp.country        (0.1165)     (0.3013)     (0.1131)     (0.2886)    (0.1539)     (0.5161)      (0.1343)     (0.5980)
     to exp. country
     Information       -1.9631***    -1.8292**    -2.2152**    -2.1003**      1.7003      2.2085*       0.8363        1.1251
                         (0.6128)     (0.6302)     (0.7392)     (0.7899)     (0.9752)    (1.0371)      (1.1473)     (1.1854)
     Log (distance)    -0.6899***   -0.6789***   -0.7029***   -0.6917***   -0.5408***   -0.4761***   -0.5793***   -0.5227***
                         (0.0815)     (0.0857)     (0.0902)     (0.0898)     (0.0838)    (0.0786)      (0.0773)     (0.0714)
     Common             0.8744***   0.8621***     0.8469***    0.8207***    0.6684***   0.6116***     0.6025***    0.5258***
     border              (0.1099)     (0.1060)     (0.1298)     (0.1248)     (0.1064)    (0.1044)      (0.0974)     (0.0980)
     Common             0.7808***   0.7497***     0.7198***    0.6559***    0.7574**     0.6905**     0.5528***     0.4280**
     language            (0.1685)     (0.1761)     (0.1467)     (0.1183)     (0.2468)    (0.2794)      (0.1587)     (0.1880)
     Output exporter      0.0002       0.0002       0.0002       0.0002    -0.0002***   -0.0002***   -0.0002***   -0.0002***
                         (0.0001)     (0.0001)     (0.0001)     (0.0002)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)
     Output importer    -0.0001**    -0.0001**    -0.0001**    -0.0002**      0.0001      -0.0000       0.0001       -0.0000
                         (0.0000)     (0.0001)     (0.0000)     (0.0001)     (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)
     Same origin                                    0.1408       0.1844                                0.4160**     0.5299**
     of law                                        (0.1783)     (0.1542)                               (0.1623)     (0.1808)




47
     Exp. country        YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
     fixed effects
     Imp. country        YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
     fixed effects
     Years F.E.          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
     Industry F.E.       YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES          YES
     Observations       20,308       20,232       20,308       20,232       113,490      113,085      113,490      113,085
     R-squared           0.416        0.417        0.416        0.417        0.647        0.644        0.648        0.645
                                                                 Table 6:



                            Effect of Trust on Portfolio Investment

     The dependent variable measures the percentage of net portfolio investment of a given country into another country.          Specifically,


the dependent variable is the stock of cross-border holdings of equities and long- and short-term debt securities valued at market prices


prevailing at the end of 2001 (from Morningstar data) divided by the sum of all foreign equity holdings plus market capitalization- foreign


liabilities. Control variables include the inverse of the covariance of stock market returns, calculated using monthly data for each country


(DATASTREAM); Border is a dummy variable equal to one if two countries share at least one border (it is coded one, if countries are the


same). Common language is the percentage of people that speak the same language in each pair of countries (Boisso and Ferrantino (1997)).


Common origin of the law is a dummy variable that is equal to one if two countries share the same origin of law. Proximity of security laws


is a synthetic measure for each pair of countries i and j the sum of the proximity of each security law characteristic based on La Porta et


al. (2003). The instruments include number of years the two countries were at war between 1000 and 1815, religious similarity, and genetic


distance. Religious similarity measures the fraction of people with the same religious faith in the two countries. Genetic distance is the


coancestry coefficient (Reynolds, 1983) calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et al.(1996). Information measure the geographical coverage of some main


European newspapers were obtained searching the Factiva search engine. For each pair of countries, A and B, it is the percentage of news in


the selected newspaper of country A about country B. All regressions include fixed effects for the country of origin and for the destination


country. The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for the potential clustering of the residual at the country level. The


symbols ***, **,* mean that the coefficient is statistically different from zero respectively at the 1,5, and 10 percent level.



                  Panel A:
                                                                        OLS             IV             OLS             IV
                  Mean trust toward                                   0.1169**       0.2373**       0.1422**       0.2580**
                  people in destination country                       (0.0383)       (0.1047)       (0.0480)       (0.1120)
                  Inverse Cov. of stock market returns                 0.0130         0.0288          0.0025         0.0193
                  of country of origin and destination                (0.0278)       (0.0318)       (0.0373)       (0.0461)
                  Press coverage                                                                    0.6717**       0.7384**
                                                                                                    (0.2898)       (0.3162)
                  Common border                                        -0.0028         -0.0058       -0.0164        -0.0210
                                                                      (0.0315)        (0.0317)      (0.0342)       (0.0326)
                  Common language                                       0.0037         -0.0124       -0.0242        -0.0415
                                                                      (0.0189)        (0.0229)      (0.0219)       (0.0286)
                  Log (distance)                                       -0.0485         -0.0431       -0.0320        -0.0249
                                                                      (0.0372)        (0.0343)      (0.0344)       (0.0320)
                  Common origin of the law                                                            0.0046        -0.0335
                                                                                                    (0.0186)       (0.0313)
                  Investing country fixed effects                       YES            YES             YES            YES
                  Destination country fixed effects                     YES            YES             YES            YES
                  Observations                                           118            118             107            107
                  R-squared                                             0.374          0.325           0.418          0.376




                                                                       48
Panel B:
                                          OLS         IV        OLS         IV
Mean trust toward                      0.1481**   0.2913**   0.1481**   0.2913**
people in destination country          (0.0577)   (0.1052)   (0.0577)   (0.1052)
Inverse Cov. of stock market returns     0.0045    0.0201      0.0045     0.0201
of country of origin and destination   (0.0354)   (0.0417)   (0.0354)   (0.0417)
Press coverage                           1.3240    2.0422      1.3240     2.0422
                                       (1.4648)   (2.4778)   (1.4648)   (2.4778)
Interaction effect between press        -0.2397    -0.4650    -0.2397    -0.4650
coverage and trust                     (0.4620)   (0.8828)   (0.4620)   (0.8828)
Common border                           -0.0171    -0.0191    -0.0171    -0.0191
                                       (0.0357)   (0.0346)   (0.0357)   (0.0346)
Common language                         -0.0131   -0.0492*    -0.0131   -0.0492*
                                       (0.0167)   (0.0265)   (0.0167)   (0.0265)
Log (distance)                          -0.0323    -0.0213    -0.0323    -0.0213
                                       (0.0353)   (0.0347)   (0.0353)   (0.0347)
Common origin of the law                                       0.0068    -0.0369
                                                             (0.0197)   (0.0274)
Investing country fixed effects         YES        YES          YES        YES
Destination country fixed effects       YES        YES          YES        YES
Observations                             107        107          107        107
R-squared                               0.415      0.360        0.415      0.360




                                       49
                                                                 Table 7:


                    Effect of Trust on Foreign Direct Investments

     The dependent variable is the log of outward investment (stocks) from the OECD data (1970- 1996). Common border is a dummy


variable equal to one if two countries share at least one border (it is coded one, if countries are the same). Common language is the percentage


of people that speak the same language in each pair of countries (Boisso and Ferrantino (1997)). Common origin of the law is a dummy


variable that is equal to one if two countries share the same origin of law. The instruments include number of years the two countries were


at war between 1000 and 1815, religious similarity, and genetic distance. Religious similarity measures the fraction of people with the same


religious faith in the two countries. Genetic distance is the coancestry coefficient (Reynolds, 1983) calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et al.(1996).


Information measure the geographical coverage of some main European newspapers were obtained searching the Factiva search engine. For


each pair of countries, A and B, it is the percentage of news in the selected newspaper of country A about country B. All regressions include


fixed effects for the country of origin and for the destination country. The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for the


potential clustering of the residual at the country level. The symbols ***, **,* mean that the coefficient is statistically different from zero


respectively at the 1,5, and 10 percent level.



                       Panel A:
                                                                     OLS            IV            OLS             IV
                       Mean trust toward                           0.8772*      2.9023**        0.8544*       2.9410**
                       people in destination country              (0.4617)      (1.2361)       (0.4621)       (1.2658)
                       Press coverage                               2.2710       4.7994          2.6385         4.8174
                                                                  (2.6005)      (3.2326)       (2.6130)       (3.4120)
                       Log (distance)                             -0.6279*       -0.3921       -0.6221*        -0.3905
                                                                  (0.3390)      (0.4063)       (0.3377)       (0.4113)
                       Common border                                0.4887       0.3316          0.4899         0.3289
                                                                  (0.2763)      (0.2646)       (0.2832)       (0.2719)
                       Common language                              0.3698       -0.0300         0.6892        -0.0583
                                                                  (0.6316)      (0.7420)       (0.4798)       (0.6094)
                       Common origin of the law                                                 -0.2570         0.0164
                                                                                               (0.4448)       (0.5777)
                       Exporting country fixed effects              YES           YES             YES            YES
                       Importing country fixed effects              YES           YES             YES            YES
                       Years fixed effects                          YES           YES             YES            YES
                       Observations                                  309           307             309            307
                       R-squared                                    0.809         0.790           0.809         0.789




                                                                      50
Panel B:
                                       OLS               IV           OLS           IV
Mean trust toward                    1.7562**      11.3403***     1.7504**     11.2592**
people in destination country        (0.6729)        (3.4299)      (0.6764)     (3.7322)
Press coverage                     46.8757***      285.1498**    48.7566***   287.9184**
                                    (15.1741)       (99.2172)     (13.7117)   (109.4383)
Interaction effect between press   -15.6924***     -97.4025**   -16.1692***   -98.2600**
coverage and trust                   (5.1214)       (34.3348)      (4.7189)    (37.5976)
Log (distance)                        -0.4878         0.7167        -0.4752      0.7237
                                     (0.3491)        (0.6796)      (0.3462)     (0.6857)
Common border                        0.6044**        0.8302*      0.6096**      0.8455*
                                     (0.2425)        (0.4226)      (0.2511)     (0.4239)
Common language                       0.2248          -1.5442        0.6769      -1.1409
                                     (0.5581)        (1.1440)      (0.3985)     (0.7498)
Common origin of the law                                            -0.3674      -0.3141
                                                                   (0.4365)     (0.7018)
Exporting country fixed effects       YES            YES              YES         YES
Importing country fixed effects       YES            YES              YES         YES
Years fixed effects                   YES            YES              YES         YES
Observations                           309            307              309         307
R-squared                             0.815          0.538            0.815       0.542




                                              51
                                                                                     Figure 1:
                                                               Fixed effects of countries of origin relative to Ireland
                     0.50

                                                                                                                                                                                         0.43

                     0.40



                     0.30


                                                                                                                                                                              0.22
                     0.20
                                                                                                                                                                       0.16
Trust fixed effect




                                                                                                                                                             0.13

                     0.10                                                                                                                             0.07


                                                                                                -0.08         -0.07      -0.06   -0.05
                     0.00
                                                                                 Lux




                                                                                                                                               UK




                                                                                                                                                              Norway
                                                 Portugal




                                                                                                                          Bel
                              GReece


                                        Spain




                                                             Ita


                                                                     NorthIre




                                                                                         Fra




                                                                                                               Austria




                                                                                                                                                       NL




                                                                                                                                                                        Den


                                                                                                                                                                               Finland


                                                                                                                                                                                          Sweden
                                                                                                  Ger(west)




                                                                                                                                  Ger(East)
                                                                                                                                              -0.04

                     -0.10                                                      -0.09   -0.08
                                                                    -0.11


                     -0.20                                  -0.19
                                       -0.22    -0.22

                             -0.26
                     -0.30
                                                                                                           Figure 2:
                                                                                   Fixed effect of country of destination relative to Ireland
                     0.60



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.40
                     0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.25 0.25 0.26 0.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.20
                     0.20

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.08 0.08 0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                                                   -0.18                               -0.10 -0.07
Trust fixed effect




                     0.00
                                                          Slovenia
                              Turkey




                                                                     Bulgary




                                                                                                                   Hungary




                                                                                                                                                                                                    UK



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     US




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lux

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bel
                                        Russia

                                                 China




                                                                                                          Poland



                                                                                                                             Ita




                                                                                                                                                                         Portugal
                                                                               Romania




                                                                                                                                    Germany (East)

                                                                                                                                                      Greece

                                                                                                                                                               Japan



                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain

                                                                                                                                                                                             Fra




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Austria

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Den

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Finland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sweden

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                                         Czech Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ger(west)
                                                                                                                                                          -0.13
                     -0.20                                                                                                                           -0.17
                                                                                  -0.23-0.22
                                                                             -0.26
                                                                        -0.29
                                                                   -0.34
                     -0.40                                    -0.37
                                                         -0.41


                                            -0.54
                     -0.60
                                       -0.59


                             -0.73
                     -0.80
