NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO MARKETS REDUCE COSTS? ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF REGULATORY
RESTRUCTURING ON U.S. ELECTRIC GENERATION EFFICIENCY
Kira Markiewicz
Nancy L. Rose
Catherine Wolfram
Working Paper 11001
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11001

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

Rose gratefully acknowledges support from the MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy
Research (CEEPR), the Hoover Institution, the Guggenheim Foundation, and the National Bureau
of Economic Research. We thank participants at NBER Productivity and Industrial Organization program
meetings, the University of California Energy Institute POWER conference, and the MIT CEEPR
conference, as well as seminar participants at Chicago, Harvard, MIT, UC Berkeley, UC Davis and
Yale for their suggestions. Our work has benefited greatly from detailed comments by Mitali Das,
Al Klevorick, Mark Roberts, Charles Rossman and Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and two anonymous
referees. We thank Tom Wilkening for assistance in coding restructuring policies across states and
Jen-Jen L'ao for assistance coding plant identities. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Kira Markiewicz, Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Markets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric
Generation Efficiency
Kira Markiewicz, Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 11001
December 2004, Revised June 2007
JEL No. L11,L43,L51,L94,D24
ABSTRACT
While neoclassical models assume static cost-minimization by firms, agency models suggest that firms
may not minimize costs in less-competitive or regulated environments. We test this using a transition
from cost-of-service regulation to market-oriented environments for many U.S. electric generating
plants. Our estimates of input demand suggest that publicly-owned plants, whose owners were largely
insulated from these reforms, experienced the smallest efficiency gains, while investor-owned plants
in states that restructured their wholesale electricity markets improved the most. The results suggest
modest medium-term efficiency benefits from replacing regulated monopoly with a market-based
industry structure.
Kira Markiewicz
1300 Clifton Road
Goizueta School of Business
Atlanta, GA
30322
Kira_Fabrizio@bus.emory.edu
Nancy L. Rose
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-280B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
nrose@mit.edu

Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu

Economists have long maintained that markets generate important efficiency
benefits for an economy. These arguments usually focus on allocative efficiency; the
implications of competition for technical efficiency are less clear. Neoclassical models of
profit-maximization assume static cost-minimizing behavior by all firms, regardless of
market competitiveness.1 Agency models, however, in recognizing the interplay of
asymmetric information with the separation of management and control, suggest possible
deviations from cost-minimization by effort-averse managers. These distortions may be
amplified when a firm’s prices are set by asymmetrically-informed regulators (e.g., JeanJacques Laffont and Jean Tirole, 1993). Replacing regulated price determination with
markets makes firms residual claimants to cost-savings, potentially increasing incentives
for efficiency-enhancing effort. 2 Theory suggests several possible roles for markets:
constraining managerial behavior by rewarding efficiency gains, confronting less-efficient
firms with the choice of cost reduction to the level of their lower-cost counterparts or exit,
and perhaps reducing agency costs.3 The actual relevance of markets for technical
efficiency ultimately is an empirical question.
This paper uses data on the U.S. electric generation sector to assess the effect on
technical efficiency of shifting regulated monopolies to more market-based environments.
The past decade has witnessed a dramatic transformation of this industry. Until the mid1990s, over ninety percent of the electricity in the US was sold by vertically-integrated
1

The implication of competition for dynamic efficiency through innovation is the subject of an extensive
theoretical and empirical literature in economics, dating at least from Joseph Schumpeter’s 1942 classic
Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy.
2
In contrast, Xavier Vives (2006) develops a model in which deregulation may lead to increased
competitive pressure and reduced R&D investment, leading to a negative effect on cost-reducing
innovation.

1

investor-owned utilities (IOUs), most operating as regulated monopolists within their
service areas. Many utilities faced some form of incentive-based regulation, adopted by
states during the 1980s and early 1990s to improve upon the efficiency incentives of
traditional cost-of-service regulation. More radical reform was initiated in the mid-1990s,
as many states began to restructure their electric utility markets. Today, nonutility
generators own roughly a quarter of generation capacity nationwide, and IOUs in many
states own only a small fraction of total generating capacity and operate in a structure that
relies heavily on market-based incentives. While studies of state-level electricity
restructuring suggest that politicians may have been motivated in large part by rentseeking (e.g., Matthew W. White, 1996, and Paul L. Joskow, 1997), many proponents of
restructuring argued that exposing utilities to competitive, market-based outcomes would
yield efficiency gains that could ultimately reduce electricity costs and retail prices.
The considerable body of empirical research on electricity restructuring within the
U.S. and abroad has thus far focused on assessing the performance of competitive
wholesale markets, with particular attention to the exercise of market power (e.g., Severin
Borenstein, James Bushnell and Frank A. Wolak, 2002 and Joskow and Edward Kahn,
2002, and Wolak, forthcoming). While many of the costs of electricity restructuring have
been intensively studied, relatively little effort has been devoted to quantifying any ex
post operating efficiency gains of restructuring. Christopher R. Knittel (2002) reports
evidence of some electric generating plant efficiency increases associated with the
diffusion of incentive regulation.4 The question of whether further reform—moving from

3

Stephen J. Nickell (1996) provides a discussion of many of these theoretical arguments. Jen Baggs and
Jean-Etienne de Bettignies (forthcoming) develop a model in which competition may reduce costs through
both direct effects, such as those described in Nickell (1996), and reductions in agency costs.
4
Incentive regulations have been more extensively studied in the telecommunications sector; e.g., Chunrong
Ai and David Sappington (2002), or Donald Kridel, Sappington, and Dennis Weisman (1996) for a survey
of many such studies.

2

incentive-based regulation to deregulated markets for generation—yields additional
improvements in plant efficiency remains open.
Research on other industries suggests productivity gains associated with
deregulation (e.g., G. Steven Olley and Ariel Pakes, 1996, on telecommunications and
Charles K. Ng and Paul Seabright, 2001, on airlines) and with increased competitive
pressure caused by factors other than regulatory change (e.g., José E. Galdón-Sánchez and
James A. Schmitz, Jr., 2002, on iron ore mines).5 This study provides the first substantial
analysis of early generation efficiency gains from electricity restructuring. 6 As such, it is
of direct policy relevance to states contemplating the future of their electricity
restructuring programs, and contributes to the broad economic debate on the role of
competition in the economy.
The results of our work indicate that the plant operators most affected by
restructuring reduced labor and nonfuel expenses, holding output constant, by three to five
percent relative to other investor-owned utility plants, and by six to twelve percent relative
to government- and cooperatively-owned plants that were largely insulated from
restructuring incentives. These may be interpreted as the medium-run efficiency gains
that Joskow (1997, p. 214) posits “may be associated with improving the operating

5

Some hint of this possibility in electricity is provided by Walter J. Primeaux (1977), who compared a
sample of municipally owned firms facing competition to a matched sample of municipally owned firms in
monopoly situations and found a significant decrease in costs per kWh for firms facing competition.
6
Joskow (1997) describes the significant labor force reductions that accompanied restructuring in the UK,
as the industry moved from state-owned monopoly to a privatized, competitive generation market, although
these mix restructuring and privatization effects. The only econometric evidence on restructuring of which
we are aware is from L. Dean Hiebert (2002), who uses stochastic frontier production functions to estimate
generation plant efficiency over 1988-1997, treating all inputs as orthogonal to productivity shocks. Hiebert
models plant inefficiency as a function of several variables, including indicators for state regulatory or
legislative enactment of utility restructuring in 1996 and in 1997. He reports a huge reduction in estimated
mean inefficiency for coal plants in states deemed to have restructured in 1996 but none for gas plants in
those states, and no effect on plants of either fuel type for policies enacted in 1997. Our work uses a longer
time period, richer characterization of the restructuring environment and dating of reforms consistent with
the U.S. Energy Information Administration, and an alternative technology specification that both allows for
more complex productivity shocks and treats possible input endogeneity biases.

3

performance of the existing stock of generating facilities and increasing the productivity
of labor operating these facilities.” Our work also highlights the importance of treating
the simultaneity of input and output choice. Failing to recognize that shocks to input
productivity may induce firms to adjust targeted output leads to overstatement of
estimated efficiency effects, by nearly a factor of two in some cases. While endogeneity
concerns have been long recognized in the productivity literature, ours is one of the first
studies of electric generation to control for this. Finally, we explore the sensitivity of the
estimated efficiency impact to the choice of control group to which restructured plants are
compared, and discuss the issues involved in determining the appropriate counterfactual.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section I describes existing
evidence on the competitive effects of efficiency and discusses how restructuring might
alter electric generation efficiency. Section II details our empirical methodology for
testing these predictions and describes our strategy for identifying restructuring effects.
The data are described in Section III. Section IV reports the results of the empirical
analysis, and Section V concludes.
I. Why Might Restructuring Affect Generator Efficiency?
Through the early 1990s, the U.S. electricity industry was dominated by vertically
integrated investor-owned utilities. Most operated as regulated monopolists over
generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity within their localized geographic
market, though there was some wholesale power traded among utilities or purchased from
a small but growing number of nonutility generators. Prices generally were determined by
state regulators based on accounting costs of service at the firm level. It has long been
argued that traditional cost-of-service regulation does relatively well in limiting rents but
less well in providing incentives for cost-minimizing production (e.g., Laffont and Tirole,
4

1993). Under pure cost-of-service regulation, regulator-approved costs are passed directly
through to customers, and reductions in the cost of service yield at most short-term profits
until rates are revised to reflect the new lower costs at the next rate case.7 Given
asymmetric information between regulators and firms, inefficient behavior by managers
that raises operating costs above minimum cost levels generally would be reflected in
increased rates and passed through to customers. Joskow (1974) and Wallace E.
Hendricks (1975) demonstrate that frictions in cost-of-service regulation, particularly
those arising from regulatory lag (time between price-resetting hearings), may provide
some incentives at the margin for cost-reducing effort. Their impact generally is limited,
however, apart from periods of rapid nominal cost inflation (Joskow, 1974).
This system led economists to argue that replacing cost-of-service regulation with
higher-powered regulatory incentive schemes or increased competition could enhance
efficiency.8 Over the 1980s and early 1990s, many state utility commissions accordingly
adopted some form of incentive regulation. The little empirical evidence available on
these reforms, which modify price setting within the regulated monopoly structure,
suggests limited effects. Knittel (2002) studies a variety of incentive regulations in use
through 1996, and finds that those targeted at plant performance or fuel cost were
associated with gains in plant-level generation efficiency.9 More general reforms, such as
price caps, rate freezes, and revenue-decoupling programs, typically were associated with
insignificant or negative efficiency estimates, all else equal.
7

Rates are constant between rate cases, apart from specific automatic adjustments (such as fuel adjustment
clauses), so changes in cost would not be reflected in rates until the next rate case.
8
See, for example, Laffont and Tirole (1993), for a theoretical justification, or Joskow and Richard
Schmalensee (1987), for an applied argument.
9
Knittel uses OLS and stochastic production frontier techniques to estimate Cobb-Douglas generating plant
production functions in capital, labor, and fuel for a panel of large IOU plants over 1981-1996. His results
from first-differenced models, which implicitly allow for fixed plant-level efficiency effects, suggest gains

5

During the second half of the 1990s, states began to shift their focus from
incentive regulation to restructuring. By 1998, every jurisdiction (50 states and the
District of Columbia) had initiated formal hearings to consider restructuring their
electricity sector, and by 2000, almost half had approved legislation introducing some
form of competition that included competitive retail access, whereby companies competed
to sell power to retail customers.10

Restructuring initiatives, in contrast to incentive

regulations, fundamentally changed the way plant owners earn revenue. At the wholesale
level, plants sell either through newly created spot markets or through long-term contracts
that are presumably based on expected spot prices. In the spot markets, plant owners
submit bids indicating the prices at which they are willing to supply power from their
plants. Dispatch order is set by the bids, and, in most markets, the bid of the marginal
plant is paid to all plants that are dispatched. High-cost plants will be forced down in the
dispatch order, reducing expected revenue.11 Plant operators that reduce costs can move
higher in the dispatch order to increase dispatch probability, and increase the profit margin
between own costs and the expected market price. Most restructuring programs also
changed the way retail rates are determined and the way in which retail customers are
allocated.12 Retail access programs in combination with the creation of the new
wholesale spot markets may increase the intensity of cost-cutting incentives, leading to
even greater effort to improve efficiency.

on the order of 1-2 percent associated with these reforms. Equations that do not allow for plant fixed effects
suggest much larger magnitudes.
10
In the aftermath of California’s electricity crisis in 2000-2001, restructuring has become less popular and
many states have delayed or suspended restructuring activity, including six that had previously approved
retail access legislation. See US Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2003.
11
This could induce closure. We address potential selection-induced biases from exit below.
12
States have used a variety of approaches to link retail rates under restructuring to wholesale prices in the
market. Over the short term, most states decoupled utility revenue from costs by mandating retail rate
freezes, often at levels discounted from pre-restructuring prices. Some states, such as Pennsylvania, are
aggressively trying to encourage entry by competitive energy suppliers, who may contract directly with
retail customers.

6

Exit by less-efficient firms is a well-understood efficiency benefit of competition:
as output shifts from (innately) higher-cost firms to lower-cost competitors the total
production cost for a given output level declines. Olley and Pakes (1996) provide
empirical evidence of this phenomenon in their plant-level analysis of the magnitude and
source of productivity gains in the U.S. telecommunications equipment industry over
1974-1987. They find substantial increases in productivity associated with the increased
competition that followed the 1984 divestiture and deregulation in this sector, and identify
the primary source of these gains as the re-allocation of output from less productive to
more productive plants across firms. In a similar vein, Chad Syverson (2004) finds that
more competitive local markets in the concrete industry are associated with higher mean,
less dispersion, and higher lower-bounds in plant productivity, effects he attributes to the
exit of less-efficient plants in more competitive environments.
The existing evidence on whether competition also leads to cost reductions
through technical efficiency gains by continuing producers and plants is relatively sparse.
Nickell (1996) uses a panel of 670 U.K. manufacturing firms to estimate production
functions that include controls for the competitive environments in which firms operate.
He finds some evidence of reduced productivity levels associated with market power and
strong support for higher productivity growth rates in more competitive environments.
Concerns about the ability of cross-industry analysis to control adequately for
unobservable heterogeneity across sectors may make sector-specific evidence tighter and
more convincing.13 A notable example is the Galdón-Sánchez and Schmitz (2002) study
of labor productivity gains at iron ore mines that faced increased competitive pressure
13

A number of studies have analyzed efficiency gains following regulatory reform in various industries; see,
for example, Elizabeth E. Bailey (1986) and B.U. Park et al. (1998) on airlines. Unfortunately, in many
cases it is difficult to disentangle direct regulatory effects on efficiency (e.g., operating restrictions imposed
on trucking firms or airlines by regulators in those sectors) from the indirect effects of reduced competition.

7

following the collapse of world steel production in the early 1980s. They find
unprecedented rates of labor productivity gains associated with this increase in
competitive pressure, “driven by continuing mines, producing the same products and
using the same technology as they had before the 1980s” (at 1233).14
Several features of the electric generation sector make it an attractive subject for
testing these potential competitive effects on technical efficiency.15 First, generation
technology is reasonably stable and well-understood and data on production inputs and
outputs at the plant-level are readily available to researchers. This has made electric
generation a common application for new production and cost function estimation
techniques, dating at least from Marc Nerlove (1963). Second, policy shifts over a
relatively short period have resulted in a dramatic transformation of the market for electric
power. This provides both time series and geographic variation in competitive
environments. Finally, static and dynamic efficiency claims bolstered much of the policy
reform; measuring these benefits is a vital prerequisite to assessing the wisdom of these
policies.
While the most significant savings from restructuring are likely to be associated
with efficient long-run investments in new capacity, there may be opportunities for
modest reductions in operating costs of existing plants (Joskow, 1997). This paper
attempts to measure the extent of that possible improvement for the existing stock of
electricity generating plants in the U.S. The implicit null hypothesis is that before
restructuring, operators were minimizing their costs given the capital stock available in the

14

Ng and Seabright (2001) estimate cost functions for a panel of U.S. and European airlines over 19821995, and conclude that potential gains from further privatization and increased competition among
European carriers are substantial, though they point out that the best-measured component of these gains
relates to ownership rather than market structure differences.
15
Understanding possible reallocation of output across plants is hampered by the exit of plants from most
publicly available databases when they are sold to nonutility owners.

8

industry. Under the null, there should be no change in plant-level efficiency measures
associated with restructuring activity. We discuss below our method for estimating plant
efficiency and identifying deviations from this hypothesis. To assess the effects of
restructuring, we need to specify how generating plants would have operated absent the
policy change. Constructing this counterfactual is crucial, but difficult.
II. Empirical Model
For a single-output production process, productive efficiency can be assessed by
estimating whether a plant is maximizing output given its inputs and whether it is using
the best mix of inputs given their relative prices. Production functions describe the
technological process of transforming inputs to outputs and ignore the costs of the inputs;
a plant is efficient if it is on the production frontier. Cost minimization assumes that,
given the input costs, firms choose the mix of inputs that minimizes the costs of producing
a given level of output. A plant could be producing the most output possible from a given
input combination but not minimizing costs if, for instance, labor were cheap relative to
materials, yet the plant used a lot of materials relative to labor. Even if the plant were
producing the maximum output possible from its workers and materials, it would not be
efficient if it could produce the same level of output less expensively by substituting labor
for materials. We explore the impact of restructuring on efficiency by specifying a
production function and then deriving the relevant input demand equations implied by cost
minimization.
We adopt the convention of representing electric generating plant output (Q) by
the net energy the generating units produce over some period. This is measured by annual
megawatt-hours, MWh, in our data, as discussed in further detail in the data section
below. While many studies of generating plant productivity model this output as a
9

function of current inputs using a Cobb-Douglas production function, the characteristics of
electricity production argue strongly for an alternative specification. We derive a model
of production and cost minimization that is sensitive to important institutional
characteristics of electricity production that have been ignored in much of the earlier
literature.
First, observed output in general will be the lesser of the output the plant is
prepared to produce given its available inputs (we call this probable output), and the
output called for by the system dispatcher (we call this actual output). Because the system
dispatcher must balance total production with demand at each moment, the gap between
probable (QP) and actual (QA) output for a given plant i will be a function of demand
realizations, the set of other plants available for dispatch, and plant i’s position in the
dispatch order.16
Second, while fuel inputs are varied in response to real-time dispatching and
operational changes, other inputs to a plant’s production are determined in advance of
output realizations. Capital typically is chosen at the time of a unit’s construction (or
retirement), and at the plant level large capital changes are relatively infrequent. From the
manager’s perspective, it may be considered a fixed input. Utilities hire labor and set
operating and materials expenditures in advance, based on expected demand. While these
can be adjusted over the medium-run, staffing decisions as well as most maintenance
expenditures are not tied to short-run fluctuations in output.17 We therefore treat these as
set in advance of actual production, and determining a target level of probable output, QP.

16

Random shocks to a plant’s operations, such as unexpected equipment failures or equipment that lasts
longer than expected, will cause it to produce less or more than its probable output from a set of available
inputs.
17
In fact, over a short time period, maintenance and repair expenditures will be inversely related to output
since the boiler needs to be cool and the plant offline for most major work. We deal with this potential
simultaneity bias below.

10

Finally, while labor, materials, and capital may be to some extent substitutable to
produce probable output, the generation process generally does not allow these inputs to
substitute for fuel in the short-run. Given this description of the technology, we posit a
Leontief production process for plant i in year t of the following form:
(1)

QitA = min[ g(Eit, Γ E, εitE ), QitP(Ki, Lit, Mit, Γ P, εitP)·exp(εitA)]

where QA is actual output and QP is probable output; inputs are denoted by E for energy
(fuel) input, K for capital, L for labor, and M for materials; Γ denotes parameter vectors,
and ε denotes unobserved (to the econometrician) mean zero shocks. See Johannes Van
Biesebroeck (2003) for the derivation of a similar production function he uses to model
automobile assembly plant production.
As noted above, fuel input decisions are made in real time, after the manager has
observed any shocks associated with the plant’s probable output productivity, εitP, the
actual operation of the plant, εitA, and the plant’s energy-specific productivity in the
current period, εitE . Probable output, QP, is in contrast determined by input decisions
made in advance of actual production. We assume that capital, measured by the
nameplate generating capacity of the plant, is fixed.18 Labor and materials decisions are
made in advance of production, but after the level and productivity of the plant’s capital is
observed. This reflects the quasi-fixity of these inputs over time: staffing decisions and
maintenance plans are designed to ensure that the plant is available when it is dispatched,
based on the targeted output QP. The error term εitP incorporates productivity shocks that
we assume are known to the plant manager in advance of scheduling labor and materials
inputs, but are not observable to the econometrician. We allow actual output to differ
from probable output by a multiplicative shock exp(εitA), assumed to be observed at the

11

time fuel input choices are made but not known at the time probable output is determined.
This shock would be, for example, negative if a generating unit were unexpectedly shut
down due to a mechanical failure, or positive if the plant were run more intensively than
anticipated, as might be the case if a number of plants ahead of it in the usual dispatch
order were unavailable or demand realizations were unexpectedly high.
We model probable output (QP) as a Cobb-Douglas function of labor and
materials, embedding capital effects in a constant (Q0(K)) term. This yields the
specification:
QitP ≤ Q0(Ki)·(Lit)γL·(Mit)γM· exp(εitP)

(2)

In preliminary analysis, we estimated the parameters of the production function, including
terms that allowed for differential productivity under restructuring. Those results
suggested productivity gains associated with restructuring. The work reported here
imposes an additional constraint, based on cost-minimization, to estimate input demand
functions, and isolate possible restructuring effects on each measured input. A costminimizing plant manager, facing wages Wit and material prices Sit, would solve for the
optimal inputs to produce probable output QitP by:
(3)

min

Wit·Lit + Sit·Mit

s.t. QitP ≤ Q0(Ki)·(Lit)γL·(Mit)γM·exp(εitP)

Lit, Mit
yielding the following factor demand equations:
(4)

Lit = (λγL QitP)/Wit

(5)

Mit = (λγM QitP)/Sit

where λ is the Lagrangian on the production constraint.

18

The empirical analysis defines a new plant-epoch, i, whenever there are significant changes in capacity, so
that within each plant-epoch, capacity is approximately constant.

12

We observe actual output, QitA = QitP exp(εitA), rather than probable output, QitP.
Making this substitution and taking logs of both sides, equation (2) becomes:
(6)

ln(Lit) = α0 + ln(QitA) – εitA – ln(Wit )

where α0 = ln(λγL).

If there are differences across plants, over time, or across regulatory

regimes in the coefficients of the production function (γL) or in the shadow value of the
probable output constraint (λ), or if there is measurement error in labor used at the plant,
this equation will hold with error. As we are particularly interested in changes in input
demand associated with restructuring, we expand the subscript it to irt to include plant i in
year t, and regulatory restructuring regime r, and re-write equation (6) as: 19
(7)

ln(Lirt) = ln(Qirt A) – ln(Wirt ) + αiL + δtL + φ r L – ε irt A + εirtL

where αiL measures a plant-specific component of labor demand, δtL captures year-specific
differences in labor demand, φ r L captures restructuring-specific shifts in labor demand,
and εirtL measures the remaining error in the labor input equation. α0 is now subsumed in
the plant-specific demand, αiL. Note that φ r L picks up mean residual changes in labor
input for a plant in a restructured regime relative to that plant overall and to all other
plants at the same point in time. It could reflect systematic changes in the marginal
productivity of labor (γL), in the shadow value of the availability constraint (λ) or in
optimization errors. 20
Similarly, equation (5) becomes:
(8)

ln(Mirt) = ln(QrtA) – ln(Srt ) + αiM + δtM + φ r M – ε irt A + ε irtM

which is directly analogous to equation (7).

19

Note that many plant-level differences, such as capital stock, and many time-varying shocks, such as
technology-neutral productivity shocks, drop out of this equation when we condition on output choice.
20
If there are systematic differences in the relation of probable and actual output across restructuring, γ r L
may also reflect the change in mean εirt A. Since εirt A reflects shocks unobservable by the firm when setting
planned output, it seems plausible that these could be mean zero in expectation, but their realizations could
be nonzero in the restructuring sample we observe.

13

We model the energy component of the Leontief production function, which will
in general hold with equality, as:
(9)

QirtA = g(Eirt, γE, εE)

Assuming that g(•) is monotonically increasing in E, we can simply invert it to get an
expression for E in terms of Q. Note that the price of fuel does not enter into the demand
for fuel except through the level of output the plant is dispatched to produce. For
consistency with the other input specifications, we specify a log-log relationship:
(10)

ln(Eirt) = γQE ·ln(Qirt) + φ r E + αiE + δtE + εirtE

where as before, the plant-specific error, αiE, the year-specific error, δtE , and the
restructuring-specific term, φ r E , capture systematic changes in the efficiency with which
plants convert energy to electricity—that is, changes in plant heat rates—across plants,
over time, or correlated with restructuring activity, respectively.
We confront two important endogeneity concerns in estimating the basic input
demand equations, (7), (8) and (10). The first is the possibility that shocks (ε irtL, ε irtM,
εirtE) in the input demand equations may be correlated with output. If output decisions are
made after a plant’s manager observes the plant’s efficiency, managers may increase
planned output in response to positive shocks to an input’s productivity, or reduce planned
output in response to negative shocks. This behavior would induce a correlation between
the error in the input demand equation and observed output. Though one can control
directly for plant-specific efficiency differences and for secular productivity shocks in a
given year, idiosyncratic shocks remain a source of possible bias. Second, the estimates
may be subject to selection bias if exit decisions are driven by unobserved productivity
shocks. In this case, negative shocks could lead to plant shutdown, implying that the
errors for observations we observe will be drawn from a truncated distribution. Neither of
14

these problems is unique to our setting, and they have been raised in many earlier
papers.21
Consider first the simultaneity issue. We face a potential simultaneity problem if,
for instance, a malfunctioning piece of equipment reduces the plant’s fuel efficiency,
leading the utility to reduce its operation of that plant and consequently to use less fuel.
There may be deviations from predetermined employment and materials budgets caused
by unanticipated breakdowns that require increased use of labor and repair expenditures
and result in lower output. A variety of methods have been used to address concerns
about simultaneity.22 We choose to use an instrumental variables approach, using a
measure of state-level electricity demand as an instrument for plant output. Geographic
electric generation markets are likely to be at least as broad as the state-level at the annual
frequency of our data. This demand is likely to be highly correlated with the amount of
output a plant will be called to provide, but uncorrelated, for instance, with how efficiently
an individual plant’s feedwater pumps are working. This approach is likely to be
particularly effective for the energy equation, given the responsiveness of energy input
choices to demand fluctuations in real time, and for identifying exogenous output
fluctuations at nonbaseload plants, which are more strongly influenced by marginal
swings in demand. It may be less powerful in identifying variation in ex ante labor and
maintenance choices, depending in part on the extent to which plant managers anticipate
state demand. We have explored the sensitivity of our results to a broad set of alternative
21

Nerlove (1963) provides an early discussion of simultaneity bias in production functions. Olley and
Pakes (1996) propose a structural approach to addressing simultaneity, which is compared to alternatives in
Zvi Griliches and Jacques Mairesse (1998). Daniel A. Ackerberg et al. (2005) discuss this issue and
compare treatments proposed by Olley and Pakes (1996) and James Levinsohn and Amil Petrin (2003).
While many papers have estimated production or cost functions for electric generating plants, from the
classic analyses in Nerlove (1963) and Laurits R. Christensen and William H. Greene (1976) to very recent
work such as Andrew N. Kleit and Dek Terrell (2001) and Knittel (2002), electricity industry studies
typically have not treated either simultaneity or selection problems.

15

instruments, including interactions of state demand with relative plant efficiency
(heatrates), fuel type, and load profile that allow for plant-level variation in the instrument
set, weather-related demand drivers (cooling and heating degree days), and lags in plantlevel output (similar to Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond, 1998 and 2000).23 The
results reported below are qualitatively robust to these alternatives.
The potential selection issue is more difficult to address. The plants in our sample
are more stable than those studied in many other contexts (especially see Olley and Pakes,
1996), suggesting that the selection problem may be somewhat less severe for electric
generation. Exit in our sample is relatively rare, apart from exit induced when
restructuring-related divestitures remove the plant from the reporting database. Adverse
productivity shocks are much more likely to result in reduced run time than in plant
retirements for the large generating plants analyzed in this work. To the extent that the
divestitures were mandated by restructuring policies, these also should not create selection
problems. In all states where plant divestitures were part of the restructuring process
except New York, virtually all of the utility-owned fossil-fuel fired plants were divested,
suggesting that the extent and incidence of divestitures following restructuring are largely
nondiscretionary.24 To further gauge the significance of potential selection effects, we
have compared results for the unbalanced panel we use in the analysis to those for a panel
of plants that continue to operate through the end of our sample period, for which potential
selection effects are likely to be most severe. With one exception, the results from the

22

See the references cited in note 21, supra.
This is discussed in detail in a Technical Appendix to this paper, available on the American Economic
Review website and as an appendix to Kira Fabrizio, et al. (hereafter FRW ), 2007. The Technical
Appendix discusses these and other robustness checks.
24
See the analysis in James B. Bushnell and Catherine D. Wolfram (2005) and the discussion in FRW
(2007) Technical Appendix.
23

16

balanced panel are similar to the main results reported in this paper, suggesting there is
little to be gained from a more detailed treatment of potential selection biases.25
Identification strategy
There is substantial spatial and temporal heterogeneity in the economic
environment in which electric utilities have operated. There are thousands of generating
plants operated by hundreds of utilities subject to regulation by dozens of political
jurisdictions each setting their own legal and institutional environment. Restructuring,
however, is not randomly assigned across political jurisdictions—earlier work suggests
that it is strongly correlated with higher than average electricity prices in the crosssection.26 Fortunately, we have panel data on the costs and operations of most electric
generating plants from well before any restructuring until the present. This allows us to
construct benchmarks that we believe control for most of the potentially confounding
variation.
The plant-specific effects, {αiN}, measure the mean use of input N at plant i
relative to other plants in the sample. These effects may be associated with differences in
plant technology type and vintage, ownership (government v. private utilities), and timeinvariant state effects. The year-specific shock, {δtN}, measures the efficiency impact of
sector-level shifts over time, such as secular technology trends, macroeconomic
fluctuations or energy price shocks. Restructuring effects on plant productivity
25

The exception is the coefficient on an indicator for transition to RETAIL ACCESS competition. This
coefficient is smaller and statistically indistinguishable from zero in the balanced panel estimation of the
NONFUEL EXPENSE regression. This could be due to the fact that several of the states that implemented
retail access competition within our sample required generating plant divestitures. Divested plants generally
are exempt from publicly disclosing the data that we rely on in our analysis, eliminating them from the
balanced sample. The negative coefficient on RETAIL ACCESS in the full sample could reflect reduced
spending on NONFUEL EXPENSES by plants that are eventually divested, though there are too few
observations on divested plants to conclude this with any certainty.
26
The significant role of sunk capital costs in regulatory ratemaking means that high prices do not
necessarily imply high operating costs for generation facilities within a state, however. See Joskow (1997)
for a discussion of the contributors to price variation across states.

17

correspond to a nonzero {φrN}. Heterogeneity in the timing and outcomes of state-level
restructuring activity allow the data to distinguish between temporal shocks and
restructuring effects. While all states held hearings on possible restructuring, the earliest
was initiated in 1993 and the latest in 1998. There is considerable variation in the
outcome of those hearings, as well, with just under half the jurisdictions (23 states and the
District of Columbia) enacting restructuring legislation between 1996 and 2000.27 The
remainder considered and rejected, or considered and simply did not act on, such
legislation. This variation allows us to use changes in efficiency at plants in states that did
not pass restructuring legislation to identify restructuring separately from secular changes
in efficiency of generation plants over time.
It is possible that plants in this control group also altered their behavior over the
post-1992 period. This could be due to the introduction or intensification of incentive
regulation within states that did not enact restructuring, to the expectation of potential
restructuring that did not occur, or to spillovers from restructuring movements in other
states (e.g. if regulators updated their information about the costs necessary to run plants
of a certain type, or multi-state utilities operating under differing regimes improved
efficiency of all their plants, not just those in restructuring states). To the extent this
occurs, our comparison will understate the magnitude of any efficiency effect of
restructuring.
We therefore consider a second control group, consisting of cooperatively-owned
and publicly-owned municipal and federal plants, which for convenience we will refer to
collectively as municipal or “MUNI” plants, although the group is broader than strictly
27

We collected information on state restructuring legislation from various Energy Information
Administration and National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners publications and state public
utility commission websites. Since 2000, no additional states have enacted restructuring legislation, and
several have delayed or suspended restructuring activity in response to the California crisis.

18

implied by this label. An extensive literature has debated the relative efficiencies of
private and public ownership in this sector under traditional regulation, with quite mixed
results. We abstract from this by allowing for plant-specific effects that absorb any levels
differences in input use across ownership type. Restructuring generally altered the
competitive environment only for private investor-owned utilities within a state, leaving
those for publicly- and cooperatively-owned utilities unchanged.28 This suggests that
MUNIs may provide a second benchmark against which to measure changes in efficiency
associated with restructuring. To control for the possible divergence of publicly-owned
plant input use in the years preceding the restructuring period, we allow a separate
intercept shift for publicly-owned plants after 1987: MUNI*POST 1987.29 We then adopt
a parameterization that measures {φrN} relative to incremental differences at publiclyowned plants during the period that investor-owned utilities are at risk of restructuring,
defined as 1993 forward, through inclusion of an indicator for MUNI*POST 1992.
Using N to denote input (labor, nonfuel expenses, or fuel), and PRICEN to denote
the relevant input price (none for the fuel equation), we have input use equation (11):
(11)

ln(Nirt) = ln(QirtA) - ln(PRICENirt ) + γ87 MUNI*POST1987it +
γ92 MUNI*POST1992it + αiN + δtN + φr N – ε irt A + ε irtN
Base differences in input use across each investor-, publicly-, or cooperatively-

owned plant are embedded in the plant fixed effects, {αiN}. All plants experience
common annual changes in input use measured by the time effects, {δtN}; publicly-owned
plants may experience a differential mean shift from these effects following 1987.
28

Arizona and Arkansas, which included government-owned utilities in restructuring programs, are the two
exceptions.
29
In Figures 1 and 2, we report nonparametric time paths for IOU and MUNI plant efficiency that suggest
some divergence between the groups prior to the beginning of state restructuring. While the designation of
1988-1992 as a transition period before restructuring is somewhat arbitrary, it serves as a conservative

19

Restructuring effects are measured by the difference-in-differences in two implicit
“nontreatment groups” to which investor-owned plants in restructuring regimes may be
compared: investor-owned plants in non-restructuring regimes over 1993-1999 (with the
IOU restructuring effect measured by φ rN), and MUNI plants over 1993-1999 (with the
IOU restructuring effect measured by φ r N – γ92).
III. Data & Summary Statistics
The analysis in this paper is based on annual plant-level data for large fossil-fueled
generating plants owned by U.S. electric utilities. Plants are comprised of at least one, but
typically several, generating units, which may be added to or retired from service over the
several-decade life of a generating plant. While an ideal dataset would allow us to explore
efficiency at the generating unit level, inputs other than fuel are not available at the
generating unit level. Some inputs, such as employees, are not assignable to a unit as they
are shared across units at the plant.30 We therefore use a plant-year as an observation.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) collects data for investorowned utility plants annually in the FERC Form 1, and the EIA and Rural Utilities Service
(RUS) collect similar data for municipally-owned plants and rural electric cooperatives,
respectively. These data include operating statistics such as size of the plant, fuel usage,
percentage ownership held by the operator and other owners, number of employees,
capacity factor, operating expense, year built, and many other plant-level statistics. Our
base dataset includes all large fossil-fuel steam and combined cycle gas turbine generating

control for pre-period relative changes and is broadly reflective of policy transitions during the mid-1980s
and early 1990s (Joskow, 1997).
30
Some labor may be shared across multiple plants, though assigned to one particular plant in our data.
This will induce measurement error, particularly in our plant employment variable.

20

plants for which data were reported to FERC, EIA or RUS over the 1981 through 1999
period.31 Further details on data construction are provided in the data appendix.
We follow the literature in characterizing output by the total energy output of the
plant over the year, measured by annual net megawatt-hours of electricity generation, NET
MWH. This is an imperfect choice. Output is, in reality, multidimensional, although most
dimensions are not recorded in the plant data. For example, generating plants may also
provide reliability services (such as spinning reserves, when the plant stands ready to
increase output at short notice), voltage support and frequency control. While the
production process varies considerably across these different outputs, only net generation
is well-measured in the data.32
More importantly, electricity output is not a homogenous product. The availability
of the plant may be an important modifier of output quality. Because electricity is not
storable, firms must decide how to balance the costs associated with taking their plant
down to do maintenance against the probability that a poorly maintained plant will fail
during peak demand hours. Changes in incentives associated with restructuring may have
altered firms’ assessments of these tradeoffs, although the expected direction of the effects
is theoretically ambiguous.33 Hourly output prices and output from individual plants
might allow us to better assess this. Lacking such data, we rely on a single output
dimension, while acknowledging its limitations.
31

One unfortunate consequence of restructuring is that available data on plants sold by utilities to nonutility
generators are extremely limited after the sale, due to changed reporting requirements. This means that
plants will be excluded from our dataset after such sales.
32
The inputs required to produce a given level of energy (MWh) from a specific plant also will depend on
whether the plant runs continuously or intermittently and on its average capacity utilization. Starting a plant
frequently and running it at low capacity utilization rates typically use more inputs (particularly fuel) per
MWh generated than does running a plant continuously at its rated capacity.
33
For instance, under traditional regulation, utilities may have faced strong political incentives to avoid
blackouts or brownouts, leading to investment in greater capacity to increase reserve margins and in greater
maintenance resources to increase plant reliability. On the other hand, competitive firms producing in

21

We have information on three variable inputs. The first, EMPLOYEES, is a count
of full-time equivalent employees at the plant. The second, NONFUEL EXPENSE,
includes all nonfuel operations and maintenance expenses, such as those for coolants,
repairs, maintenance supervision and engineering. This variable is less than ideal as a
measure of materials, both because it reflects expenditures rather than quantities, and
because it includes the wage bill for the employees counted in EMPLOYEES, although
that expense is not separately delineated in our data. As NONFUEL EXPENSES includes
payroll costs, both this and EMPLOYEES will reflect changes in staffing.34 The third
input is the quantity of fuel consumed by type of fuel (tons of coal, barrels of oil, and mcf
of natural gas). We convert fuel into BTUs using the reported annual plant-specific Btu
content of each fuel to obtain total BTU input at the plant for each year.
Input prices pose a challenge. We do not observe firm- or plant-level wages.
Our basic specifications use the variable WAGE, reflecting the Bureau of Labor Statistics
state-level average utility wage by ownership type: investor-owned or publicly-owned.
For MUNI plants in states without a publicly-owned utility wage series, we impute wage
to be the product of investor-owned utility wages for that state and the average ratio of
publicly- to investor-owned utility wages overall. This variable is problematic: not only
does it measure firm-specific wages with error, but it is susceptible to the potential
endogeneity of wages to the regulatory environment.35 We have experimented with

restructured wholesale markets may face even stronger incentives to be available when demand peaks
because this is when prices are highest.
34
The elasticity of NONFUEL EXPENSES with respect to EMPLOYEES is about .5 in our data, broadly
consistent with our back of the envelope calculations suggesting that labor costs are roughly half of the total
nonfuel operating budget.
35
Hendricks (1975) suggests that utilities may bargain less aggressively over input prices such as wages
during periods in which higher costs can be readily passed on to customers through higher regulated prices,
and more aggressively when the firm is likely to be the residual claimant to cost savings. In other industries,
regulatory reform has sometimes been associated with substantial reductions in wages, suggesting rentsharing under regulation (see Nancy L. Rose, 1987, on the trucking industry). Moreover, electricity workers
tend to be highly unionized, and unions may bargain over employment terms as well as wages. These

22

specifications that instrument for utility wages with the state average wages of workers in
comparable labor markets, including natural gas distribution, petroleum refining and
hazardous waste treatment facilities. While this instrument may in theory better reflect an
exogenous opportunity wage for workers at power plants, the results using this are much
noisier (though the non-WAGE coefficients are not materially affected). We therefore use
WAGE in our basic specifications. We do not have reasonable indices for the materials
prices that comprise NONFUEL EXPENSES, even at the state-industry level. Our
empirical model of NONFUEL EXPENSES therefore corresponds to an input demand
equation with constant real relative prices and a price coefficient of one.
The final input is the capital stock of the plant, which we measure by plant
capacity and vintage. Our data record the plant capacity in megawatts. We combine this
with information on unit retirements to define plant-epochs. Each plant is assigned a
unique identifier. Any time the capacity of the plant is significantly changed, we create a
new identifier and associated new plant-epoch specific effect. This allows capital changes
to alter the underlying input efficiency of the plant. There may be variation within plantepoch when “scrubbers” (flue-gas desulfurization systems, or FGDs), are installed to
reduce sulfur-dioxide emissions by some coal plants. SCRUBBERs affect the
environmental output, unmeasured by ln(NET MWH), which may suggest less efficient
operation conditional only on observed output. We therefore include a direct control for
the presence of a SCRUBBER.
Operational plant data are supplemented with information on state-level
restructuring activity. For each state, we have identified (i) the date at which formal
hearings on restructuring began, (ii) the enactment date for legislation restructuring the
considerations suggest that observed wages may not be exogenous to the firm, and may not reflect the

23

state’s utility sector, if any, (iii) the implementation date for retail access under that
legislation, and (iv) associated aspects of restructuring such as rate freezes and mandatory
divestiture of generation. Testing for restructuring-specific shocks requires a
determination of how to match this information with firm decisions: when were plant
operators in a given state likely to have begun responding to a policy change?
Consultations with industry participants and readings of these events suggest that utilities
often acted in advance of final legislative or regulatory outcomes. The process leading to
state restructuring typically lasted a number of years, allowing utilities to anticipate the
coming change, and alter their behavior in advance. For example, Boston Edison’s 10-K
filed in March 1994 discussed Massachusetts’ consideration of restructuring, stating “The
Company is responding to the current and anticipated competitive pressure with a
commitment to cost control and increased operating efficiency without sacrificing quality
of service or profitability” (Boston Edison, 1994, p. 6).36 Massachusetts had just begun
holding formal hearings on restructuring the industry in 1994. Utilities may have phased
input changes, especially those involving labor and particularly unionized workers.
Moreover, as policy changes were discussed, rates were frozen in many states, either
explicitly by policy makers or in effect by implicit PUC decisions not to hear new rate
cases, enabling utilities to capture the savings from incremental cost reductions.37

opportunity cost to managers of the marginal unit of labor.
36
A similar theme was echoed by many other utility executives. For example, in a 1993 news story on
PECO’s early retirement plan, Chairman and CEO Joseph Paquette described “trying to improve the
company's competitive position by emphasizing a more productive work force. Employees are receiving
extensive training for quality, and the company is looking at modifying its salary structures to promote pay
for performance. Paquette said such programs are needed to help the company conduct business in an
evolving, less-regulated power generation environment. ‘We have to be prepared for this more competitive
world,’ he said” (“Philadelphia Electric: Cites Effect of Cost-Cutting Plan,” Dow Jones News Service, May
27, 1993).
37
As noted earlier, some of these changes may have also affected utilities in non-restructuring states. For
example, the number of utility rate cases dropped dramatically in the 1990s, implying that many utilities
may have been short- or medium-run residual claimants to cost reductions. Knittel (2002) identifies a
number of incentive regulations adopted in various jurisdictions during the 1990s. Many of the fuel-related

24

In this work, we allow restructuring effects to begin with the opening of formal
hearings on restructuring. The primary variable of interest, RESTRUCTURED, is an
indicator variable that turns on for investor-owned plants with the start of formal
proceedings in a state that eventually passed restructuring legislation.38 If utilities did not
respond until restructuring legislation or regulation was enacted and the policy uncertainty
resolved, RESTRUCTURED will underestimate the true effect by averaging in
nonresponse years. To evaluate this possibility we introduce a second variable, LAW
PASSED, an indicator equal to one beginning in the year the state passes restructuring
legislation.39 A third variable, RETAIL ACCESS, indicates the start of retail access for
plants in the states that implemented retail competition within our sample.40 If actual
implementation of retail access and the associated wholesale market reforms is important
to efficiency gains, it will be reflected in an incremental effect of RETAIL ACCESS.
To compare differences in the path of municipally-owned plants over the
restructuring time period, we define the indicator variables MUNI*POST 1987 and
MUNI*POST 1992. The first is equal to one for all non-investor-owned plants after 1987,

regulations (modified pass-through clauses, heat rate and equivalent availability factor incentive programs)
were strongly correlated with ultimate restructuring. Some of the broader regulations (e.g., price caps and
revenue decoupling programs) were almost orthogonal to eventual restructuring.
38
The RESTRUCTURED variable is based on whether a state had passed legislation as of mid-2001. To
date, there has been no additional restructuring and some states have delayed or suspended planned
restructuring activity in the aftermath of the California electricity crisis. Plants are assigned to the state in
which they are regulated. A plant located in one state may be owned by a company with exclusive service
territory in a different state. In this case, the ownership state is the one for which the regulatory policy is
measured. Some plants are owned by a company with service territory in more than one state and some
plants are owned by several companies that are regulated by different states. In the regression analysis, we
found that separately characterizing “mixed” regulation and “shared” plants had very little impact on our
results.
39
There is on average about a 2.6-year lag between the initiation of hearings and the passage of the law.
We have experimented with a number of alternative measures of restructuring activity, including variables
that begin with hearings regardless of restructuring outcomes, those that measure years since hearings were
initiated for states that eventually restructured, and the presence of restructuring-associated rate freezes.
None of these materially changes the conclusions we draw below.
40
While RESTRUCTURED indicates approval of retail access competition, the specified phase-in of retail
access was often slow. Only seven states implemented retail access during our sample period, four in 1998
and three in 1999.

25

the second for all non- IOU plants after 1992. MUNI*POST 1987 allows for the
possibility that relative input demand growth for IOU and publicly-owned plants diverged
in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when many states began to experiment with incentive
regulation and during which time the earliest discussion of increased competition took
place. MUNI*POST 1992 captures the incremental change in relative input demand
growth across IOUs and publicly-owned plants during the restructuring period. Because
the designation of the pre-reform period is inherently imperfect, we also report the
unrestricted annual time path of input demand growth (see Figures 1 and 2).
Details on the data sources and summary statistics are provided in the data
appendix. Table 1 reports summary statistics for plant-level data in 1985 across three
categories: investor-owned plants in states that eventually restructured, investor-owned
plants in states that did not restructure, and non-IOU (MUNI) plants. We use 1985 to
ensure that comparisons are made prior to any significant changes across states in the
competitive or regulatory environment, even well before restructuring initiatives.
This table suggests that the plants in these groups are not random draws from the
same population. The first three variables measure employees and nonfuel operating
expenses, scaled by the plant’s capacity, and fuel use in millions of British thermal units
(mmBtus), scaled by the plant’s output. In 1985, before state-level restructuring
initiatives were considered, IOU plants in states that eventually restructured used more
employees and nonfuel operating expenses per MW of capacity than did IOU plants in
non-restructuring states (see the difference in means test in column 4). Employment by
municipally-owned plants is not statistically distinguishable from employment at
restructuring IOU plants, but MUNI plants appear to have lower levels of nonfuel
expenses. Differences in heat rates and capacity factors are not significant for any cross26

sample comparison. The last four rows suggest notable differences in the stock of plants
across these three groups. Although IOU plants are very similar in size across regimes,
MUNI plants tend to be substantially smaller. IOU plants in restructuring states tend to be
older, more likely to use gas, and less likely to use coal, than their counterparts in nonrestructuring states. IOU plants in restructuring states also tend to be older and less likely
to use coal than their MUNI counterparts. The regression analysis will control for these
differences directly or with the use of plant-epoch effects.
If investor-owned utilities achieved efficiency improvements when facing
impending restructuring of the generation sector, one would expect to see a relative
decrease in the cost of generation for affected companies, and little difference in the
change in transmission and distribution costs between the affected and not affected states
since restructuring programs leave transmission and distribution comparatively untouched.
If restructuring did not affect operating efficiency in the generation sector, we might
expect similar changes in generation expenses across restructuring and non-restructuring
companies, and perhaps similar patterns of cost changes across the transmission,
distribution, and generation sectors.
Table 2 displays the mean changes in cost per MWh for investor-owned utilities in
restructuring and non-restructuring states between 1990 and 1996. 41 Unlike distribution
and transmission costs, generation costs per MWh decrease considerably over this period,
and by considerably more at companies in restructuring states, significant at the 6 percent
level. Moreover, the difference in cost changes across regimes is not significant for either
the transmission or distribution costs. These aggregate statistics may suggest that the
41

For this analysis, we rely on data reported annually by utility companies to the FERC in the Form 1, page
320, 321, and 322 respectively. We use a balanced sample composed of all companies with data reported
for all three sectors in both 1990 and 1996. This amounts to 48 companies in states that did not restructure
and 72 in states that did restructure.

27

division of the utility company faced with competition (the generating sector) responded
with a decrease in costs, while other sectors and companies not faced with competition did
not share this response.
IV. Estimating the Effects of Restructuring on Input Use
Following equation (11), we estimate the influence of restructuring on the use of
input N (EMPLOYEES, NONFUEL EXPENSE, and BTUs) with the following basic
regression model:
(12)

ln(Nirt) = β1Nln(NET MWHirt) + β2Nln(PRICENirt ) + β3NSCRUBBERirt +
φ r NIOU*RESTRUCTUREDirt + γ87NMUNI*POST 1987irt +
γ92NMUNI*POST 1992irt + αiN + δtN + eirt

where we allow for nonunity coefficients on the output term (β1N ) for all equations and on
the input price term (β2N on WAGE) in the EMPLOYEES equation,42 and measure the
impact of having a scrubber on plant input use with the variable SCRUBBER. αiN is a
time-invariant fixed effect for input N at plant-epoch i, which may contain a state-specific
and ownership-specific error that will not be separately identified. These plant-specific
effects control for much of the expected variation in input use across plants arising from
heterogeneous technologies, state or regional fixed factors, and basic efficiency
differences. They also control for differences in the plant mix between restructuring and
non-restructuring states by comparing each plant to itself over time, removing any timeinvariant plant effects. As a Hausman test (Jerry Hausman, 1978) rejects the exogeneity
of the plant-epoch effects, all reported results include plant-epoch fixed-effects. δtN is an

42

Recall that we do not have a price associated with nonfuel expenses, and that according to equation (10),
fuel prices should not enter into the fuel input function. We experimented with using a variable measuring
the price of a given plant’s fuel relative to the prices of other fuels in the same region as an instrument for
output but the variable had no power in the first stage.

28

industry-level effect in year t, which controls for systematic changes in input demand
common to all plants in that year.
The error term, eirt, combines the deviation of actual from probable output, β1Nε irtA,
and the input N-specific productivity shock to plant i in regime r at time t, εirtN. This error
is unlikely to be independent over time for a given plant; the data suggest considerable
persistence in input shocks, particularly for labor, from year to year. The estimated rho
assuming a first-order serial correlation process ranges from roughly 0.33 for nonfuel
expenses to 0.75 for labor. As discussed earlier, the estimation must also account for
endogeneity of output, measured in these specifications as the net generation by the plant
in megawatt-hours (NET MWH). We therefore implement a GLS-IV estimation strategy,
using a Prais-Winsten GLS correction for first-order serial correlation at the plant level,43
and instrumenting for plant output with a nonlinear function of state demand (the log of
total state electricity sales, which is a consumption rather than production measure). 44
We consider specifications that include interactions of IOU ownership with the
three primary restructuring indicator variables described in section III:
RESTRUCTURED, LAW PASSED, and RETAIL ACCESS. In the input regressions, a
negative coefficient on the restructuring variables would imply increased input efficiency
associated with the regulatory reform. The core results for the input analysis are presented
in table 3 for EMPLOYEES, table 4 for NONFUEL EXPENSES and table 5 for BTU. We
first discuss the results for employment and nonfuel expenses, and then discuss the results
for fuel use.

43

Reported standard errors also correct for possible correlation across observations at the state-year level.
State demand is an important determinant of plant-level output, but should be unaffected by plant
productivity shocks. The F-statistic on the instrument from the first stage estimates for the NONFUEL
EXPENSE and BTU specifications (i.e. excluding the WAGE variable) is 11.9. We have explored the
sensitivity of our results to alternative instrument choices; these are reported in the FRW (2007) Technical
Appendix.

44

29

Column 1 of tables 3 and 4 reports results from generalized least squares (GLS)
estimation of our basic specification, treating plant output as exogenous. The primary
coefficient of interest, IOU*RESTRUCTURED, captures the mean differential in input use
for investor-owned plants in states that eventually pass restructuring legislation. This is ,
measured over the period following the first restructuring hearings, relative to the
untreated IOU plants in non-restructuring states. The results suggest statistically and
economically significant declines in input use associated with regulatory restructuring.
Employment declines by roughly 3 percent (1 percent standard error) and nonfuel
expenses decline by roughly 9 percent (2 percent standard error),45 relative to IOU plants
in regimes that have not restructured.46
The second notable result is the dependence of the implied restructuring effect on
the control group. While IOU plants in restructuring states exhibit modest reductions in
employment and nonfuel expenses relative to IOUs in non-restructuring states, the implied
reductions are substantially larger when compared to public and cooperative plants. The
positive MUNI*POST 1987 coefficients suggest that all IOU plants improved their
efficiency relative to MUNI plants during the late 1980s and early 1990s. This gap
widened further after 1992 (see MUNI*POST 1992). This suggests that even IOU plants
in non-restructuring regimes improved their relative input use to a significant extent,
perhaps in response to latent threats of increased competition and restructuring.
Employment use was 6 percent lower for IOU plants in restructuring states relative to

45

We use [exp(φ r N )-1]*100 to approximate the implied percentage effect of IOU* RESTRUCTURED on
input use.
46
Note that the Cobb-Douglas functional form assumption for labor and nonfuel expenses suggests that the
coefficient on output should be one, substantially larger than the coefficients estimated in these regressions.
We have estimated production functions in EMPLOYEES and NONFUEL EXPENSES using more flexible
functional forms than Cobb-Douglas, and the results also suggest efficiency gains associated with
restructuring. We have also estimated instrumental variables versions of equations (7) and (8) that include
the other input instead of output and obtained very similar results to those reported here.

30

MUNI plants after 1992, and nonfuel expenses declined by 11 percent relative to the
MUNI benchmark (computed as the IOU*RESTRUCTURED minus MUNI*POST 1992
coefficients in tables 3 and 4).

We return to this issue in greater detail below.

The remaining columns in each table report instrumental variables (GLS-IV)
estimates of the input equations that treat potential measurement error and simultaneity
bias with respect to output, as well as serial correlation of shocks. For EMPLOYEES,
estimates of the output coefficient almost double relative to the GLS estimates, although
the imprecision of the GLS-IV estimates make it impossible to reject equivalence, and in
absolute magnitude, both estimates of the labor demand elasticity with respect to output
are quite small, at 4 percent (0.5 percent standard error) for GLS and 7 percent (7 percent
standard error) for GLS-IV.

Consistent with this, the estimated effect of restructuring on

labor demand is essentially unaffected by the treatment of output exogeneity. For
NONFUEL EXPENSES, however, instrumenting for output increases its estimated
elasticity more than fourfold, to over 50 percent (9 percent standard error). This is
consistent with a negative correlation of input shocks and output, as for example, if large
maintenance expenditures are associated with outages at the plant. With the strong link
between output and nonfuel expenses implied by these results, correcting for output
endogeneity also has a substantial effect on the estimated effect of restructuring. The
estimated coefficient on the IOU*RESTRUCTURED coefficient drops by almost half, to
-5 percent (2.6 percent standard error), bringing it into the range of the estimated labor
input effect.
Columns 3 and 4 of the tables explore robustness to alternative measures of
restructuring, maintaining the use of GLS-IV estimates. Measuring restructuring by LAW
PASSED in column 3 yields smaller (and statistically indistinguishable from zero)
31

coefficients in both the employment and the nonfuel expense regressions, perhaps because
the baseline period now includes efficiency improvements made between the initiation
and passage of legislation. Column 4 adds the RETAIL ACCESS variable. We note that
its coefficient is identified by no more than two years of data in the seven states that
implement retail access as of 1999, and it is not particularly stable across alternative
instrument sets or to changes in the sample. In these basic specifications, the coefficient
on RETAIL ACCESS in labor demand is quite imprecisely estimated, though the point
estimate suggests an additional –3 percent (5 percent standard error) change in
employment when states implement retail access. The estimated impact of retail access on
nonfuel expenses is substantially larger, at -17 percent (6.5 percent), though its sensitivity
to balancing the sample precludes confidence in the estimate (see footnote 25).
Finally, in column 5 of each table, we report results that use an alternative measure
of competitive pressure. Policy changes in the late 1980s and early 1990s set the stage for
increased nonutility generation, but the impact of that change varied substantially across
states. We construct an indicator, HIGH NONUTILITY GENERATION, which turns on in
1993 if the plant is in a state that has above median penetration of nonutility generation as
of 1993. This measure should capture any utility responses to higher intensity of actual
generation competition from unregulated market participants.47 The estimated impact of
high levels of nonutility generation on employment at IOU plants is slightly smaller and
noisier than RESTRUCTURED estimates (at -2.2 percent, standard error, 1.9 percent). For
nonfuel expenses, high penetration by non utility generation appears to have no detectable
direct effect on IOU plant input use (-1 percent, standard error, 3 percent).

47

We include this in column 5 as a replacement for restructuring policy variables, but have also estimated
models that include direct effects of RESTRUCTURED and HIGH NONUTILITY GENERATION as well as
their interaction.

32

In the instrumental variables results, as in the GLS results, the implied magnitude
of the restructuring effect depends upon the chosen benchmark or control group. The gap
in IOU input demand between restructuring and non-restructuring states, conditional on
output, is generally statistically and economically significant, though relatively modest.
The performance gain of an IOU plant in a restructured regime relative to MUNI plants
over the same period is larger, on the order of 6 percent reductions in employment and 12
percent reductions in nonfuel expenses.48
To provide further insight into the question of benchmark group, we re-estimate
the basic model of column (4) without the IOU*RESTRUCTURED and MUNI*POST
1992 variables, but allowing for separate year effects for each of three categories of
plants: IOU plants in states that eventually restructure, IOU plants in states that do not
restructure, and MUNI plants. Figures 1 (employees) and 2 (nonfuel expenses) plot the
estimated year effects for each plant group. The figures suggest greater divergence
between MUNI and IOU plants in both input measures as the 1990s progress. As this is a
period of increasing competitive pressures and substantial movement toward restructuring,
these patterns suggest to us that there is considerable information in the MUNI benchmark
comparisons.
Table 5 reports results from variants of our basic specification for fuel inputs. In
column 1, GLS results suggest an output elasticity well below unity (0.912, standard error
0.004), and an implied reduction in fuel use associated with IOU plants in restructuring
regimes (-1.4 percent, standard error 0.4 percent). Columns 2 through 5 report results for
specifications that instrument for output. The estimated output elasticity is quite close to,
and statistically indistinguishable from, unity. The estimated effects of restructuring or
48

The results are robust to a variety of more flexible specifications of the MUNI controls over time and to

33

NON UTILITY GENERATION competition are all small and statistically indistinguishable
from zero (negative in columns 2 and 4, positive in columns 3 and 5). There is no
measurable effect of restructuring on fuel efficiency relative to IOU plants in nonrestructuring states. Nor is there evidence of significant differences between IOU plants
and MUNI plants. The MUNI *POST 1992 coefficient point estimates appear virtually
identical to the IOU restructuring coefficients, and are similarly indistinguishable from
zero.49
While the data do not suggest gains in fuel efficiency from restructuring within our
sample, a caveat is in order. Although variations on the order of even 0.5 - 1.0 percent in
fuel productivity are economically significant, it may be difficult to measure these
sufficiently precisely with our aggregated data. Fuel efficiency at a plant is heavily
influenced by factors such as the allocation of output across units at a plant, the number of
times its units are stopped and started, and for how long the units were running below
their capacity. Our inability to measure or control for possible changes in these
operational characteristics may make it particularly difficult to capture any changes in fuel
efficiency. Improving our understanding of fuel efficiency effects seems an important
direction for future research.
Testing robustness of the RESTRUCTURED effect
We have analyzed the robustness of these results to a variety of alternative
specifications of the input demand equations. We report selected results below;
additional robustness tests are available in our Technical Appendix. Given the null results

allowing differential MUNI output elasticity coefficients.
49
We obtained similar null results when we estimated specifications using the log of plant heat rate
(BTUs/MWhs) as the dependent variable, controlling for output.

34

in our basic fuel use regressions, we focus on labor and nonfuel expense input choices in
this analysis.
Our first tests divide the sample along size and age lines; recall that these are the
dimensions on which MUNI plants appear to differ from IOU plants. In tables 6
(employees) and 7 (nonfuel expenses), we report results for “larger” versus “smaller”
plants (columns 1 and 2), and “old” versus “new” plants (columns 3 and 4). These are
relative cuts that divide the sample at roughly the median of size (575 MW) and the
median of age (oldest unit is built after 1960). For all specifications, IOU plants in
restructured regimes exhibit lower input use than do IOU plants in nonrestructured
regimes (see the coefficients on IOU*RESTRUCTURED), though the magnitude of the
estimated effect varies with the subsample. Estimated IOU restructuring effects suggest
very similar employment reductions at LARGER and SMALLER plants and slightly greater
employment reductions at NEW plants than at OLD plants, though the point estimates are
not significantly different across the subsamples. Nonfuel expense reductions appear to
be greatest for LARGER and NEW plants—about twice the estimated magnitude for those
at SMALLER and OLD plants. More interesting, perhaps, is the comparison to MUNI
plants. They appear indistinguishable from IOUs in input use at OLD plants (see column
3 of both tables) and in employment at LARGER plants. For newer and SMALLER plants
(where the MUNI density is greatest), the post-1992 performance gap is at least as large as
in the previous tables. It is difficult to tell whether the patterns in these subsamples reflect
real differences or a greater ability of the data to pin down performance effects for the
denser part of the sample. Moreover, it does not appear that the overall conclusions of the
earlier tables with respect to the MUNI benchmark are substantially affected by these
sample differences.
35

In table 8, we consider whether the results are explained by a regression to the
mean phenomenon among IOU plants: is the gain in efficiency among plants in
restructuring regimes because they had on average low productivity draws prior to
restructuring, and simply return to mean efficiency over time? To examine this, we
identify high- and low-input use plants and investigate the extent to which efficiency gains
at the higher input use plants are offset by efficiency losses at low input use plants. To
separate plants into “low input” and “high input” categories, we predict input use from a
regression on data for the pre-restructuring period, 1981 – 1992. We calculate the mean
residual for each plant and classify plants with mean residuals above zero as “HIGH
INPUT” and those below zero as “LOW INPUT.” We then interact these indicators with
the restructuring variables, which are post-1992, and re-run the basic regression
specification allowing input responsiveness to restructuring to differ across plant type.50
The results in table 8 suggest that most of the restructuring-related input declines
relative to IOU plants in nonrestructured regimes are associated with high input-use IOU
plants, with reductions in the neighborhood of 10 percent to 12 percent (standard errors,
about 3 percent) for both labor and nonfuel expenses for these plants. The coefficients on
the IOU*RESTRUCTURED*LOW INPUT interactions are economically and statistically
indistinguishable from zero, contrary to mean reversion predictions. This may suggest
that the form of efficiency improvement was to bring less efficient plants into line with
more efficient plants. This is consistent with discussions we have had with several utility
managers, who claimed that restructuring led their firms to identify high-cost plants as
those disadvantaged in the dispatch order, and to focus attention on bringing the costs of
those plants closer to an efficient benchmark plant. Interestingly, the MUNI benchmark

50

The direct effects of LOW INPUT and HIGH INPUT categories are absorbed in the plant fixed effects.

36

suggests that LOW INPUT MUNI plants became more expensive, with little relative
change at the HIGH INPUT MUNI plants after 1992.
We have implemented a number of additional robustness checks, including
alternative instruments and instrument strategies and more flexible dynamics in input
choice. A more complete discussion and example results are available in our Technical
Appendix. Of particular note were specifications that allow for the possibility of fixed
costs of input adjustments. We find that the restructuring estimates are robust to allowing
inputs to respond to future as well as current output levels. Lagged values of output
(following Blundell and Bond, 1998, 2000) proved to be weak instruments in our GLS-IV
model.
V. Conclusion
This research provides some of the first estimates of the impact of electricity
generation sector restructuring in the United States on plant-level efficiency. The results
suggest restructuring may yield substantive medium-run efficiency gains. The estimates
suggests that IOU plants in restructuring regimes reduced their labor and nonfuel
operating expenses by three to five percent in anticipation of increased competition in
electricity generation, relative to IOU plants in states that did not restructure their markets.
The estimated efficiency gains are even larger when compared to a benchmark based on
municipal, federal, and cooperative plants: on the order of six percent reductions in labor
use and twelve percent reductions in nonfuel operating expenses relative to non-IOU
plants over the same time period. There is little evidence of increases in fuel efficiency
relative to plants in non-restructuring regimes, although the power of these tests is limited
given the plausible range of possible fuel use improvements.

37

These same-plant reductions in input use suggest an important role for marketbased incentives and competition in promoting technical efficiency, buttressing the
findings of Nickell (1996), Ng and Seabright (2001), and Galdón-Sánchez and Schmitz
(2002), among others. This finding is particularly interesting given the industry context.
Generating plant technology is reasonably well understood by engineers, and the prerestructuring industry was remarkably open in sharing detailed information on plant
operations and input use across plants and firms.51 Presumably, external benchmarks also
were more accessible in this setting than in most industries. This could suggest that
competition induced greater effort on cost reduction by increasing the sensitivity of
returns to managerial and worker effort, rather than by reducing informational
asymmetries over managerial effort (Nickell, 1996).
Additional work remains to be done to fill out the picture of the overall effects of
restructuring on electricity industry efficiency.52 We began by looking at operating
efficiency within existing utility plants both because this is one of the few places where
gains are likely to show up before restructured wholesale markets open up and because
rich data are available on utility-owned plants. As our results suggest, even these data are
inadequate for the fine-level analysis required to estimate within and across-plant changes
in fuel efficiency. This analysis will require datasets with both cleaner measures of fuel
efficiency and richer information on independent factors that affect fuel use. Finally,
assessing whether investment decisions are made more efficiently after restructuring
requires more time, and access to better nonutility data. Since power plants are so long-

51

Our access to detailed, publicly-available, plant-identifiable data corroborates this.
See Wolfram (2005) for a discussion of the general issues involved in assessing different types of
efficiency changes accompany electricity restructuring.

52

38

lived, very few new additions are made each year, and currently we have no more than a
handful of anecdotes about investment after restructuring.
It is important to recognize that these efficiency estimates are, however, only one
input to judging the ultimate benefit of restructuring policies. The overall assessment
depends as well on the realized magnitude of potential dynamic efficiencies, and
offsetting effects from higher investment expenditures, restructuring costs, the loss of
coordination and network economies within vertically integrated systems, and the exercise
of market power in unregulated generation markets. Dynamic costs could be higher if
restructuring reduces knowledge sharing that affects productivity growth over time. It is
possible, however, that longer run benefits will be greater if firms respond to the new
incentives created by restructuring with investments in both human and physical capital
that further enhance efficiency. If California’s crisis does not induce reversals of the
restructuring movement, and regulators do not shut down data reporting and researcher
access to detailed plant-level data, time may enable us to distinguish among these
possibilities.

39

References
Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2005. “Structural Identification of
Production Functions.” UCLA mimeo.
Ai, Chunrong, and David E. M. Sappington. 2002. “The Impact of State Incentive
Regulation on the U.S. Telecommunications Industry.” Journal of Regulatory
Economics, 22(2): 133-160.
Baggs, Jen, and Jean-Etienne de Bettignies. Forthcoming. “Product Market Competition
and Agency Costs.” Journal of Industrial Economics.
Bailey, Elizabeth E. 1986. “Price and Productivity Change Following Deregulation: The
US Experience.” Economic Journal, 96(381): 1-17.
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions
in Dynamic Panel Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 87(1): 115-143.
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 2000. “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel
Data: An Application to Production Functions.” Econometric Reviews, 19(3): 321340.
Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market
Inefficiencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.”
American Economic Review, 92(5): 1376-1405.
Boston Edison Co. 1994. Annual Report and 10-K.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/13372/0000950135-94-000231.txt
Bushnell, James B., and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2005. "Ownership Change, Incentives
and Plant Efficiency: The Divestiture of U.S. Electric Generation Plants." Center
for the Study of Energy Markets Paper CSEMWP-140.

40

Christensen, Laurits R., and William H. Greene. 1976. "Economies of Scale in U.S.
Electric Power Generation." Journal of Political Economy, 84(4): 655-676.
Fabrizio, Kira, Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. “Does Competition
Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric
Generation Efficiency.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
11001. Revised.
Galdón-Sánchez, José E., and James A. Schmitz, Jr. 2002. “Competitive Pressure and
Labor Productivity: World Iron Ore Markets in the 1980s.” American Economic
Review, 92(4): 1222-35.
Griliches, Zvi, and Jacques Mairesse. 1998. “Production Functions: The Search for
Identification.” In Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century, ed.
Steinar Strøm, 169-203. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica, 46(6):
1251-1271.
Hendricks, Wallace E. 1975. “The Effect of Regulation on Collective Bargaining in
Electric Utilities.” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, 6(2): 451465.
Hiebert, L. Dean. 2002. “The Determinants of the Cost Efficiency of Electric Generating
Plants: A Stochastic Frontier Production Approach.” Southern Economic Journal,
68(4): 935-946.
Joskow, Paul L. 1974. “Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the
Process of Public Utility Price Regulation.” Journal of Law and Economics, 17(2):
291-327.

41

Joskow, Paul L. 1997. “Restructuring, Competition and Regulatory Reform in the U.S.
Electricity Sector.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3): 119-138.
Joskow, Paul L., and Edward Kahn. 2002. “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior
in California’s Wholesale Electricity Market during Summer 2000.” Energy
Journal, 23(4): 1-35.
Joskow, Paul L., and Richard Schmalensee. 1987. “The Performance of Coal-Burning
Electric Generating Units in the United States: 1960-1980.” Journal of Applied
Economics, 2(2): 85-109.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2002. “Alternative Regulatory Methods and Firm Efficiency:
Stochastic Frontier Evidence from the US Electricity Industry.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 84(3): 530–540.
Kleit, Andrew, and Dek Terrell. 2001. “Measuring Potential Efficiency Gains From
Deregulation of Electricity Generation: A Bayesian Approach.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 83(3): 523–530.
Kridel, Donald J., David E. M. Sappington, and Dennis L. Weisman. 1996. “The Effects
of Incentive Regulation in the Telecommunications Industry: A Survey.” Journal
of Regulatory Economics, 9(3): 269-306.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
Regulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levinsohn, James, and Amil Petrin. 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
to Control for Unobservables.” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2): 317-41.
Nerlove, Marc. 1963. “Returns to Scale in Electricity Supply.” In Measurement in
Economics, 167-198. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

42

Ng, Charles K., and Paul Seabright. 2001. “Competition, Privatization, and Productive
Efficiency: Evidence from the Airline Industry.” Economic Journal, 111(473):
591-619.
Nickell, Stephen J. 1996. “Competition and Corporate Performance.” Journal of Political
Economy, 104(4): 724-746.
Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry.” Econometrica, 64(6): 1263-1297.
Park, B. U., R. C. Sickles, and L. Simar. 1998. “Stochastic Panel Frontiers: A
Semiparametric Approach.” Journal of Econometrics, 84(2): 273-301.
Primeaux, Walter J. 1977. “An Assessment of X-Efficiency Gained through
Competition.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 59(1): 105-08.
Rose, Nancy L. 1987. “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking
Industry.” Journal of Political Economy, 95 (6): 1146 - 1178.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York, NY:
Harper & Brothers.
Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.”
Journal of Political Economy, 112(6): 1181-1222.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2003. “Status of State Restructuring Activity
Timeline as of February 2003.” http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/chg_str/
retail_access_timeline.html [accessed November 23, 2003].
Van Biesebroeck, Johannes. 2003. “Productivity Dynamics with Technology Choice: An
Application to Automobile Assembly.” Review of Economic Studies, 70(1): 167198.

43

Vives, Xavier. 2006. “Innovation and Competitive Pressure.” IESE Business School
University of Navarra Working Paper No. 634.
White, Matthew W. 1996. “Power Struggles: Explaining Deregulatory Reforms in
Electricity Markets.” In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics
1996, 201–250. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Wolak, Frank A. 2006. “Regulating Competition in Wholesale Electricity Supply.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Regulatory Reform:
Lessons Learned. Mimeo.
Wolfram, Catherine D. 2005. “The Efficiency of Electricity Generation in the U.S. after
Restructuring.” In Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges, ed. James
Griffin and Steve Puller, 227-255, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

44

Table 1: Summary of Plant Characteristics in 1985, By Ownership and Restructuring Regime as of 2001
Difference in Means
RESTRUCTURED
NONMUNI
(t-statistic)
RESTRUCTURED
IOU Plants
Plants
Variable
RESTRUCTURED RESTRUCTURED
IOU Plants
(N=249)
(N=105)
NONRESTRUCTURED
IOUs (N=192)
IOUs
MUNI
EMPLOYEES / MW
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.04**
0.02
(0.22)
(0.14)
(0.13)
(2.07)
(1.12)
NONFUEL EXPENSE/ MW
19909
16742
15369
3167**
4539**
($/MW)
(14180)
(9976)
(9334)
(2.75)
(3.54)
HEAT RATE
11
11
12
-0.2
-0.6
(Million Btu/MWh)
(2.0)
(3.3)
(5.9)
(-0.90)
(-0.97)
CAPACITY FACTOR
0.40
0.40
0.39
-0.006
0.005
(0.0-1.0)
(0.21)
(.20)
(0.22)
(-.30)
(0.18)
MegaWatt Capacity
805
801
679
3.6
126*
(MW)
(658)
(645)
(601)
(0.06)
(1.75)
Age of Oldest Unit
28
24
19
3.5**
8.4**
(years)
(11)
(13)
(11)
(2.96)
(6.40)
Percent COAL
51
79
68
-28**
-16**
(6.42)
(2.91)
Percent GAS
37
16
29
20**
8
(5.03)
(1.48)
In the first three columns, standard deviations are in parentheses.
* denotes differences significant at 0.10 level ** denotes differences significant at 0.05 level or better.

Table 2: Percentage Change in Costs per MWh from 1990 to 1996
Difference of Means Tests
Investor Owned Utilities in Non-restructuring versus Restructuring States
N
Distribution Transmission Generation
Restructuring Mean
72
1.5
13.1
-13.5
Non-restructuring
48
-1.6
12.6
-5.1
Mean
Difference of means
3.1
0.4
-8.3
t-statistic
0.70
0.06
-1.87
All measures are in nominal dollars.
Transmission and distribution costs are per MWh sales to ultimate customers,
while generation costs are per MWhs generated at company plants.

1

Table 3: Labor Input Demand Estimates with Alternative Specifications of Restructuring
Dependent variable: ln(EMPLOYEES)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
GLS
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
Independent Variables
Basic
Basic
Law Date
Retail
Non Utility
Access
Generation
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
-0.032**
-0.031**
-0.031**
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.014)
IOU*LAW PASSED
-0.013
(0.016)
IOU*RETAIL ACCESS
-0.031
(0.051)
IOU*HIGH NON
-0.022
UTILITY GENERATION
(0.019)
MUNI*POST 1992
0.029**
0.032***
0.036*** 0.031***
0.029**
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.014)
MUNI*POST 1987
0.056***
0.060***
0.061*** 0.059***
0.062***
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
ln(WAGE)
-0.010
-0.012
-0.013
-0.011
-0.013
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
ln(NET MWH)
0.036***
0.067
0.076
0.060
0.078
(0.005)
(0.064)
(0.065)
(0.065)
(0.064)
SCRUBBER
0.033
0.037
0.039
0.035
0.041
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.026)
(0.025)
ρ
.75
.72
.71
.72
.71
N =10079; 769 plant-epoch and 19 year effects included.
Estimates corrected for the presence of serial correlation using a Prais-Winsten transformation.
IV estimates use ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

Table 4: Nonfuel Expense Input Demand Estimates with Alternative Specifications of Restructuring
Dependent variable: ln(NONFUEL EXPENSES)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
GLS
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
Basic
Basic
Law Date
Retail
Non Utility
Independent Variables
Access
Generation
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
-0.095***
-0.051**
-0.052**
(0.022)
(0.026)
(0.025)
IOU*LAW PASSED
-0.022
(0.027)
IOU*RETAIL ACCESS
-0.189***
(0.063)
IOU*HIGH NON
-0.013
UTILITY GENERATION
(0.029)
MUNI*POST 1992
0.057***
0.069***
0.082***
0.068***
0.079***
(0.019)
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.023)
MUNI*POST 1987
0.121***
0.109***
0.108***
0.110***
0.108***
(0.020)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.023)
ln(NET MWH)
0.077***
0.417***
0.445***
0.379***
0.454***
(0.011)
(0.090)
(0.091)
(0.091)
(0.091)
SCRUBBER
0.025
0.051
0.055
0.040
0.059
(0.038)
(0.050)
(0.053)
(0.048)
(0.053)
ρ
.38
.33
.34
.33
.34
N = 10079; 769 plant-epoch and 19 year effects included.
Estimates corrected for the presence of serial correlation using a Prais-Winsten transformation.
IV estimates use ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

Table 5: Fuel Input Demand Estimates with Alternative Specifications of Restructuring
Dependent variable: ln(BTUs)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
GLS
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
GLS-IV
Independent Variables
Basic
Basic
Law Date
Retail
Non Utility
Access
Generation
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
-0.014***
-0.009
-0.009
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.006)
IOU*LAW PASSED
0.005
(0.007)
IOU*RETAIL ACCESS
0.007
(0.017)
IOU*HIGH NON
0.005
UTILITY GENERATION
(0.008)
MUNI*POST 1992
-0.004
-0.005
-0.003
-0.005
-0.001
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
MUNI*POST 1987
0.004
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
ln(NET MWH)
0.912***
0.969***
0.979***
0.970***
0.978***
(0.004)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.036)
(0.034)
SCRUBBER
-0.008
-0.003
-0.001
-0.003
-0.002
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
ρ
-.08
.44
.44
.44
.44
N = 10002; 768 plant-epoch and 19 year effects included.
Estimates corrected for the presence of serial correlation using a Prais-Winsten transformation.
IV estimates use ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

Table 6: Labor Input Demand Estimates by Plant Type
Dependent variable: ln(EMPLOYEES)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Larger Plants
Smaller Plants
Old Plants
New Plants
Independent Variables
575MW+
< 575 MW
< 1960
1960+
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
-0.030**
-0.031
-0.025
-0.033***
(0.015)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.012)
MUNI*POST 1992
0.018
0.039**
-0.001
0.036***
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.023)
(0.012)
MUNI*POST 1987
0.016
0.086***
0.092***
0.039***
(0.021)
(0.016)
(0.028)
(0.013)
ln(WAGE)
0.004
-0.021**
-0.034
-0.005
(0.027)
(0.010)
(0.038)
(0.020)
ln(NET MWH )
0.054
0.047
0.085
0.013
(0.118)
(0.054)
(0.059)
(0.100)
SCRUBBER
0.068
-0.027
-0.001
0.055*
(0.043)
(0.019)
(0.031)
(0.032)
ρ
.71
.74
.70
.73
Observations
5016
5063
5113
4966
Plant-epoch and year effects included.
All estimates are GLS-IV using a Prais-Winsten transformation for serial correlation
and ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

Table 7: Nonfuel Expense Demand Estimates by Plant Type
Dependent variable: ln(NONFUEL EXPENSES)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Larger Plants Smaller Plants
Old Plants
New Plants
Independent Variables
575MW+
< 575 MW
< 1960
1960+
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
-0.072**
-0.034
-0.034
-0.068***
(0.029)
(0.032)
(0.036)
(0.025)
MUNI*POST 1992
0.078***
0.061**
0.019
0.080***
(0.030)
(0.027)
(0.043)
(0.024)
MUNI*POST 1987
0.052*
0.149***
0.144***
0.102***
(0.031)
(0.026)
(0.037)
(0.027)
ln(NET MWH )
0.464***
0.342***
0.430***
0.369***
(0.146)
(0.092)
(0.110)
(0.121)
SCRUBBER
-0.032
0.178***
0.101
-0.057
(0.057)
(0.066)
(0.063)
(0.058)
ρ
.35
.30
.33
.31
Observations
5016
5063
5113
4966
Plant-epoch and year effects included.
All estimates are GLS-IV using a Prais-Winsten transformation for serial correlation
and ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

Table 8: Tests for Mean Reversion in Restructuring Effects on Input Demand
Dependent Variable
Independent Variable

IOU*RESTRUCTURED
Interaction
MUNI*POST 1992
Interaction
MUNI*POST 1987
ln(WAGE)
ln(NET MWH)
SCRUBBER
ρ

ln(EMPLOYEES)
*LOW INPUT
*HIGH INPUT
PLANT
PLANT
0.017
-0.100***
(0.012)
(0.027)
0.086***
-0.010
(0.019)
(0.014)
0.063***
(0.013)
-0.012
(0.013)
0.080
(0.064)
0.024
(0.022)
.70

ln(NONFUEL EXPENSES)
*LOW INPUT
*HIGH INPUT
PLANT
PLANT
0.009
-0.118***
(0.028)
(0.030)
0.122***
0.006
(0.027)
(0.023)
0.109***
(0.021)
0.405***
(0.091)
0.042
(0.046)
.33

N = 9784; 702 plant-epoch and 19 year effects included.
All estimates are GLS-IV using a Prais-Winsten transformation for serial correlation
and ln(STATE SALES) as an instrument for ln(NET MWH).
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered for correlation within a state-year.
* significant at 10 percent; ** significant at 5 percent; *** significant at 1 percent

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

MUNI

Year

IOU: Non-restructured States
IOU: Restructured States

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82

0

19

Year Fixed Effect Relative to 1981

Figure 1: Labor Input Demand Year-Effects by Regulatory Status (Basic GLS-IV Specification)

Figure 2: Nonfuel Expense Input Demand Year-Effects by Regulatory Status (Basic GLS-IV Specification)

0.1

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6

MUNI Plants
IOU: Non-restructured States
IOU: Restructured States

8
19
9

6
19
9

4
19
9

2
19
9

0
19
9

8
19
8

6
19
8

4
19
8

-0.1

2

0

19
8

Year Fixed Effect Relative to 1981

0.2

Data Appendix
Sample Construction:
This study analyzes productivity for large fossil-fueled steam turbine or combined cycle
plants. The core data source is the Utility Data Institute (UDI) O&M Production Cost Database.
UDI develops this from the annual FERC Form 1 (filed by investor-owned utilities), EIA Form 412
(filed by municipal and other government utilities), and RUS Form 7 & 12 (filed by electric
cooperatives) filings. We construct the sample used in the empirical analysis as follows:
Plant type: We exclude alternative fuel plants (wood, geothermal, waste; 14 plants, 196 plantyears). We restrict the sample to steam turbine (ST) and combined cycle (CC) plants, based on the
variable OMPTYPE in the UDI database. This excludes 564 combustion (gas) turbine only (GT)
plants, 6487 plant-year observations. 53
Plant-epoch: Plant-epochs consist of plant-years over which plant capacity is relatively constant, i.e.
reported capacity changes are less than 40 MW and 15 percent.
Plant size: We retain plant-year observations as long as they are part of a plant-epoch with mean
capacity (gross megawatts) above 100 MW and at least 3 years of operations at a scale above 100
MW. The mean capacity test excludes 229 plant-epochs (186 plants, 2142 plant-years); the 3-year
operations test excludes an additional 117 plant-epochs (171 plant-years). The latter test also
excludes plant-epochs for which we only have one or two years of data, typically plants that add or
retire capacity near the beginning or end of our sample period. Excluding these seemed appropriate

53

Most of these are small; the majority report incomplete data. In many cases, these appear (based on plant names and
locations) to report information for auxiliary gas turbines located on the same site as units with large steam turbines:
e.g., Alamitos, a 1900 MW plant with 6 steam units and Alamitos GT, a 140 MW jet engine unit are separate
observations in our dataset. The basic restructuring results are robust to including all large GT plant observations with
nonmissing data as additional plants, and to aggregating GT plant data with their identifiable associated base plants
(using plant name and location). See column (2) in tables T5 and T6 in the FRW (2007) Technical Appendix.

Data Appendix – page A1

given plant-epoch fixed effects and the Prais-Winsten-differenced GLS estimation techniques we
use.
Incomplete plant data: We drop 274 plant-years with missing or nonpositive output data; 80 plantyears with missing or nonpositive nonfuel expenses; 204 plant-years with missing employment and
289 plant-years with zero reported employees. Observations excluded for missing data do not
seem to be directly related to restructuring, and in some cases are less frequent in restructuring
states, conditional on year.54
Outlier analysis: Stata’s dfbeta regression diagnostics were used to ensure that the results are
robust to outliers. The dfbeta statistic measures how much a coefficient estimate changes (relative
to its standard error) when an observation is omitted. For the basic employment and nonfuel
expense model, we calculated dfbeta statistics for all observations for the variables ln(NET MWH ),
SCRUBBER, ln(WAGE) for the employment input model, IOU*RESTRUCTURED, MUNI*POST
1992, and MUNI*POST 1987. We excluded 148 observations that moved coefficient estimates in
either or both of the employment or the nonfuel regressions by more than 0.1 standard errors. We
found little evidence of a pattern in the observations that are dropped this way. For instance, we
drop at least 4 observations from every year, and the most observations dropped from any year are
21 from 1998. These deletions change the coefficient point estimates relatively little and serve
mainly to clean the data of extreme outliers that inflate the standard errors, as reported in columns
(3) and (4) of our Technical Appendix tables T5 and T6. We note that the coefficient on
IOU*RESTRUCTURED in the labor input equation changes only slightly (from 0.31 in our basic

54

For example, regression of the percent of plants in a state-year observation with missing or zero employee data on
time since restructuring indicator (min (0, the number of years since the start of formal hearings in the state), year
dummy variables, and state fixed effects suggests that the percentage of such missing values actually decreases
following restructuring.

Data Appendix – page A2

specification on the trimmed sample to 0.26 in the untrimmed sample) though it is significantly
distinguishable from zero only at the 11 percent level for the untrimmed sample.
The resulting basic dataset consists of 10,079 observations on 647 plants, allocated to 779
plant-epochs.
Fuel Input Dataset: The fuel input dataset begins with the basic dataset described above. We
eliminate observations with missing fuel data and apply Stata’s dfbeta regression diagnostics to an
estimate of the fuel input equation, using a process and thresholds similar to that described for
employment and nonfuel expenses. This resulted in deletion of an additional 77 observations.
Since most of the analysis that we report in the paper is based on the employment and nonfuel
specifications and since the fuel data appear considerably noisier, this smaller dataset is used only
for the fuel input analysis. It consists of 10,002 observations on 646 plants, 778 plant-epochs.

Data Appendix – page A3

Table A1: Summary of Variables (N=10079 unless otherwise noted)
Variable
Definition
Mean
(Standard Deviation)
Output and Input Variables
ln(NONFUEL EXPENSE) ln (Annual non fuel production
16.036
expenses ($)), calculated as the total
(0.940)
production expense less fuel
expense.
ln (EMPLOYEES)
ln (Annual mean number of
4.739
employees)
(0.815)
ln(BTU)
ln(Total of the total btus of fuel
30.547
consumption). Calculated as (tons of
(1.291)
coal * 2000 lbs/ton* btu/lb) +
(barrels of oil*42 gal/barrel*btu/gal)
+ (Mcf gas*1000 cf /mcf*btu/cf).
These use reported annual plantspecific btu content of each fuel.
(N = 10002)
ln(NET MWH)
ln (Annual net MWh generation )
14.329
(1.396)
Utility and Restructuring Variables
IOU
1 for plants classified as IOU,
0.802
holding, or private companies; 0
otherwise.
MUNI
1 for plants owned by utilities
0.197
classified as government or
cooperative utilities; 0 otherwise.
IOU*RESTRUCTURED
0.108
1 for IOU plants in states that
restructured, beginning in the year
of the first formal hearing; 0
otherwise.
IOU*LAW PASSED
1 for IOU plants in states that
0.041
restructured, beginning in the year
that legislation was enacted; 0
otherwise.
IOU*RETAIL ACCESS
1 for IOU plants in states that
0.006
restructured, beginning in the first
year of retail access; 0 otherwise.
MUNI*POST 1987
1 for MUNI plants in years 19880.133
1999; 0 otherwise.
MUNI*POST 1992
1 for MUNI plants in years 19930.074
1999; 0 otherwise.
IOU*HIGH NON
1 beginning in 1993 for IOU plants
0.103
UTILITY GENERATION
in states with above median
penetration of nonutility generating
plants in 1993; 0 otherwise.
Data Appendix – page A4

LOW INPUT

HIGH INPUT

Other Variables
SCRUBBER

1 if plant mean residual from the
relevant input use regression for
1981-1992 period is below zero; 0
otherwise (N=9784).
1 if plant mean residual from the
relevant input use regression for
1981-1992 period is above zero; 0
otherwise (N=9784).

1 if there is an FGD scrubber at the
plant; 0 otherwise.
ln(WAGE)
Bureau of Labor Statistics annual
wage bill divided by total
employment calculated at the stateyear level separately for IOU and
MUNI plants. Numbers are imputed
for MUNI plants in 18 states over
various years and for IOU plants in 6
states from 1997-1999.
Plant Characteristic Variables
LARGER
1 if the plant capacity (Gross MW) is
at least 575MW.
SMALLER
1 if the plant capacity (Gross MW) is
less than 575 MW.
OLD
1 if the youngest unit at the plant
entered service before 1960.
NEW
1 if the youngest unit at the plant
entered service in 1960 or later.
Economic and Weather Variables
ln(STATE SALES)
ln (Total state electricity
consumption by year in
gigawatthours)
ANNUAL_HDDAYS
Population-weighted heating degree
days for each state-year (use MD for
DC); N = 10069.
ANNUAL_CDDAYS
Population-weighted cooling degree
days for each state-year (use MD for
DC); N = 10069.

0.500
(0.500)
0.500
(0.500)

0.132
10.532
(.335)

0.498
(0.500)
0.502
(0.500)
.507
(.500)
.493
(.500)
11.184
(0.851)
4399.468
(2138.744)
1432.163
(1.396)

Data Appendix – page A5

Data Sources:
Plant characteristics and operating data: UDI O&M Production Cost Database
Wages: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Industry state-level annual wage
bill divided by industry total employment.
Electric utility wages: SIC Industries 4911.
Comparable sector wages: Average over SIC industries 4923-4925 (natural gas
distribution), 4953 (hazardous waste treatment), and 2911 (petroleum refining).
Utility ownership: UDI Utility Datapak Book, 1997.
Restructuring variables:

Restructuring status and timing is compiled from a review of

(1) U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration (EIA), "The Changing
Structure of the Electric Power Industry: An Update, 12/96"
(2) EIA, "The Changing Structure of the Electric Power Industry: 2000 An Update"
(3) EIA, "Status of State Electric Industry Restructuring Activity," Timeline as of July 2002
(4) Edison Electric Institute "Electric Competition in the States" February, 2001
(5) National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC), "Utility Regulatory
Policy in the United States and Canada, Compilation," 1994 – 1995, and 1995 – 96
(6) The Council of State Governments, "Restructuring the Electricity Industry," 1999
(7) State Public Utility Commission websites, relevant legislation and reports.
State demand data and instruments:
State electricity sales by year: Sales to Ultimate Customers from EIA's "Electric Sales and
Revenue," Table 6, and EIA's "Electric Power Annual," Tables 117 and 90, various years.
Heating and cooling degree days: Population-weighted heating and cooling degree days by stateyear (using Maryland for Washington, D.C.) are from U.S. Dept. of Commerce, National Oceanic
Data Appendix – page A6

and Atmospheric Administration, Historical Climatology Series, “Monthly State, Regional, and
National Heating Degree Days Weighted By Population,” various years.

Data Appendix – page A7

