NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERTEMPORAL PRICE SPECULATION
AND THE OPTIMAL CURRENT-ACCOUNT DEF'ICIT

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 1100

NATIONAL BUREAU ( ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

March 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity in the World
Econoniy-. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1100
March 1983

Intertemporal Price Speculation and the Optimal Current—Account Deficit

Abstract

The paper studies the effects of terms—of—trade fluctuations in

an infinite—horizon optimizing model of a small open economy. While
the current—account response to a transitory terms—of—trade shock is

in part explicable by intertemporal smoothing, an important additional
factor is the effect of anticipated future terms—of—trade shifts on
the real value of the external debt in terms of the home consumption

basket. When foreign borrowing is indexed to the import good, a
temporary worsening of the terms of trade creates the expectation of

a decline in the real value of external debt. This fall in the relevant real interest rate leads households to increase consumption while
export prices are low and to decrease consumption sharply once the

terms of trade recover. If an adverse price shock is of sufficiently
brief duration, instantaneous utility will rise initially.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
International Affairs Building
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—5489

This paper employs a simple intertemporal optimizing model to
study the effects of transitory fluctuations in a small country's external

terms of trade. The paper focuses on the current—account and utility
paths induced by temporary terms—of—trade movements, and it compares

them with those induced by temporary shocks to output. The economy
modeled is one whose foreign borrowing is indexed to the goods it

imports. This assumption reflects the situation of industrializing
economies that have dollar—denominated foreign debts and face world import prices given in dollar terms.

In the model developed beiow, a transitory terms—of—trade setback
creites the expectation of a future fall in the value of external debt

relacive to the domestic consumption basket. Temporarily, the real cost
of borrowing abroad is lowered.1' Any transitory real income reduction
causes a current—account deficit: but while the deficit an output shock
induces is explicable in full by households' desire to smooth consumption
through intertemporal foreign trade, the deficit induced by a terms—of—
trade shock is motivated also by a desire to speculate, through borrowing,

on the anticipated future fall in the relative price of imports. Because
the relevant real interest rate is low while the terms of trade are poor,

there is an incentive to shift consumption toward that period. The incentive disappears when the expected terms—of—trade improvement occurs, and
so instantaneous utility falls discontinuously at that moment.

The analysis yields a number of interesting conclusions. The utility
time profile following a transitory output reduction is flat, but as
noted above, that induced by a temporary terms—of—trade shock is dis—

—2—

continuous. Again in contrast to the case of an output disturbance, the
cumulative current deficit run during an interlude of terms—of—trade

weakness depends on the degree of individual risk aversion, which
measures the extent of intertemporal substitutability in consumption.
Finally, it can be shown that if an unfavorable terms—of—trade movement
is of sufficiently brief duration, instantaneous utility will

rise

initially, falling below its pre—shock level once the terms of trade have
recovered.

In a closely related paper, Dornbusch (1983) examines the influence
of non—traded goods on the behavior of an economy similar to the one

studied below. The central point of his analysis——identical to the one
made in this paper——is that the interest rate relevant for consumption
decisions is the cost of external borrowing expressed in terms of the home

consumption basket.-" Dornbusch does not study the impact of terms—of—
trade disturbances, however. In addition, the analytical techniques
employed here differ considerably from his, and are of independent interest in that they allow one to express the economy's equilibrium posi-

tion in closed form

as

a function of the expected future paths of the

televant exogenous variables.

The results of transitory and anticipated relative—price shocks

have been analyzed in two—period models by a number of authors.-" As illustrated below, however, extension of the analysis to an infinite—horizon

setting can lead to a richer description of the induced current—account
paths. Obstfeld (1980, 1982) and Svensson and Razin (1983) have analyzed
the effects of permanent, unanticipated relative—price shocks using infinite—
horizon models that emphasize the role of subjective time preference in

—3—

individual saving decisions. In contrast, the model explored below
makes the simplifying assumption that the representative consumer's
subjective time—preference rate is constant.

The paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the
preferences and interteinporal transformation possibilities that form

the building blocks of the model. Section II sets out the effects of
a temporary fall in output, while section III studies the consequences
of a transitory terms—of—trade deterioration and contrasts them with

those of an output shock. Section IV offers concluding remarks. A
technical appendix substantiates some assertions made in the text.

—4—

I. The Model
The analysis concerns a small open economy consisting of identical,

immortal households. Each of these planning units maximizes a welfare
functional of the form

V =

(1)

J u(x,m)exp(_ót)dt.

The concave instantaneous utility function u(,) appearing in (1) is defined
over the household's consumption of an exportable good (x) and an importable good (in).

The parameter 5 is the household's constant (positive)

rate of time preference.

Each household is endowed with an exogenous flow of y units of the
export good. That good is perishable; the only available asset is an
internationally—traded bond which carries a fixed face value equal to one
unit of the importable good and entitles its owner to receive r units
4/

of the importable per unit time.—
t

If the planning period begins at time

= 0 and b0 denotes the number of bonds owned by the family on that

date, the desired consumption path must satisfy the intertemporal
budget constraint:

(2)

J [(xt/pt) + m]exp(_rt)dt

In (2), Pt S

the

b0 + (y/p)exp(_rt)dt.

price of imports in terms of exports, the terms of

trade. The path of the terms of trade is exogenous from the standpoint
of the small country. The world interest rate r is likewise exogenous,
5
held constant throughout the analysis.—
and

is

—5—

Necessary conditions for maximization of (1) subject to (2) can be
derived by differentiating the Lagrangian expression

(3)

L =

J u(xt,m)exp(_6t)dt

—

xf f[(xt/Pt)

+ mJexp(_rt)dt

-

b0

with respect to x and

fYt/PtexP_rtdt

(for all t). Those conditions are

(4)

u(xt,m)exp(_5t)

(5)

um(xt,mt)exp(_ót) =

)exp(—rt).

Together with the intertemporal budget constraint (2), equations (4) and
(5) can be used to derive a closed—form solution for the economy's optimal

consumption path x t,mt

t—

as well as X, the optimal initial shadow

value of wealth. For this purpose, ,

the

subjective time preference race,

is assumed to equal r, the bond rate given by the world capital

market. In addition, the utility function is assumed to reside within
the constant relative risk aversion family

(6)

u(x,m)

cl—al—R
(xm
)

where R > 0 and 1 > 0. > 0.

The coefficient of risk aversion R measures the

curvature of the utility function, and thus the extent to which a smooth con-

sumption time path is desirable. When R = 1, u(x,m) = cQn(x) + (1 — c)Qn(m).

—6—

The optimal shadow value X and the optimal consumption path are

calculated as follows. Because

=

r

(by assumption), equations (4)—(6)

imply that

=

apt/(l

a).

—

It follows from (5) and (7) that

(8)

rn=

la

hR

Pt

1—a

A

Now (x/p) + m = mt/Cl — a), by (7). The intertemporal budget constraint (2) and equation (8) therefore yield the optimal shadow value
a(l—R)

—

a)l_R[J [PtJ

exp(—rt)dt)1

(9)

[b0 + J(yt/pt)expt)dt]R

Equations (7) and (8) may be combined with formula (9) to yield expressions

for the

optimal

consumption trajectories.Z1

The shadow price A is, by (9), a function of the expected future

paths of output and the terms of trade: by implication, the same is

true of consumption. Any

previously

unanticipated change in these paths

will cause A to jump to a new level. An unanticipated shift in lifetime
consumption possibilities [as described by (2)] thus induces households

to revise both thedesiredlével of current consumption and the entire
planned path of future consumption.

—7—

The optimal path of net external bond holdings, {b}o, may be
derived from (9) and Bellman's principle. In the absence of disturbances
that were not anticipated at time t = 0, an optimal consumption program
computed on that date must coincide with an optimal program as re—

0.

computed at time t = s >

In other words, the optimal plan is time

consistent. Because x and m are monotonically decreasing functions of
X, the optimal shadow value of wealth as of time s > 0 must therefore
equal the value computed at time 0 .

It

follows that

for any s > 0,

(1 -

l—R t ct(l—R)
R

J

(1 - J

exp(_r(t_s))dtJR

—

(10)

+
I(yt/pt)exp(_r(t_s))dt]R

where

again represents the optimal shadow price computed at time 0

on the basis of the expected price and output paths appearing in (9).

The multiplier A can change only as a result of events that were unanticipated at time t =

O.-

By equating the right—hand sides of (9) and (10), we can express
the optimal level of net external assets b8 as a funétion of the time

paths of output and the terms of trade. (Of course, b0 =
b0 is predetermined and not subject to choice.) The current account is the time

derivative of bt,V that is,

(11)

=

+ rb —

(x/p)

—

tnt.

—8—

Equations (9) and (10) will be used in the following sections to trace
out the optimal current—account responses to a number of different
real income disturbances.

Before going on to these exercises, it is useful to examine the
effect on the current account of an output or terms—of—trade shock that

is both unanticipated and permanent. It is assumed here——and throughout
the analysis below-—that, prior to the shock, output and the terms of trade

are expected to remain constant at y =

Pt

=

p,

for all t, so that the economy

is in a stationary state. The level of the pre—shock shadow value A is then
cy

-

(1—a)

l—R

(12) x=
[rb0 +

(l—R)

_____
1

—a

(/)1R

where b0 is the stock of bonds inherited from the past [see (9)]. An unanticipated, permanent fall in output from y to y' causes a once—and—for—all

rise in A (to A', say) provided no further unexpected events occur. But
the optimal shadow value can remain at A' through time with no change in
the stock of foreign claims because the expected paths of output and the

terms of trade are flat. It follows that if the economy is initially in
a stationary position, an unanticipated, permanent shock to the terms of

trade has no impact on the current account: external adjustment is im-

mediate. The same is true of relative price shocks.IPI

II. Transitory Output Shocks
As a prelude to studying the optimal current—account response to a

temporary terms—of—trade shock, we study the external asset path induced by a
transitory decline in output. Before the transitory disturbance is

—9—

revealed, the economy is in the stationary position described at the end

of section I. After the shock is revealed (at time t =

0),

the terms of

trade are expected to remain at the level Pt = p for all t, but output

t > T.

y'

=

is expected to follow the path:

<

y

for 0 <

t

<

=

T,

y for

It follows that at the initial instant, the shadow value of wealth

jumps permanently from the level A given by (12) to a new level

(13)

'

(1

=

[rb0

1—Ri

-

I

>

+ (y'/p)(l — exp(—rT)) + (y/p)exp(_rT)]R

Equations (7) and (8) imply that the consumption levels of both commodities
fall the moment the news of the transitory output shock arrives, but remain

constant thereafter. Instantaneous utility must therefore also follow a
lower, constant path.

For this to be possible, the current account must be in deficit

while output is temporarily low. By equating the right—hand sides of
(9) and (10), we find that for any expected output path and constant terms of

trade p, the stock of external claims must

(14)

+ J(y/p)exp[_r(t_s)]dt =

satisfy

b0 + f(Yt/P)exp(_rt)dt

for all s, so that household net worth (measured in imports) remains con-

stant over time. The constant post—shock level of

expenditure equals the

annuity value of (14), that is,permanent income. The economy smooths its
consumption and utility by choosing the highest fixed expenditure level
consistent with its new intertemporal budget constraint and borrowing

from abroad while current income is below permanent income. Observe that

—10—

when real income disturbances arise entirely from fluctuations in output,

the induced external asset path is not dependent on the risk aversion
parameter R characterizing the curvature of the utility function.
Under the present assumptions concerning the output path expected
in the wake of the shock, equation (14) becomes

(15)

b =

b0

for 0 < s < T,

+

[(y'/rp)

b =

bT

—

(y/rp)][exp(—r(T—s))

for s >

T.

—

exp(—rT)]

Differentiation of (15) shows that

between times s = 0 and s = T the current account balance is given by

(16)

=

[(yl

—

y)/p}exp(—r(T—s)) < 0.

According to (16), the current account deficit grows up until time T, at
which moment its level is bT =

(y'

—

y)/p.

When the anticipated increase

in output occurs, the current account jumps to zero with no change in

spending or instantaneous utility. The time path of the current account
is illustrated in figure 1.

III. Transitory Terms—of—Trade Shocks
The preceding analysis serves as background for the discussion of
transitory real income fluctuations caused by relative price movements.

This section studies the current—account effects of a transitory terms—of—

trade deterioration, assuming that the economy is initially ata stationary
position and that the expected path of the terms of trade remains fixed at

y = y

for all t.

Once the shock occurs, the anticipated time path of the

FIGURE 1

0

0
y'— y

exp(rT)p

—
p

y

I
TIME

—11—.

terms of trade is given by: Pt =

p'

for 0 <

t

<

T, Pt = p

<

p'

for t > T.

Before the occurrence of the shock, when the terms of trade are
expected to follow the constant path Pt = p for all t, the optimal shadow

value X is, once again, described by equation (12). The temporary and unanticipated rise in the price of imports causes A to jump to the new, per-

manent level
a(l—R)
(1 —
(17)

a)

l_Rr _____

A' =

[rb0

L

a

R

(1 -

exp(-rT))

+ (y/p')(l —

exp(-rT))

1

—

í_____
a

a(l—R)
R

1R

exp(—rT)J

+ (y/p)exp(_rT)]R

To determine the effect of the price shock on the current account, it is

necessary to know whether A' is greater or less than A. The appendix demonstrates that the sign of the derivative of (17) with respect to p', evaluated

at p' =

p,

is the same as that of the expression (1—R)(rb0 —

m0)

+ (yip),

where m0 is the consumption level of the imported good in the pre—shock

stationary state. When R < 1, the foregoing quantity is positive because
cannot exceed the initial level of permanent income, rb0 + (yip). A

sufficient condition for the quantity to be positive when R >
in0 >

rb0,

1

is that

so that the economy is indeed a net importer of the "import"

good, as we have assumed.—' Thus, (dA'/dp')j,

>

0 in all cases.

It follows that for small price changes,

(18)

A'

provided

>

X

the terms—of—trade change does in fact hurt the home country.

Because the newly—established shadow value A' remains constant through time

—12—

and the economy is in a stationary position from date T onward,
a(l—R)
-

(19) '

=

(1—cz)

1—R

1— a

[rbT + (/)JR
by (10). Equations (12), (18), and (19) imply that bT <
b0. The inequality
shows that the home country runs a cumulative current account deficit between
times 0 and T.
In the case of the temporary fall in output studied in section II, the

post—shock time profile of instantaneous utility was flat: the economy
smoothed its utility stream perfectly by holding consumption constant in
the face of the anticipated increase in output. This pure smoothing behavior no longer obtains when real income falls because of a transitory

adverse terms—of—trade change. Because bonds have a face value fixed in
terms of the import good, terms—of—trade changes alter the real value of
the external debt when this is measured in terms of a basket including

both importables and exportables. An anticipated improvement in
the terms of trade lowers the real cost of borrowing abroad in the period

before the terms of trade improve. Individual optimality therefore involves an element of intertemporal price speculation which causes a discontinuity in the time profile of utility and may even cause instantaneous
utility to rise temporarily.
A detailed analysis of the time path of instantaneous utility throws

light on the equilibrium response to a transitory terms—of—trade change.
The intertemporal constancy of A', together with (7) and (8), implies that

consumption of both commodities--and hence, utility——must be constant between times 0 and T, and again after time T.

Only at time T, when the terms

—13—

of trade revert to p from p', can consumption and utility change discretely.
The level of utility while the terms of trade are relatively unfavorable is
calculated [with the help of (6)—(8)J to be
1 —

c (1—R)/R '

ct(1—R)/R

1—tx

p20'/

—

u(A',p').

1 -R
The jump in instantaneous utility at time T is obtained by differentiating (20)
with respect to the terms of trade, holding A' constant:

(21) -- = -a(1

-

R)u(T,pT)/pR

<

0.

Equation (21) shows that instantaneous utility falls abruptly when the terms

of trade improve at time T. There is thus a discontinuity in the utility
path at that point.

To complete the description of the utility time profile we must ask

how instantaneous utility changes at time 0 when the transitory price
shock is first revealed. The answer depends on the duration T of the adverse

terms—of—trade movement. The initial jump in utility is given by

(22)

du =

ux(AP)dA + u(),p)dp,

which is of ambiguous sign because the first summand is negative while the

second is, by (21), positive. In equation (22) it is the variation dA
(and that only) that is a function of T; and as the appendix demonstrates,

(23)

liin dA =

T÷O

0.

—14—

It follows from (23) that there are time periods T sufficiently short that

the derivative (22) is positive. This implies the surprising result that
for a sufficiently brief terms—of—trade deterioration, instantaneous utility
can rise initially, even though the value of the intertemporal welfare

functional V [given by (1)] must fall. Figure 2 depicts two possible
utility time profiles, the second of which entails such an initial rise in

utility.

These time profiles can be explained by our earlier observation that
an anticipated terms—of—trade improvement effectively lowers the real interest

rate relevant for external borrowing decisions. As in the case of a temporary
output shock, the economy's reaction to a temporary adverse price shift

arises in part from a desire to smooth the feasible utility stream: this
explains the emergence of an external deficit. But in addition, households
know that the real value of any debt incurred between times 0 and T will

decline abruptly when p' falls to p. Thus, while the reduction in per—.
manent income induces them to cut consumption, the expected price change
leads them to increase their consumption while the terms of trade are unfavorable and reduce consumption sharply once the anticipated capital gains

have been realized. The fall in consumption at time T corresponds to the
discontinuous drop in instantaneous utility pictured in figure 2. The
possibility of an initial increase in instantaneous utility arises because the speculative (or real interest rate) effect of a transitory price

shock may outweigh the income effect when the shock is of
brief duration.

The parameter R plays a key role in determining the optimal current—
account deficit, again in contrast to the case of a temporary fall in output.

U

FIGURE 2

1

o

1

TIME

U

I

I

01

TIME

—15—

From (17) and (19) the cumulative current surplus between times 0 and T is
is the negative quantity

bT

—

b0

—

(1

-

exp(rT))[(ap)R1bO+

(1 —

}

- (P')

ct(l—R)

R
(b0+

a(l—R)/R

exp(—rT))(cxp')

a(l—R)/R

+ exp(—rT)(ap)

By differentiating the foregoing expression one finds that

sign

=

sign

so that dbT/dR > 0.

{log(p'/p) [(1 -

exP(_rT))[b0

+

+ exP(_rT)(b0 +

As the measure of risk aversion R increases, the smooth-

ing motive becomes more important relative to the speculative motive and the
cumulative current—account deficit run while the terms of trade are poor

declines. Increased concavity of the utility function makes it more costly
(in welfare terms) to shift consumption from the post—T period to the period
in which the terms of trade are temporarily unfavorable and the cost of borrowing is, correspondingly, low. ---"

The assumption that all international lending is indexed to
the imnorted good is clearly central to the results derived above. If bonds

were indexed instead to exports, an expected future terms—of—trade improvement would raise rather than lower the perceived cost of borrowing

abroad during a spell of low export prices; and this rise in the relevant
real interest rate would reinforce rather than oppose the income effect on

spending of the temporary terms—of—trade shock. The assumption of
import—indexed lending seems, however, to be the more realistic one for

the industializing economies which have experienced such marked terms—

—16—

of—trade volatility over the last decade. These countries' external
debts are primarily dollar denominated, while a substantial fraction of
their imports is priced in dollars on world markets.

In a setting of perfectly integrated capital markets it would he natural
to introduce alongside import—indexed bonds a bond linked in value to exports

and paying an own—interest rate p. A consequence of the perfect—foresight
assumption, however, is the arbitrage relation

(24)

p =

r

+ (i;/p),

which, given p and r, severely restricts the possible terms—of—trade paths

that can be analyzed. In particular, (24) precludes anticipated, discrete
shifts in the price of imports of the type analyzed in this paper. A two—
country model would allow the endogenous determination of p and r and yield
predictions concerning the current—account and (smooth) terms—of—trade paths

induced by various shocks to the world economy. Those predictions would
in general depend on the countries' initial portfolio compositions, which,

again because of the perfect—foresight assumption, are indeterminate. A
satisfactory resolution of the difficulty requires an explicitly stochastic
model of the type explored by Lucas (1982).

IV. Conclusion
This paper has studied the effects of transitory terms—of—trade

fluctuations on a small open economy. Using a simple intertemporal optimizing model of individual behavior, the paper showed that a temporary
worsening in the terms of trade occasions a current—account deficit which
persists until the terms of trade return to their initial level.

—17r'

This current—account path is explicable in part by households'
desire to smooth their consumption streams; but a complete explanation must

recognize also that the expected future improvement in the terms of trade
gives households an opportunity to speculate intertemporally by incurring
an import—indexed foreign debt whose real value is certain to decrease.
The result is that the economy's utility time profile is discontinuous,

with instantaneous utility rising initially if the duration of the terms—
of—trade shock is sufficiently brief.

—18—

Appendix

The

appendix calculates the effect of a transitory rise in the

terms of trade p on the optimal shadow value of wealth, A. That effect
Is simply the derivative of the right—hand side of (17) with respect to
pT, evaluated at pt =

(25)

dA

p

p,=p

p:

= (1—exp(—rT))(l—a)

1—R
cxp

1 —

p[rb0 + (yIp)]

ct(1—R)

{c(1—R)(rb0 + I' +

p

Clearly, the limit of (25) as T - 0 is 0, as equation (23) asserts. To
sign (25), we must analyze the term in braces, a(1—R)[rb0 + (yip)]

It

follows from (8) and (12) that the pre—shock level of consumption of the

imported good,

cz(1

as

+ (Ry/p).

—

is given by (1 —

R)(rb0 + ) +

= (1 —

cz)[rb0 + (y/p)]. Thus

R)(rb0

—

) +- >0

asserted in the paragraph following equation (17).

—19--

Footnotes
*

The research reported in this paper was begun while I was a visiting

scholar in the International Finance Division of the Board of Governors

of the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful for the suggestions of
participants in seminars at Columbia University and the University of

Pennsylvania. Also appreciated are the comments of the editor and the
referees. Financial support from the National Science Foundation is
acknowledged with thanks.

—20—

1. Dornbusch (1982) argues that the consumer price index is the appropriate deflator for an external foreign—currency debt.

2. This point is also made by Obstfeld (1981) in a variant of this paper's

model and by Mussa (1983) in a descriptive model of current—account
determination.

As in Dornbusch (1983), the model used below assumes

preferences of the constant relative risk aversion variety. Given these
preferences, the representative individual's instantaneous utility is an

increasing function of the consumption index studied by Dornbusch. The
results below, which are expressed in terms of the instantaneous utility
level, are therefore easily translated into statements about the time
path of the consumption index.

3. See, among others, Bruno (1982), Marion (1982), Sachs (1981), and
Svensson and Razin (1983). Dornbusch and Kruginan (1976) emphasize the
distinction between permanent and transitory changes in an informal
discussion of the current—account effects of relative—price shocks.

4. The assumption that borrowing is indexed to imports introduces a
certain asymmetry into the model. The implications of the assumption
are discussed at the end of section III, below.

5. Because perfect foresight is assumed, no notational distinction
between expected and realized variables is made. Note that the inter—
temporal budget constraint (2) implies the transversality condition

limtbexp(_rt) = 0, which rules Out excessive foreign borrowing [see
Obstfeld (1982)). Constraint (2) alone is therefore sufficient to

—21—

preclude an unbounded consumption and borrowing program in which all interest payments are met through further borrowing.

6. Without this assumption the economy would not possess a stationary
state.

7.

By (2), the denominator of (9)——household net worth——must always be

positive. Thus A > 0.

It is assumed throughout that all real—income

shocks are sufficiently small that they would not result in non—positive
household net worth even if they were permanent.

8. The multiplier A can be interpreted as an asset price; see Obstfeld
(1981). The assertion that it cannot jump discretely in response to
events that were previously anticipated is analogous to the corresponding
statement concerning asset prices established in efficient markets.

9. While b is a continuous function of time, it need not be differentiable: the current—account balance bt can change sharply. At points
where b is not differentiable, equation (11) below is interpreted as
describing the

ght—hand derivative of bt.

10. If the economy is not initially in a stationary position, however, permanent
shifts in the expected future paths of output or the terms of trade will
influence the current account.

11. If the economy's endowment of the foreign good, rb0, exceeds desired
consumption, that good will be exported, not imported.

—22—

12. Recall that the condition rn0 >

rb0 is sufficient (but not necessary)

to ensure that a teniporary rise in p leads to a current deficit. Even
a small country that benefits from a transitory rise in p may run a deficit
because it can gain from raising consumption temporarily and incurring a

debt whose real value is sure to decrease. As R dition in0 >

, however,

the con-

rb0 becomes necessary as well as sufficient for a deficit.

—23—

References
Bruno, M., "Adjustment and Structural Change under Raw Material Price
Shocks," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1982, 84: 199—222.
Dornbusch, R., "Consumption Opportunities and the Real Value of the
External Debt," Journal of Development Economics, February 1982,
10: 93—101.

Dornbusch, R., "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External
Borrowing," Journal of Political Economy, February 1983, 91: 141—153.

Dornbusch, R. and P. Krugman, "Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short Run,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1976, 7: 537—575.
Lucas, R..E., "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country World,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, November 1982, 335—359.
Marion, N.P.,, "Anticipated and Unanticipated Oil Price Increases and the

Current Account," Working Paper No. 759, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1981.

Mussa, M., "The Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," in J.F.O. Bilson and
R.C. Marstori, eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Policy, Chicago: Univer-

sity of Chicago Press (for the National Bureau of Economic

Research),

1983.

Obstfeld, M., "Intermediate Imports, the Terms of Trade, and the Dynamics
of the Exchange Rate and Current Account," Journal of International
Economics, November 1980, 10: 461—480.

Obstfeld, M., "Transitory Terms—of—Trade Shocks and the Current Account:
The Case of Constant Time Preference," International Finance Discussion Paper No. 194, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, 1981.

—24—

Obstfeld, M., "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a
Laursen—Metzler Effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, May

1982,

97: 251—270.

Sachs, J.D., "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the
1970s," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981, 12: 201—
268.

Svensson, L.E.0. and A. Razin, "The Terms of Trade, Spending, and the
Current Account: The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect," Journal
of Political Economy, February 1983, 91: 97—125.

