NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CRISES AND PRICES:
INFORMATION AGGREGATION, MULTIPLICITY AND VOLATILITY
George-Marios Angeletos
Iván Werning
Working Paper 11015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11015
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

For useful comments and suggestions, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Amador, V.V. Chari, Christian
Hellwig, Patrick Kehoe, Balazs Szentes, and seminar participants at MIT, Stanford, UCLA, UC Berkeley,
Duke, the Minneapolis and Chicago Federal Reserve Banks, the Minnesota Summer Workshop, and the
UTDT Summer Workshop.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by George-Marios Angeletos and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Crises and Prices: Information Aggregation, Multiplicity and Volatility
George-Marios Angeletos and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 11015
December 2004
JEL No. D8, E5, F3, G1
ABSTRACT
Many argue that crises – such as currency attacks, bank runs and riots – can be described as times
of non-fundamental volatility. We argue that crises are also times when endogenous sources of
information are closely monitored and thus an important part of the phenomena. We study the role
of endogenous information in generating volatility by introducing a financial market in a
coordination game where agents have heterogeneous information about the fundamentals. The
equilibrium price aggregates information without restoring common knowledge. In contrast to the
case with exogenous information, we find that uniqueness may not be obtained as a perturbation
from common knowledge: multiplicity is ensured when individuals observe fundamentals with small
idiosyncratic noise. Multiplicity may emerge also in the financial price. When the equilibrium is
unique, it becomes more sensitive to non-fundamental shocks as private noise is reduced.
George -Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu
Ivan Werning
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

1

Introduction

It’s a love-hate relationship, economists are at once fascinated and uncomfortable with multiple equilibria. On the one hand, economic and political crises involve large and abrupt
changes in outcomes, but often lack obvious comparable changes in fundamentals. Commentators attribute an important role to more or less arbitrary shifts in ‘market sentiments’
or ‘animal spirits’, and models with multiple equilibria formalize these ideas. On the other
hand, models with multiple equilibria can also be viewed as incomplete theories that should
ultimately be extended along some dimension to resolve the indeterminacy.
The first view is represented by a large empirical and theoretical literature. On the
empirical side, Kaminsky (1999), for example, documents that the likelihood of economic
crises is aﬀected by observable fundamentals, but that a significant amount of volatility
remains unexplained. On the theoretical side, models featuring multiple equilibria attempt to
address such non-fundamental volatility. Bank runs, currency attacks, debt crises, financial
crashes, riots and political regime changes are modeled as a coordination game: attacking a
regime — such as a currency peg or the banking system — is worthwhile if and only if enough
agents are also expected to attack.1
Morris and Shin (1998, 2000, 2001) contribute to the second view by showing that a
unique equilibrium survives in such coordination games when individuals observe fundamentals with small enough private noise.2 The result is most striking when seen as a perturbation
around the original common-knowledge model, which is ridden with equilibria. Most importantly, their contribution highlights the role of the information structure in determining and
characterizing the equilibrium set.
The aim of this paper is to understand the role of information in crises. We focus on
two distinct forms of non-fundamental volatility: the existence of multiple equilibria and
the sensitivity of a unique equilibrium to non-fundamental disturbances. We argue that
considering endogenous information is crucial for these questions.
Information is typically treated exogenously in coordination models, but is largely endogenous in most situations of interest. Financial prices and macroeconomic indicators
convey information regarding others actions and their information. During times of crises
such indicators are monitored intensely and appear to be an important part of the phenomena. As an example, consider the Argentine 2001-2002 crisis, which included devaluation
of the peso, sovereign-debt default, and suspension of bank payments. Leading up to the
crisis throughout 2001, bank deposits and the peso-forward rate deteriorated steadily. Such
1
See, for example, Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Obstfeld (1986, 1996), Velasco (1996), Calvo (1988),
Cooper and John (1988), Cole and Kehoe (1996).
2
See also Carlson and van Damme (1993) for the pioneering contribution to global games.

1

variables were widely reported by news media and investor reports, and were closely watched
by people making crucial economic decisions.
These observations lead us to introduce endogenous sources of public information in a
coordination game. In our baseline model, individuals observe their private signals and the
price of a financial asset. The rational-expectations equilibrium price aggregates disperse
private information, but avoids perfect revelation by introducing enough noise in the aggregation process, as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1976). Thus, none of our results are driven by
restoring common-knowledge.3
The main insight to emerge is that the precision of the endogenous public information
increases with the precision of the exogenous private information. When private information
is more precise, individuals’ asset demands are more sensitive to their information. As a
result, the equilibrium price reacts more sensitively to fundamental variables, thus conveying
more precise information.
This result has important implications for the determinacy of equilibria, as a horse-race
between private and public information emerges. An increase in the precision of private
information makes coordination more diﬃcult as individuals rely more on their own distinct information. However, the consequent increase in the precision of endogenous public
information facilitates coordination. This indirect eﬀect typically dominates, reversing the
limiting result: multiplicity is ensured when individuals observe fundamentals with small
enough private noise.
Uniqueness therefore can not be attained as a small perturbation around commonknowledge. To illustrate this point Figure 1 displays the regions of uniqueness and multiplicity in the space of exogenous levels of public and private noise (σε and σ x , respectively).
Multiplicity is ensured when either noise is suﬃciently small. In this sense, public and private noise act symmetrically. In contrast, when information is exogenous, less public noise
facilitates multiplicity, but less private noise contributes towards uniqueness. Moreover,
with endogenous information, equilibria outcomes are continuous with respect to information parameters. In contrast, with exogenous information, the limiting result discussed above
illustrates a sharp discontinuity.
Interestingly, multiplicity may emerge, not only with respect to the probability of regime
change, but also in the asset price. This occurs when the asset’s dividend depends on the
endogenous aggregate actions in the coordination game. Diﬀerent equilibrium prices are
then sustained by diﬀerent self-fulfilling expectations about the others actions, and therefore
about the dividend; and multiple such expectations are in turn possible only thanks to the
coordinating role prices play in the first place.
3

Atkeson (2000) has already pointed out that perfectly revealing asset markets could restore multiplicity.

2

σx

uniqueness

multiplicity

σε

Figure 1: σ x measures the exogenous noise in private information and σ ε the exogenous
public noise in the aggregation of information.
In regions where the equilibrium is unique, we are able to perform comparative statics.
We find that a reduction in exogenous noise increases the sensitivity of the regime outcome
to non-fundamental disturbances. When the asset’s dividend is endogenous, a reduction in
noise may also increase the non-fundamental volatility in the financial price. Since these
results parallel the determinants of equilibrium multiplicity, we conclude that lower noise
increases volatility for both forms of volatility.
We also study a separate model motivated by the bank run and riots applications. In this
model there is no financial market. However, information is endogenous because individuals
observe a public noisy signal of others actions. A virtue of this model is that it allows us
to study endogenous information with minimal modifications to the original Morris-Shin
framework. The model shares the main insights and results for equilibrium multiplicity
obtained with financial prices.
Related Literature. The paper contributes to the literature on financial crises4 by
examining the role of information and coordination in generating high-non fundamental
volatility, either by introducing multiple equilibria, or with a unique equilibrium. Chari and
Kehoe (2003) also study the role of information for non-fundmental volatility, but within the
context of a herding model. Our paper can be viewed as bringing coordination games and
herding models closer together: by allowing endogenous public signals about others actions,
we incorporate an aspect of social learning into a coordination game.
4

See the references in footnote 1.

3

Our analysis builds on the work of Morris and Shin and underscores their general theme
that the information structure is crucial in coordination games. Within such a framework, our
aim is to understand the eﬀect of endogenous sources of public information, such as financial
prices and other indicators of aggregate activity. Angeletos, Hellwig and Pavan (2003, 2004)
also endogenize the information structure, but not through information aggregation as here.
Instead, they examine, respectively, the signaling eﬀects of policy interventions in a static
global game and the role of information in a dynamic global game.
Related is Hellwig, Mukherji and Tsyvinski (2004), who consider a currency-crises model
in which financial prices directly aﬀect the coordination outcome. In particular, they focus
on how multiplicity or uniqueness depends on whether the central bank’s decision to devalue
is triggered by large reserve losses or high interest rates. Like in our case, they find multiple
equilibria for small levels of noise.
Tarashev (2003) also endogenizes interest rates in a currency-crises model, but does not
investigate the possibility of equilibrium multiplicity. Dasgupta (2002), on the other hand,
introduces signals about past activity in an investment game, but assumes that these signals
are purely private, thus also bypassing the possibility of multiple equilibria.
Finally, the paper contributes to the rational-expectations literature by examining the
coordinating role of financial prices and its implications for volatility. In Grossman and
Stiglitz (1981), the payoﬀ of an agent is independent of the actions of other agents for
any given price, and the equilibrium price only aggregates information about the exogenous
dividend of the asset. In our environment, instead, the price serves also a coordinating role:
agents use the price to predict each others’ actions in the coordination game. It is this
coordinating role that explains why multiple equilibria and high volatility may emerge in
financial prices when the dividend is endogenous.5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the basic model in Section 2
and review the exogenous information benchmark. Section 3 incorporates the financial asset
and examines multiplicity of equilibria. Section 4 examines the determinants of volatility as
a comparative static along a unique equilibrium. Section 5 studies the model with a direct
signal of aggregate activity. Section 6 concludes.

5
Barlevy and Veronessi (2004) consider a Grossman-Stiglitz-like economy which admits multiple rationalexpectations equilibria, but where the source of multiplicity is very diﬀerent. In their model, the dividend
is exogenous and the price does not play any coordinating role. Multiplicity instead originates from the
non-linearity of the inference problem faced by uninformed traders when they interact with informed and
less risk-averse agents.

4

2

The Basic Model: Exogenous Information

Before introducing financial prices or other endogenous signals, we review the basic model
with exogenous information, as in Morris-Shin.
Actions and Payoﬀs. There is a status quo and a measure-one continuum of agents,
indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Each agent i can choose between two actions, either attack the status
quo (ai = 1) or not attack (ai = 1). The payoﬀ from not attacking is normalized to zero. The
payoﬀ from attacking is 1 − c > 0 if the status quo is abandoned and −c otherwise, where
c ∈ (0, 1) parametrizes the cost of attacking. The status quo is in turn abandoned if and
only if A > θ, where A denotes the mass of agents attacking and θ represents the exogenous
fundamentals, namely the strength of the status quo. It follows that the payoﬀ of agent i is
U(ai , A, θ) = ai (R (A, θ) − c)

(1)

where R (A, θ) denotes the regime outcome, with R = 1 if A > θ and R = 0 otherwise.
Interpretations. In models of self-fulfilling currency crises (e.g., Obstfeld, 1986, 1996;
Morris and Shin, 1998), a “regime change” occurs when a suﬃciently large mass of speculators attacks the currency, forcing the central bank to abandon the peg; θ then parametrizes
the amount of foreign reserves or more generally the ability and willingness of the central
bank to maintain the peg. In models of self-fulling bank runs, on the other hand, a “regime
change” occurs once a suﬃciently large number of depositors decide to withdraw their deposits, forcing the bank to suspend its payments; θ then parametrizes the liquid resources
available to the banking system.6
Throughout the paper, we focus on crises as the main interpretation of the model. Other
applications, however, are also possible. For example, one could interpret the model as
an economy with investment complementarities, in which ai = 1 represents undertake an
investment, A the aggregate level of investment, and θ the exogenous productivity.
In short, the key property of the payoﬀ structure we consider is that it introduces a
coordination motive: U (1, A, θ) − U (0, A, θ) increases with A, meaning that the individual
incentive to take one action increases with the mass of other agents taking the same action.
Indeed, when θ is common knowledge, both A = 1 and A = 0 is an equilibrium whenever
θ ∈ (θ, θ] ≡ (0, 1]. The interval (θ, θ] thus represents the set of “critical fundamentals” for
which agents can coordinate on multiple courses of action under common knowledge.
Information. Following Morris-Shin, we assume θ is not common knowledge. In the
6

Other related interpretations include debt crises and financial crashes (Morris and Shin, 2003, 2004;
Goldstein and Pauzner; 2000; Corsetti, Guimaraes, and Roubini; 2004; Rochet and Vives 2004). Atkeson
(2000), on the other hand, interprets the model as describing riots.

5

beginning of the game, nature draws θ from a given distribution, which constitutes the
agents’ common prior about θ. For simplicity, this prior is assumed to be an (improper)
uniform over the entire real line.7 Agent i then receives a private signal xi = θ + σ x ξ i ,
where σ x is a positive scalar and ξ i ∼ N (0, 1) is idiosyncratic noise, i.i.d. across agents and
independent of θ. Agents also observe an exogenous public signal z = θ + σ z v, where σ z is a
positive scalar and v ∼ N (0, 1) is common noise, distributed independently of both θ and ξ.
The information structure is thus parametrized parsimoniously by σ x and σ z , the standard
−2
deviations of the two noises; or equivalently by αx = σ −2
x and αz = σ z , the precisions of
private and public information.
Equilibrium Analysis. We focus on monotone equilibria, that is, equilibria in which
an agent attacks if and only if his private signal is suﬃciently low.8 Thus suppose that,
given a realization z of the public signal, an agent attacks if and only if the realization x
of his private signal is less than a threshold x∗ (z). The size of the attack is then A(θ, z) =
¢
¡√
Φ αx (x∗ (z) − θ) and is decreasing in θ. It follows that regime change occurs if and only
if θ ≤ θ∗ (z), where θ∗ (z) is the unique solution to A(θ, z) = θ, or equivalently
x∗ (z) = θ∗ (z) +

√1 Φ−1 (θ ∗ (z)).
αx

(2)

x
z
The posterior of the agent about θ is Normal with mean αxα+α
x + αxα+α
z and precision
z
z
−2
−2
αx + αz , where αx = σ x and αz = σ z denote, respectively, the precision of private and
public information. It follows that the agent finds it optimal to attack if and only if x ≤ x∗ (z),
where x∗ (z) solve the indiﬀerence condition Pr [θ ≤ θ∗ (z)|x, z] = c, or equivalently

Φ

³√
³
αx + αz θ∗ (z) −

αx
x∗ (z)
αx +αz

−

αz
z
αx +αz

Substituting (2) into (3) gives a single equation in θ∗ (z) :
Φ−1 (θ∗ (z)) −

√αz θ ∗
αx

(z) =

q
1+

αz −1
Φ
αx

´´

= c.

(1 − c) −

√αz z
αx

(3)

(4)

Hence, an equilibrium is simply identified with a solution to (4).
√
√
A solution to (4) always exist and is unique for all z if and only if αz / αx ≤ 2π, or
√
equivalently σ x ≤ σ 2z 2π. (See Appendix for a detailed derivation.) We conclude that the
7

This assumption is without any serious loss of generality: by letting the common prior be uninformative,
we bias the results against multiplicity.
8
This is without serious loss of generality for two reasons. First, when the monotone equilibrium is
unique and the information is exogenous, a standard argument of iterrated deletion of strongly dominated
strategies can be used to show that there are no other non-monotone equilibria either. Second, to prove the
existence of multiple equilibria and the convergence to common-knowledge outcomes with either exogenous
or endogenous information, it suﬃces to look at monotone equilibria.

6

σx

multiplicity

uniqueness

σz

Figure 2: σ x and σ z parametrize the noise in private and public information; uniqueness is
ensured for σx small enough.
equilibrium is unique if and only if the private noise is suﬃciently small.
Proposition 1 (Morris-Shin) In the game with exogenous information, the equilibrium is
√
unique if and only if σ x ≤ σ 2z 2π.
This result is illustrated in Figure 2, which depicts the regions of (σ x , σ z ) for which
the equilibrium is unique. For any σ z > 0, uniqueness in ensured by letting σ x > 0 sufficiently small. In the limit as σ x → 0, the incomplete-information game approaches the
common-knowledge game, in which there are multiple equilibria; yet, the equilibrium of the
incomplete-information game remains unique and actually asymptotes to a situation where
the regime outcome becomes independent of ε. In other words, not only sunspots cease
to matter, but all non-fundamental volatility — the volatility of A or R conditional on θ —
vanishes.
Corollary 1 In the limit as σx → 0, there is a unique equilibrium in which A (θ, z) → 1 if
θ < θ̂ and A (θ, z) → 0 if θ > θ̂, where θ̂ = 1 − c.
This result is intriguing, as it manifests a sharp discontinuity of the equilibrium set around
σ x = 0 : a tiny perturbation away from perfect information obtains a unique equilibrium.
The key intuition is that disperse private information serves as an anchor for individual
behavior: it limits the ability to forecast each others’ actions and thereby to coordinate on
multiple equilibria.
7

Indeed, when all agents share the same information about the underlying fundamentals,
they can perfectly forecast each others’ actions in equilibrium and can therefore perfectly
coordinate on either everybody or nobody attacking when θ ∈ (θ, θ]. But when agents have
heterogeneous information about the fundamentals, each agent faces uncertainty regarding
other agents’ beliefs about θ and their actions. For any given precision of public information,
the higher the precision of the agents’ private information, the more heavily agents condition
their actions on their own private information, and thus the harder it is for other agents to
predict their actions. When σx is suﬃciently small relative to σ z , this anchoring eﬀect of
private information is strong enough that the ability to coordinate on multiple courses of
action totally brakes down and a unique equilibrium survives. Finally, as σx → 0, the private
signal become infinitely precise relative to the public signal, in which case agents cease to
condition on the public signal and by implication the sensitivity of equilibrium outcomes to
the shock ε vanishes.

3

Endogenous Information I: Financial Prices

The results reviewed above presume that the precision of public information remains invariant while changing the precision of private information. This, however, may not be possible
when the public information consists of financial prices that endogenously aggregate the
disperse private information in the population.
To capture the role of prices as a channel of information aggregation, we modify the
environment as follows. There are now two stages. In stage 1, agents trade a financial asset
whose dividend depends on the underlying exogenous fundamentals and/or the endogenous
outcome of Stage 2. Stage 2 in turn is like the benchmark regime-change game of the previous
section, except for that the public signal is now the price that cleared the asset market in
stage 1.
This framework opens up new modeling choices regarding the specification of the asset’s
dividend and the preferences over risky payoﬀs. We guide our choices with an eye towards
tractability: to isolate the eﬀects of information aggregation from any direct payoﬀ linkages
between the two stages, we assume that preferences are separable between the first-stage
portfolio choice and the second-stage attacking decision;9 and to preserve normality of the
information structure, we model stage 1 along the CARA-normal framework of Grossman
and Stiglitz (1976, 1980) and Hellwig (1980).
9

However, we do allow the payoﬀ of the asset to depend on the aggregate activity of stage 2.

8

3.1

Model Setup

The game starts again with nature drawing θ from an improper uniform over R. Each agent
i has a given endowment of wealth wi and receives an exogenous private signal xi = θ + σx ξ i .
The distribution of wi is arbitrary and the noise ξ i is N (0, 1) , i.i.d. across agents, and
independent of θ.
In stage 1, agents can invest their wealth either in a risk-less asset or a risky asset. The
riskless asset is in infinitely elastic supply, it costs 1 in the first stage, and it delivers 1 in
the second stage. The risky asset, on the other hand, costs p in the first stage and delivers
f in the second.
The agent enjoys utility from final-stage consumption and has constant absolute risk
aversion (CARA). The payoﬀ from the portfolio choice is thus V (c) = − exp(−γc)/γ, where
c = w − pk + fk is consumption, k denotes investment in the risky asset, and γ > 0
is the coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion. The net supply of the risky asset is given by
an unobserved random variable K s (ε) = σ ε ε, where ε ∼ N (0, 1) is independent of both
the fundamentals and the private noise and σ ε parametrizes the exogenous noise in the
aggregation process. The unobserved shock ε can also be interpreted as the demand of
‘noise traders’ and its role is to introduce noise in the information revealed by financial
prices about fundamentals.
In stage 2, agents chose whether to attack or not. The the status quo is abandoned
(R = 1) if and only if A > θ and the agent’s payoﬀ from stage 2 is U (a, A, θ) = a (R (A, θ) − c) ,
as in the benchmark model. The regime outcome, the asset’s dividend, and the agents’ payoﬀs are realized at the end of stage 2.10
For the specification of the asset’s dividend f, we consider two alternatives: the case that
f is determined merely by the underlying economic fundamentals θ; and the case that f is
a function of the endogenous activity A of the coordination stage.
Because of the CARA-normal specification, the demand for the risky asset is independent
of wealth. The individual’s demand k in stage 1 and action a in stage 2 are thus functions
of (x, p) alone, the realizations of the private signal and the equilibrium price. Since there is
a continuum of agents, the corresponding aggregates are functions of (θ, p) , the underlying
fundamental and the price. The equilibrium price, on the other hand, is a function of the
exogenous state (θ, ε). We thus define
Definition 1 A rational-expectations equilibrium is a price function P (θ, ε), individual strategies k(x, p) and a(x, p) for investment and attacking, and corresponding aggregates K(θ, p)
10

Given the separability of payoﬀ between the two stages, one could reinterpret the model as if the agents
who move in stage 1 were diﬀerent than the agents who move in stage 2, provided of course that the latter
observe the price that cleared the asset market in stage 1.

9

and A(θ, p), such that: (i) in stage 1,
k(x, p) = arg max E [ V ((f − p) k) | x, p ]
k∈R
¶
µ
Z
x−θ
K(θ, p) = k(x, p)dΦ
σx
x

(5)
(6)

K (θ, P (θ, ε)) = K s (ε)

(7)

a(x, p) = arg max E [ U(a, A(θ, p), θ) | x, p ]
a∈[0,1]
¶
µ
Z
x−θ
A(θ, p) = a(x, p)dΦ
σx
x

(8)

(ii) in stage 2,

(9)

The interpretation of these conditions is straightforward. Condition (5) requires that an
agent’s investment take into account the information contained in their private information
and prices, whereas condition (7) imposes market clearing in the asset market. Note that
(5)-(7) define a standard rational-expectations equilibrium for stage 1, whereas (8)-(9) define
a standard Perfect Bayesian equilibrium in stage 2. Finally, with some abuse of notation,
we let R (θ, ε) = R (θ, A (θ, P (θ, ε))) denote the equilibrium regime outcome as a function of
the exogenous state (θ, ε) .

3.2

Exogenous dividend

We consider first the case that the dividend f depends only on the exogenous economic
fundamentals θ. To preserve Normality, we let f = f (θ) = θ.
We start the characterization of the equilibrium with stage 1 (the financial market).
Thanks to the CARA-Normal specification, the expected utility of the agent reduces to
¢
¡
E [V (c) |x, p] = V (E [f |x, p] − p) k − γ2 Var[f |x, p]k2

The FOC, which is both necessary and suﬃcient, implies that the optimal demand for the
asset is
E[f |x, p] − p
,
(10)
k(x, p) =
γVar[f |x, p]
where f = θ. We propose that the posterior of θ conditional on x, p has mean δx + (1 − δ)p
and precision α, for some δ ∈ (0, 1) and α > 0. It follows that k(x, p) = (δα/γ) (x − p)
and therefore K(θ, p) = (δα/γ) (θ − p). In equilibrium, K(θ, p) = K s (ε) , which gives the
10

market-clearing price as p = θ − (δα/γ)−1 σ ε ε, or equivalently
P (θ, ε) = θ − σ p ε

(11)

where σ p = (δα/γ)−1 σ ε is the standard deviation of the price conditional on θ. The observation of p is therefore equivalent to the observation of a Normal signal about θ with precision
αp = σ −2
p . Moreover, x and p are independent and therefore θ|x, p ∼ N (δx + (1 − δ) p, α) ,
δ = αx /α, and α = αx + αp , which verifies our initial guess. Solving for α, δ, and αp , we get
α = αx (1 + αx αε /γ 2 ), δ = 1/(1 + αx αε /γ 2 ), and αp = αε α2x /γ 2 . That is, the precision of the
public information revealed by the price is an increasing function of both the precision the
aggregation process and the agents’ primitive private information. Equivalently,
σ p = γσ ε σ 2x ,

(12)

which together with (11) completes the characterization of stage 1.
Next, consider stage 2 (the coordination stage). Given (11), the continuation game in
stage 2 is isomorphic to the benchmark game of Section 2, except for the fact that the public
signal is z = p = P (θ, ε) and hence αz = αp . The following are thus immediate implications
of our earlier analysis in Section 2: first, the agent’s strategy is a (x, p) = 1 if and only
¡√
¢
if x < x∗ (p) , the aggregate attack is A (θ, p) = Φ αx (x∗ (p) − θ) , and the regime is
abandoned if and only if θ < θ∗ (p); second, the thresholds x∗ (p) and θ∗ (p) are given by the
solution to (2) and (4) once we replace z with p and αz with αp ; third, the solution is unique
√
if and only if and only if σ x ≤ σ 2p 2π. Using then (11), we conclude that the equilibrium is
unique if and only if σ 2ε σ 3x ≥ γ 2 (2π)−1/2 .
Proposition 2 In the economy with f = f (θ), there are multiple equilibria if and only if
σ2ε σ 3x < γ 2 (2π)−1/2 . There are then multiple strategies, a (x, p) , attacks A (θ, p) and regime
outcomes, R (θ, p) , for the coordination stage, but the asset demands, k (x, p) and K (θ, p) ,
and the price function, P (θ, ε), are always uniquely determined.
Note how this result contrasts with Proposition 1: when public information is exogenous,
a suﬃciently low σ x ensures uniqueness; but when the public information is endogenous as
in the present model, a suﬃciently low σx ensures multiplicity. This is because more precise
private information now implies more precise public information, indeed at a rate high enough
that the agents’ ability to predict each others’ actions increases as their information improves.
Figure 3 illustrates the result in the (σ x , σ z ) space: unlike Figure 2, as σ x decreases, σ z also
decreases and fast enough that the economy necessarily enters the region of multiplicity.

11

σx

multiplicity

uniqueness

σz

Figure 3: With endogenous public information, as σ x decreases, σ z also decreases; multiplicity is therefore ensured for suﬃciently small σ x .
Uniqueness can therefore not be seen as a small perturbation away from common knowledge. As it was earlier illustrated in Figure 1, when either σ x or σ ε is small enough, the
precision of the endogenous public information is suﬃciently high that multiple courses of action can be sustained in the coordination stage. Moreover, the common-knowledge outcomes
can actually be recovered as as either type of noise vanishes.
Corollary 2 Consider the limit as σ x → 0 for given σ ε , or the limit as σ ε → 0 for given
σ x . There exists an equilibrium in which R (θ, ε) → 0 whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ), as well as an
equilibrium in which R (θ, ε) → 1 whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ). In every equilibrium, P (θ, ε) → θ for
all (θ, ε).

3.3

Endogenous dividend

We now consider the case that the payoﬀ of the asset is determined by the outcome of the
coordination stage. To preserve Normality, we now let f = f (A) = −Φ−1 (A). The asset
thus pays more the lower the size of the attack, which we could interpret as a situation where
“attack” means refraining from some short of investment.
We start again the equilibrium analysis with stage 1. Guessing (and later verifying) that
agents use monotone strategies in stage 2 such that a (x, p) = 1 if and only if x < x∗ (p)
¡√
¢
for some threshold x∗ (p) , we have that A (θ, p) = Φ αx [x∗ (p) − θ] and therefore f =
√
αx [θ − x∗ (p)]. Hence, if the agents posterior about θ is Normal (which we verify later),
12

so is f . It follows that the individual optimal demand for the asset is again as in (10).
√
√
γ = γ αx and
Substituting f = αx [θ − x∗ (p)] into the latter and letting e
1
pe = √ p + x∗ (p)
αx

(13)

we can rewrite the optimal demand as k = (E[θ|x, p] − pe) / (e
γ Var[θ|x, p]). Like in the previous
section, we then propose E[θ|x, p] = δx + (1 − δ) pe and Var[θ|x, p] = α. It follows that
K (θ, p) = (δα/e
γ ) (θ − pe) and therefore market clearing implies
pe = θ −

γ
e
√ ε.
δα αε

(14)

Hence, provided that there is a one-to-one mapping between p and pe, the observation of p
γ )2 αε
is equivalent to the observation of a Normal signal about θ with precision αp = (δα/e
and therefore θ|x, p˜N (δx + (1 − δ) pe, α) with δ = αx / (αx + αp ) and α = αx + αp . Solving
γ 2 = αε α3x /γ 2 , or equivalently
for δ, α, and αp gives αp = αε α2x /e
σ p = γσ ε σ 3x .

(15)

Next, consider stage 2. The threshold θ∗ (p) solves θ = A (θ, p) ; equivalently,
x∗ (p) = θ∗ (p) +

∗
√1 Φ−1 (θ (p)).
αx

(16)

The threshold x∗ (p), on the other hand, solves Pr [θ ≤ θ∗ (p)|x, p] = c; equivalently,
³p
³
Φ
αx + αp θ∗ (p) −

αx
x∗ (p)
αx +αp

−

´´

αx
pe
αx +αp

= c.

(17)

These equations are the analogues of (2) and (4) in the benchmark game. However, once we
substitute (13) and (16) into (17), we get a unique solution for θ∗ (p) :
θ∗ (p) = Φ

³q

αx
Φ−1
αx +αp

(1 − c) −

´

αp
p
αx +αp

,

(18)

in which case (16) implies also a unique x∗ (p) . Hence, unlike either the benchmark game or
the case of the previous section, the strategy of the agents in the coordination game and the
regime outcome are always uniquely determined as functions of the realized price.
To complete the analysis, we need to determine the mapping between p and pe, that is,
the equilibrium price mapping p = P (θ, ε). Using (13), the aggregate demand for the asset

13

is

µ
¶
1
δα
∗
θ − √ p − x (p) .
K (θ, p) =
γ
e
αx

(19)

Since x∗ (p) is uniquely determined, K (θ, p) is also uniquely determined (and similarly for
k (x, p)). Moreover, for any θ, K(θ, p) is continuous in p, K(θ, p) → ∞ as p → −∞, and
K(θ, p) → −∞ as p → +∞. It follows that K (θ, p) = ε, or equivalently (13), always admits
a solution; that is, a market-clearing price p = P (θ, ε) exists for any θ and ε. However, the
market-clearing price need not always be unique. Note that θ∗ (p) and x∗ (p) are decreasing
√
in p, which in turn implies the asset’s dividend, f = αx [θ − x∗ (p)], is itself increasing in p.
As a result, the demand for the asset can be non-monotonic. Indeed, (16) and (19) imply
sign

½

∂K (θ, p)
∂p

¾

½√
¾
¡ −1 ∗ ¢
αx
= −sign
− φ Φ (θ )
αp

√
√
and therefore K (θ, p) is globally decreasing in p if and only if αx /αp ≥ 2π, or equivalently
√
√
σ2ε σ 3x ≥ γ 2 / 2π. If instead σ 2ε σ 3x < γ 2 / 2π, the aggregate demand for the asset is nonmonotonic and there is a non-empty interval (e
p1 , pe2 ) such that (13) admits a single solution
p1 , pe2 ). Diﬀerent selections from these
whenever pe ∈
/ (e
p1 , pe2 ) but three solutions whenever pe ∈ (e
solutions then sustain diﬀerent mappings between pe and p, that is, diﬀerent equilibrium price
functions P (θ, ε) .
Proposition 3 In the economy with f = f (A), there are multiple equilibria if and only if
σ2ε σ 5x < γ 2 (2π)−1/2 . There are then multiple price functions P (θ, ε), but the asset demands
k (x, p) , K (θ, p) , the strategy a (x, p) , and the attack A (θ, p) are always uniquely determined.
In the model of the previous section, the dividend was a function of θ alone and therefore
the price played the role of a signal about the exogenous fundamental. As a result, indeterminacy emerged for the strategies and the size of the attack in the coordination stage, but
not for the price clearing the asset market. Here, instead, the dividend depends on A and
therefore the price plays the role of an anticipatory signal about the endogenous size of the
attack. A particular price realization coupled with an agent’s private information then pins
down a unique posterior about the size of the attack, in which case the agent’s best response
is of course unique. This explains why the strategies in stage 2 are uniquely determined.
In stage 1, on the other hand, diﬀerent levels of the price are associated with diﬀerent
expectations about the size of the attack and therefore about the dividend of the asset: in
equilibrium, a higher price signals a higher dividend. When this eﬀect is strong enough, it can
oﬀset the usual negative payoﬀ eﬀect of the price — namely that a higher price means a higher
cost of obtaining the asset — and may therefore induce the demand for the asset to increase
14

with the price. This non-monotonicity of the asset demand introduces the possibility for
multiple market-clearing prices. Finally, the positive eﬀect of the price is stronger when αp
is higher, for a higher αp increases the sensitivity of the agents’ actions in stage 2 to the price
and therefore of the dividend to the price. This explains why multiple equilibrium prices
exist for for small levels of noise.
To further understand why multiplicity emerges in the price and not in the strategy
of the agents, it helps to consider for a moment the no-noise game (σ x = σ ε = 0). The
exogenous signal is then x = θ and the equilibrium price is p = −Φ−1 (A) and therefore an
agent learns perfectly θ by observing x and A by observing p. Clearly, the agent then finds
it optimal to attack if and only if A ≥ θ, or equivalently x ≤ Φ(−p), which means that his
strategy is uniquely determined as a function of x and p. However, the equilibrium values of
p and A are not uniquely determined. Instead, for every θ ∈ (θ, θ], both (p, A) = (∞, 0) and
(p, A) = (−∞, 1) can be sustained in equilibrium.
In conclusion, small noise now ensures multiplicity in both the asset price and the coordination outcome: diﬀerent equilibrium price functions result to diﬀerent realizations of
the price and the size of the attack for the same θ and ε and therefore to diﬀerent regime
outcomes as well. What is more, the no-noise (or common-knowledge) outcomes are once
again obtained as the noise vanishes.
Corollary 3 Consider the limit as σx → 0 for given σ ε , or the limit as σ ε → 0 for given
σ x . There is an equilibrium in which R(θ, ε) → 1 and P (θ, ε) → −∞ whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ), as
well as an equilibrium in which R(θ, ε) → 1 and P (θ, ε) → −∞ whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ).

3.4

Discussion

Although the property that the precision of endogenous public information increases with
the precision of exogenous private information is likely to be very robust, how strong this
eﬀect is and whether it can overturn the direct eﬀect of private information may depend
on the details of the channel through which private information is aggregated. Indeed, the
result that multiplicity is ensured for small σ x relies on the precision of public information
increasing at a rate higher than the square root of the precision of public information. That
was the case in the two specifications we consider above (as evident in (12) and (15)) but
need not be true in general. We now provide an example which illustrates this possibility.
To this aim, we modify stage 1 as follows. The agent is assumed to be risk neutral
and face a quadratic liquidity/transaction cost for investing in the risky asset. The indirect

15

utility from the portfolio choice is thus given by
κ
V (c) = c = w − pk − k 2 + fk
2

(20)

where the scalar κ > 0 parametrizes the liquidity/transaction cost. We consider again two
cases for the dividend, exogenous and endogenous.
Proposition 4 Suppose V is given by (20).
(i) When f = θ, the equilibrium price function P is always unique, whereas the equilibrium regime outcome R is unique if and only if σ x is either suﬃciently small or suﬃciently
high relative to σ ε .
(ii) When f = −Φ−1 (A), there are multiple equilibria if and only if σ x and/or σ ε are
suﬃciently small. Multiplicity then emerges in both the regime outcome R and the price
function P.
Here, unlike the earlier CARA-normal cases, the increase in the precision of public information generated by an increase in the precision of private information is not always strong
enough to oﬀset the direct eﬀect of the private information when the payoﬀ of the asset is
exogenous. This is because the slope of individual demand on the expected dividend is independent of the risk in the dividend, which implies that the precision of public information
increase less with private information than when the slope itself increases with more precise
information (less risk). When the dividend depends only on θ, the anchoring eﬀect of private
information dominates, thus ensuring uniqueness for σ x small enough.
When, however, the dividend of the asset depends on the size of the attack, the fact that
the sensitivity of the size of the attack and therefore of the dividend itself to the fundamental
increases as the agents’ information improves compensates for the lack of such a sensitivity
in the demand for the asset. As a result, coordination once again becomes easier as private
information becomes more precise and multiplicity reemerges for small enough noise.
These two examples highlight that the details of the channel through which information
is aggregated matters: whether it takes a small or a large perturbation away from common
knowledge for uniqueness to prevail — or, more gererally, what is the region of σx and σ ε for
which there are multiple equilibria — may depend on the set of financial assets traded, the
preferences of the agents, and other institutional details of the particular application one
examines.
In Section 5, we consider a diﬀerent model where there is no financial market to aggregate
information, but agents observe a direct signal about others’ activity when they decide
whether to attack. We find that the coordinating eﬀect of this endogenous signal is once
again strong to deliver multiplicity when σx or σ z are small enough.
16

Hellwig, Mukherji, and Tsyvinski (2004), on the other hand, consider a currency-crises
model in which the coordination game is embedded in the financial market: they assume
that the dividend of the asset (i.e., a peso bond in their model) is itself low when the price
of the asset is low (i.e., when interest rates are high). They also find that multiple equilibria
exist when the private noise is small enough.
In the next section, which examines the implications of our analysis for non-fundamental
volatility, we continue to focus on cases in which the coordinating eﬀect of prices is suﬃciently
strong. Although, as we have just shown, this is not always true, we beleive this is an
interesting benchmark.

4

Noise and Volatility

We now investigate the role of the information structure for non-fundamental volatility, that
is, the volatility of equilibrium outcomes conditional on θ. We consider in turn two sources
of non-fundamental volatility: volatility generated by payoﬀ-irrelevant variables (sunspots)
when there are multiple equilibria and agents use these sunspots to coordinate their behavior;
and volatility generated by the shock ε when the equilibrium is unique.
With exogenous information, multiplicity disappears when agents observe the fundamentals with small idiosyncratic noise. By implication, there is no sunspot volatility when σx
is small enough. What is more, as σ x → 0, the size of the attack and by implication the
regime outcome become independent of ε. Hence, all non-fundamental volatility vanishes as
σx → 0. On the other hand, non-fundamental volatility is maximized when σ z → 0 for given
σx , as in this case the common-knowledge outcomes are obtained.
With endogenous information, the impact of private noise on volatility is quite diﬀerent.
A suﬃciently large reduction in either σ x or σ ε can increase volatility by ensuring multiplicity
and therefore introducing more sunspot volatility. Corollaries 2 and 3 indeed imply that
sunspot volatility is maximized when either noise vanishes: as σ x → 0 or σ ε → 0, the
regime can either collapse or survive for any given θ ∈ (θ, θ], purely as a function of the
sunspot. What is more, sunspot volatility can show up in prices as well: when the dividend
is endogenous, the equilibrium price can be arbitrarily low or arbitrarily high for any given
θ ∈ (θ, θ].
The property that, with endogenous information, less noise may increase volatility does
not rely on the existence of multiple equilibria. As we show next, when the equilibrium is
unique, a reduction in either σx or σ ε may increase the sensitivity of the regime outcome and
the asset price to the exogenous shock ε and may therefore result to higher non-fundamental
volatility.
17

4.1

Regime Volatility

In equilibrium, the regime is abandoned (R = 1) if and only if θ ≤ θ∗ (p) , but p in turn
depends on θ, since p = P (θ, ε) . To express the equilibrium regime outcome as a function
of the exogenous variables θ and ε, note that, as long as the equilibrium is unique, θ∗ (p)
is continuously decreasing in p and P (θ, ε) is continuously increasing in θ. It follows that
R (θ, ε) = 1 if and only if θ ≤ θ̂ (ε) , where θ̂ (ε) is the unique solution to
θ̂ = θ∗ (P (θ̂, ε)).
We can thus examine the non-fundamental volatility of the regime outcome by examining
the sensitivity of θ̂ (ε) to ε.
Consider first the case the dividend is exogenous (f = f (θ)). Using the results of Section
3.2, we get
¶
µ
1
ε
(21)
θ̂ (ε) = Φ ψ +
γσ ε σ 2x
p
where ψ = 1 + 1/ (γ 2 σ 2ε σ 4x )Φ−1 (1 − c). It follows that
φ(Φ−1 (θ̂))
∂ θ̂
=
∂ε
γσ ε σ 2x

(22)

and therefore, for any given θ̂, a reduction in σ ε or σ x increases the slope of θ̂ (ε) with
respect to ε. By implication, θ̂ satisfies a single-crossing property with respect to σ x or
σ ε : let ε0 be the unique value of ε for which ∂ θ̂/∂σ ε = 0 or equivalently ∂ θ̂/∂σ x = 0;
for any ε1 and ε2 such that ε1 < ε0 < ε2 , we still have that ∂|θ̂(ε2 ) − θ̂(ε1 )|/σ ε < 0 and
similarly ∂|θ̂(ε2 ) − θ̂(ε1 )|/σ ε < 0. In this sense, a reduction in either type of noise increases
non-fundamental volatility.
The result is illustrated in Figure 4. The solid line depicts the threshold θ̂ (ε) as a function
of ε for a relatively high σ x , whereas the dashed line corresponds to a relatively low σ x . A
similar single-crossing property holds when the dividend is endogenous (f = f (A)). Indeed,
(21) and (22) continue to hold if we replace γ with γ
e = γσ x . We conclude that

Proposition 5 Less noise implies more non-fundamental volatility even when the equilibrium is unique: for any given θ̂, a reduction in σ ε or σ x increases the slope of θ̂ (ε) with
respect to ε.

Our earlier results regarding equilibrium multiplicity can thus be viewed as an extreme
reincarnation of the above result. When the noise is suﬃciently small, volatility can be high,

18

ˆ
θ
1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
ε

-10

-5

5

10

Figure 4: The regime-change threshold θ̂(ε) as a function of the shock ε.
not only because the outcome is very sensitive to the exogenous noise, but also because the
outcome can depend on arbitrary sunspots.

4.2

Price Volatility

We next examine the comparative statics of the volatility of prices. To emphasize the
implications for volatility that do not derive from multiplicity, we first focus again on case
that the equilibrium is unique or that there are no sunspots.
When the dividend is exogenous, we have f = θ, p = f − σ p ε, and σ p = γσ ε σ 2x . When
instead the dividend is endogenous, we have f = Φ−1 (A) = (θ − x∗ )/σ x , p = f − (σ p /σ x ) ε,
and σ p = γσ ε σ 3x . In either case, we can write the equilibrium price as the sum of the dividend
and the supply shock appropriately weighted:
¡
¢
p = f − γσ ε σ 2x ε

(23)

Keeping f constant, the volatility of the price clearly decreases with a reduction in either σ x
or σ ε . But what about the volatility of the dividend itself?
When the dividend is exogenous, f is independent of ε. The impact of noise is then
exactly like in Grossman-Stiglitz: a reduction in either σx or σ ε implies lower volatility in
equilibrium prices.
When instead the dividend is endogenous, f depends on ε, because agents’ actions in
the second stage depend on the price, which in turn depends on the shock ε. Moreover, for
essentially the same reason that a reduction in noise increases the sensitivity of the regime
outcome to the shock ε, a reduction in noise increases the sensitivity of f on ε. As a result,

19

PHθ,εL
40
20

-20

-10

10

20

ε

-20
-40

Figure 5: The equilibrium price P (θ, ε) as a function of the shock ε.
the overall impact of noise on the volatility of prices is now ambiguous: on the one hand,
less noise reduces the volatility of the price for any given volatility of the dividend; on the
other hand, less noise increases the volatility of the dividend itself.
The second eﬀect indeed dominates in some cases. An example is illustrated in Figure 5,
which depicts P (θ, ε) for diﬀerent values of ε and a given θ. The solid line corresponds to a
relatively high σx , the dotted one to an intermediate σ x , and the dashed one to a relatively
low σ x . (In all cases, however, σ x is high enough that the equilibrium in unique.) The eﬀect
of σ x on the sensitivity of P (θ, ε) to ε is non-monotonic: it is highest when σ x is either high
or low. A similar picture emerges if we consider the impact of σ ε . We thus conclude:
Proposition 6 When the dividend is exogenous, the volatility of the price conditional on θ
necessarily decreases with a reduction in either σ x or σ ε . But when the dividend depends on
the coordination outcome, a reduction in either noise can increase price volatility.

5

Endogenous Information II: Observable Actions

In the analysis so far, we have assumed that agents observe a signal generated by a diﬀerent
stage of economic interactions than the coordination game. We now examine the case that
the information originates in the coordination game itself. In particular, we assume away
the financial market and let agents observe a noisy public signal about the activity of other
agents in the coordination game.
We first consider a model where the signal is about others’ contemporaneous actions. In
this case, our equilibrium concept is novel and unavoidably at the crossroads of rationalexpectations and game theory. We later show that the same results can be obtained in a
20

dynamic variant of this model, in which the population is divided into two groups: ‘early’
movers, who have only private information about the fundamentals, and ‘late’ movers, who
can also observe a public signal about the early movers’ activity. In the latter case, the
equilibrium concept is standard game-theoretic.

5.1

Model set-up

There is no asset market and, except for the endogenous public signal, the game is identical to
the benchmark model analyzed in Section 2. All agents move simultaneously after observing
private signals about the fundamentals and a public signal about the size of the attack. The
private signals are again x = θ + σx ξ, whereas the public signal is
y = s(A, ε)
where s : [0, 1] × R → R and ε is noise, independent of θ and ξ. To preserve Normality of
the information structure and obtain closed-form solution, we let s(A, ε) = Φ−1 (A) + σ ε ε
and ε ∼ N (0, 1) .11 The exogenous information structure is then parameterized by the pair
of standard deviations (σ x , σ ε ).
Since the information of each agent includes a signal about other agents’ actions, the
equilibrium concept we define is a hybrid of a perfect Bayesian equilibrium and a rationalexpectations equilibrium.
Definition 2 A rational-expectations equilibrium consists of an endogenous signal y = Y (θ, ε),
an individual attack strategy a(x, y), and an aggregate attack A(θ, y), that satisfy:
a(x, y) = arg max E [ U (a, R(θ, y)) | x, y ]
a∈[0,1]

A(θ, y) =

µ

Z

x−θ
a(x, y)dΦ
σx
x

¶

y = s(A(θ, y), ε)

(24)

(25)

(26)

for all (θ, ε, x, y) ∈ R4 , where R(θ, y) = 1 if A(θ, y) ≥ θ and R(θ, y) = 0 otherwise.
Condition (24) means that a(x, y) is the optimal strategy for the agent, whereas condition
(25) means that A(θ, y) is simply the aggregate across agents. The fixed-point relation
introduced by (26) is the rational-expectations feature of our context: the signal y must be
generated by individual actions, which in turn are contingent on y.
11

This convenient specification was introduced by Dasgupta (2002).

21

5.2

Equilibrium analysis

We focus again on monotone equilibria, in which an agent attacks if and only if x ≤ x∗ (y)
and the status quo is abandoned if and only if θ ≤ θ∗ (y). A monotone equilibrium is thus
identifies with a triplet of functions x∗ , θ∗ , and Y.
Given that an agent attacks if and only if x ≤ x∗ (y), the aggregate attack is A(θ, y) =
¢
¡√
Φ αx (x∗ (y) − θ) . It follows that the regime is abandoned if and only if θ ≤ θ∗ (y), where
θ∗ (y) solves A(θ, y) = θ, or equivalently
x∗ (y) = θ∗ (y) +

√1 Φ−1 (θ ∗ (y)).
αx

(27)

Condition (26), on the other hand, implies that the signal must satisfy y =
σ ε ε, or equivalently
x∗ (y) − σ x y = θ − σ x σ ε ε.

√
αx [x∗ (y) − θ]+
(28)

Note that (28) is a mapping between y and z = θ − σ x σ ε ε. Define the correspondence
Y(z) = { y ∈ R | x∗ (y) − σ x y = z } .

(29)

We will later show that Y(z) is non-empty and examine when it is single- or multi-valued.
Now take any function Ỹ (z) that is a selection from this correspondence — that is, such
that Ỹ (z) ∈ Y(z) for all z — and let Y (θ, ε) = Ỹ (θ − σ x σ ε ε). Any such selection preserves
normality of the information structure.
Indeed, the observation of y = Y (θ, ε) is then equivalent to the observation of z =
θ − σ x σ ε ε = Z (y) , where Z (y) = x∗ (y) − σ x y. Therefore, it is as if the agents observe a
Normal public signal about θ with precision αz = αx αε , or equivalently
(30)

σz = σx σε .

The precision of endogenous public information is thus once again increasing in the precision
of exogenous private information.
For the individual agent in turn to find it optimal to attack if and only if x ≤ x∗ (y), it
must be that x∗ (y) solves the indiﬀerence condition Pr (θ ≤ θ∗ (y) |x, y) = c, or equivalently
³√
³
Φ
αx + αz θ∗ (y) −

αx
x∗
αx +αz

22

(y) −

αz
Z
αx +αz

´´
(y) = c.

(31)

Using Z (y) = x∗ (y) − σ x y and substituting x∗ (y) from (27), we get
µ

αz
θ (y) = Φ
y+
αx + αz
∗

r

¶
αx
−1
Φ (1 − c) ,
αx + αz

(32)

which together with (27) determines unique θ∗ (y) and x∗ (y). Hence, the strategy of the
agents a (x, y) and the aggregate attack A (θ, y) are uniquely determined.
We finally need to examine the equilibrium correspondence Y(z). Recall that this is given
by the set of solutions to x∗ (y) − σ x y = z. Using (27) and (32), this reduces to
µ
¶
¶
αx
1
αz
−
y+Λ + √
y + Λ = z,
F (y) ≡ Φ
αx + αz
αx
αx + αz
µ

(33)

p
where Λ ≡ αx / (αx + αz )Φ−1 (1 − c). Note that F (y) is continuous in y, and F (y) → −∞
as y → +∞, and F (y) → +∞ as y → −∞, which ensures that Y(z) is non-empty and
therefore that an equilibrium always exist. Next, note that
½
´¾
αz ³ αz
sign {F (y)} = −sign 1 − √ φ αx +αz y + Λ
αx
0

√
√
and therefore F (y) is globally monotonic if and only if αz / αx ≤ 2π, in which case Y(z) is
√
√
single valued. If instead αz / αx > 2π, there is a non-empty interval (z, z) such that Y(z)
takes three values whenever z ∈ (z, z) . Diﬀerent selections then sustain diﬀerent equilibrium
signal Y .
Using αz = αε αx , we conclude that multiple equilibria survive as long as either source of
noise is suﬃciently small.
Proposition 7 A monotone rational-expectations equilibrium exists for all (σ x , σ ε ) and
√
√
is unique if and only if σ 2ε σ x ≥ 1/ 2π. If σ 2ε σ x < 1/ 2π, the equilibrium strategy a and
aggregate attack A remain unique, but there are multiple signal functions Y .
Interestingly, when multiplicity arises, it is with respect to aggregate outcomes but not
with respect to individual behavior. To understand this result, consider the no-noise limit
(σ x = σ ε = 0), in which case x = θ and y = Φ−1 (A). Clearly, the agent finds it optimal to
attack if and only if x ≤ Φ(y), which uniquely determines the equilibrium strategy a(x, y) for
the agent. However, for every θ ∈ (θ, θ], both (y, A) = (−∞, 0) and (y, A) = (+∞, 1) can
be sustained as equilibria. When σ x and σ ε are non-zero, the same nature of indeterminacy
remains: the behavior of the agent is uniquely determined for any given x and y, but there
can be multiple equilibrium value for y and A for any given realization of θ and ε. In this

23

sense, the multiplicity here is similar to the one we encountered in Section 3.3, when agents
traded a financial asset whose dividend depended on the size of the attack.
Finally, the common-knowledge outcomes are once again obtained as either source of
information becomes infinitely precise, and therefore sunspot volatility is maximized when
the noise vanishes. On the other, the Morris-Shin limit can be obtained if the endogenous
public signal becomes infinitely imprecise, in which case it is as if the endogenous signal were
not available.
Corollary 4 (i) Consider the limit as either σ x → 0 or σε → 0. There exists an equilibrium
in which R (θ, ε) → 0 whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ], as well as an equilibrium in which R (θ, ε) → 1
whenever θ ∈ (θ, θ].
(ii) Consider the limit as σε → ∞. There is a unique equilibrium in which R (θ, ε) → 1
whenever θ < θ̂ and R (θ, ε) → 0 whenever θ > θ̂, where θ̂ ≡ 1 − c.

5.3

Non-simultaneous signal

The analysis above has assumed that agents can condition their decision to attack on a noisy
indicator of contemporaneous aggregate behavior. We now show that our results extend to
a simple dynamic model in which no agent has information about contemporaneous actions
of other agents and therefore a standard game-theoretic equilibrium concept (namely PBE)
can be used.
The population is divided into two groups, ‘early’ and ‘late’ agents. Early agents move
first, on the basis of their private information alone. Late agents move second, on the basis
of their private information as well as a noisy public signal about the aggregate activity
of early agents. Neither group can observe contemporaneous activity, but late agents can
condition their behavior on the activity of early agents.
Let µ ∈ (0, 1) denote the fraction of early agents, A1 the aggregate activity of early
agents, and A2 the aggregate activity of late agents. The signal generated by early agents
and observed only by late agents is given by
y1 = Φ−1 (A1 ) + ε,

(34)

where ε ∼ N (0, σ 2ε ) is independent of θ and ξ. Early agents can condition their actions
only on their private information, whereas late agents can condition their actions also on y1 .
Finally, the regime changes if and only if µA1 + (1 − µ)A2 ≥ θ.
We look for perfect Bayesian equilibria in which the strategy of the agents in monotonic
in their private information. Since late agents can condition their behavior on y1 but early
24

agents not, a monotone equilibrium is a scalar x∗1 ∈ R and a pair of functions x∗2 : R → R
and θ∗ : R → (0, 1) such that: an early agent attacks if and only if x ≤ x∗1 ; a late agent
attacks if and only if x ≤ x∗2 (y1 ); and the regime is abandoned if and only if θ ≤ θ∗ (y1 ).
¡√
¢
In such an equilibrium, the aggregate attack of early agents is A1 (θ) = Φ αx [x∗1 − θ] .
√
It follows that y1 = Φ−1 (A1 (θ))+ε = αx [x∗1 − θ]+ε. Hence, in equilibrium, the observation
of y1 is equivalent to the observation of
1
z = x∗1 − √ y1 = θ − σ x ε,
αx
which is a public signal with precision αz = αε αx (equivalently, with standard deviation
σ z = σ ε σ x ), like in the simultaneous-signal model.
Since y1 and z have the same informational content, we can equivalently express the
strategy of a late agent as a function of z instead of y1 and replace the functions x∗2 (y1 )
and θ∗ (y1 ) with x∗2 (z) and θ∗ (z). The aggregate attack of late agents is then A2 (θ, z) =
¢
¡√
Φ αx [x∗2 (z) − θ] and the overall attack from both groups is A (θ, z) = µA1 (θ) + (1 −
µ)A2 (θ, z) . It follows that the regime changes if and only if θ ≤ θ∗ (z), where θ∗ (z) solves
A (θ∗ (z), z) = θ∗ (z), or equivalently
√
√
µΦ ( αx [x∗1 − θ∗ (z)]) + (1 − µ)Φ ( αx [x∗2 (z) − θ∗ (z)]) = θ∗ (z).

(35)

Next, consider the optimal behavior of the agents. Since the realization of z is known
to late agents, their decision problem is like in the benchmark model: the threshold x∗2 (z)
solves Pr [θ ≤ θ∗ (z)|x∗2 (z), z] = c, or equivalently
Φ

¡√
¢
α (δx∗2 (z) + (1 − δ) z − θ∗ (z)) = 1 − c,

(36)

where δ = αx /(αx + αz ) and α = αx + αz . Early agents, on the other hand, do not observe z
and therefore face a double forecast problem: they are uncertain about both the fundamental
and the signal upon which late agents will condition their behavior. The threshold x∗1 solves
Pr [θ ≤ θ∗ (y)|x∗1 ] = c, or equivalently
Z

√
√
√
Φ ( αx [x∗1 − θ∗ (z)]) α1 φ ( α1 [x∗1 − z]) dz = 1 − c,

(37)

where α1 = αx αε /(1 + αε ).12
A monotone equilibrium is therefore a joint solution to (35)-(37). We can reduce the
¡
¢
To see this, note that z = θ − σ x ε = x − ξ − σ x ε, so that z|x ∼ N 0, σ 2x + σ 2x σ 2ε . That is, conditional
on x, z is distributed normal with precision α1 = αx αε /(1 + αε ).
12

25

dimensionality of the system by solving (35) for x∗2 (z) :
x∗2 (z)

µ
¶
√
1 −1 ∗
µ
∗
∗
∗
{θ (z) − Φ ( αx [x1 − θ (z)])} .
θ (z) +
= θ (z) + √ Φ
αx
1−µ
∗

Substituting the above into (36) and using δ = αx /(αx + αz ) and α = αx + αz , we obtain:
Γ(θ∗ (z), x∗1 ) = g (z) ,

(38)

where

µ
¶
√
µ
αz
−1
∗
θ+
{θ − Φ ( αx [x1 − θ])} ,
Γ(θ, x1 ) = − √ θ + Φ
αx
1−µ
p
¡ √ ¢
g (z) = 1 + αz /αx Φ−1 (1 − c) − αz / αx z, and αz = αε αx . We conclude that an equilibrium is a joint solution of (37) and (38) for a threshold x∗1 ∈ R and a function θ∗ : R → (0, 1).
Let C denote the set of piecewise continuous real functions with range a subset of [0, 1].
For any given function θ∗ ∈ C, (37) always defines a unique x∗1 ∈ R. For given x∗1 ∈ R, on
the other hand, (38) may admit a unique or multiple solutions in θ∗ ∈ C, depending on
(αx , αε , µ) . Diﬀerent solutions to (38) for given x∗1 represent diﬀerent continuation equilibria
for the game between late agents defined by a fixed strategy for the early agents. The
question of interest, however, is the determinacy of equilibrium in the entire game.
In the appendix we show that, when (38) admits a unique solution for every x∗1 ∈ R,
the fixed point of (37)-(38) is also unique. On the other hand, when (38) admits multiple
solutions for every x∗1 ∈ R, we prove that (37)-(38) also admits multiple fixed points. This
provides us with the following suﬃcient (but not necessary) conditions for uniqueness and
multiplicity:
Proposition 8 (i) There exists a unique equilibrium if
1
σ 2ε σ x ≥ √ (1 − µ)
2π
(ii) There exist multiple equilibria if
¢
1 ¡
σ2ε σ x < √
1 − µ − µσ 2ε
2π

√
For any σ ε and σ x such that σ 2ε σ x < 1/ 2π, multiplicity in ensured for µ low enough.
In this sense, the multiplicity result of the simultaneous-move game survives as long as the
fraction of informed (late) agents is high enough. Indeed, the dependence of (38) on x∗1
vanishes as µ → 0 and therefore it can be shown that the equilibria of the simultaneous26

signal model can be approximated by equilibria of this dynamic model as µ → 0. What is
more, for any µ < 1, multiple equilibria exist as long as σ ε and σ x are suﬃciently low. On
the other hand, for any σ x and any σ ε , uniqueness is ensured by taking µ → 1, which is also
intuitive, since in this case the role of the informed agents vanishes.
We conclude that the insights we derived in the simultaneous-signal model extend to
the present framework and do not hinge on the fixed-point nature of the hybrid equilibrium
concept we used there.

6

Final Remarks

We view the main theme in Morris-Shin as emphasizing the importance of the details of
the information structures for understanding the determinacy of equilibria and the volatility
of outcomes. This paper contributes to this same theme by studying the importance of
endogenous information aggregation. We model public information by either (i) a financial
asset’s price that reveals information in equilibrium, or (ii) a direct noisy signal of aggregate
activity. An important feature of the equilibrium in all cases is that the precision of public
information is endogenous and rises with the precision of private information.
We showed that this eﬀect is typically strong enough to reverse the limiting uniqueness
result obtained with exogenous information: multiplicity is now ensured when either the
idiosyncratic noise in the individuals’ observation of fundamentals or the common noise in
the aggregation process is small enough; conversely, a unique equilibrium survives when the
noise is large enough.
We also showed that less noise may have a destabilizing eﬀect even when the equilibrium
is unique: a reduction in either source of noise may increase the sensitivity of the coordination
outcome and the price to exogenous shocks, thus leading to an increase in non-fundamental
volatility. Our multiplicity result can thus be interpreted as an extreme version of this
negative eﬀect of on volatility.
Our results on volatility may help understand crises phenomena such as currency attacks,
bank runs, or debt crises. However, we have abstracted from the institutional details of
each specific application, which may also be important for the questions of multiplicity and
volatility. Extending our analysis to particular applications is thus a promising direction for
future research.

27

7

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. Rewrite (4) as
G (θ∗ (z)) = g (z) ,

(39)

p
¡
¡
√ ¢
√ ¢
where G(θ) ≡ − αz / αx θ + Φ−1 (θ) and g (z) = 1 + αz /αx Φ−1 (1 − c) − αz / αx z.
For every z ∈ R, G(θ) is continuous in θ, with G(0, z) = −∞ and G(1, z) = ∞, which implies
that there necessarily exists a solution and any solution satisfies θ∗ (z) ∈ (0, 1). Next, note
that
αz
1
G0 (θ) = − √ +
αx φ(Φ−1 (θ))
√
√
√
and maxw∈R φ(w) = 1/ 2π. If αz / αx ≤ 2π we have that G is strictly increasing in θ,
√
√
which implies a unique solution to (39). If instead αz / αx > 2π, then G is non-monotonic
in θ and there is an interval (z, z) such that (39) admits multiple solutions θ∗ (z) whenever
z ∈ (z, z) and a unique solution otherwise. We conclude that monotone equilibrium is unique
√
√
if and only if αz / αx ≤ 2π. QED
Proof of Corollary 1. Consider the limits as σ x → 0 for given σ z , or σ z → ∞ for given
p
√
σ x . In either case, αz / αx → 0 and (αx + αz ) /αx → 1. Condition (39) then implies that
θ∗ (z) → θ̂ = 1 − c for any z, so that the regime-change threshold is unique and independent
of z. Similarly, x∗ (z) → x̂, where x̂ = θ̂ if we consider the limit σ x → 0, and x̂ = θ̂ +σx Φ−1 (θ̂)
if we instead consider the limit σ z → ∞. QED.
Proof of Propositions 3 and 4. See main text.
Proof of Proposition 4. Part (i). Consider an agent who receives a private signal x and
observes a price p. His optimal investment k solves
u01 (w − k) = E [ (f − p)u02 ((f − p)k) | x, p ] .

(40)

We assume that u1 (c) is quadratic and u2 (c) is linear, in which case (40) reduces to a simple
linear relation, ki = κ {E [f |x, p] − p} + λ, for some constants κ > 0, λ ∈ R. With out any
loss of generality, we normalize λ = 0. Finally, we let f = f (θ) = θ. That is, the return of
the asset depends only on the exogenous fundamental.
The analysis here is similar to that in the first example. The optimal individual demand
for the asset is
k = κ {E [ f | x, p ] − p} = κ {E [ θ | x, p ] − p} .
28

We conjecture
E [ θ | x, p ] = δx + (1 − δ)p
for some δ ∈ (0, 1) to be determined. It follows that k = k(x, p) = κδ(x − p) and therefore
K(θ, p) = κδ (θ − p) . In equilibrium, K = ε. Hence, the equilibrium price is
p = P (θ, ε) = θ −

1
ε.
κδ

By implication, p is a public signal about θ with precision κ2 δ 2 αε . That is, in this example
1
ε. It remains to pin down δ and the function Q.
Z(p) = p and v = − κδ
Note that αp is bounded above by κ2 αε and therefore we immediately have that uniqueness is ensured for αx high enough. To complete the analysis, note that
δ=

αx
αx
=
.
αx + αp
αx + αε δ 2 κ2

The above uniquely determines δ ∈ (0, 1) as an increasing function of αu and a decreasing
function of αε . To see this, let α = αx / (αε κ2 ) and rewrite the above as α = δ 3 /(1 − δ).
Obviously, this gives a monotonic relation between α and δ, with δ → 0 as α → 0 and δ → 1
as α → ∞. Using these results, we find
√
αp
κ2 δ 2 αε
δ2
= √
= (κ αε ) √
√
αx
αx
αx
p
√
= (κ αε ) δ (1 − δ).

The fact that δ (1 − δ) → 0 as either αx → 0 or αx → ∞ then implies that, given αε ,
√
√
we have that αp / αx < 2π and therefore the equilibrium in unique if and only if αx
is either suﬃciently small or suﬃciently high. On the other hand, for given αx , we have
δ (1 − δ) ≤ 1/4 necessarily and therefore αε < 8π/κ2 is suﬃcient for uniqueness, whereas αε
suﬃciently high is suﬃcient for multiplicity.
Part (ii). Let x∗ (p) denote the threshold agents use in stage 2 in deciding whether to
attack. In equilibrium,
µ ∗
¶
x (p) − θ
−1
,
A = A(θ, p) = Φ
σx
√
so that the asset return is f = αx [θ − x∗ (p)]. The demand for the asset is thus
√
√
k = κ {E [ f | x, p ] − p} = κ { αx E [ θ | x, p ] − p − αx x∗ (p)} .

29

Let

1
pe = √ p + x∗ (p)
αx

(41)

and note that, for every p, the above defines a unique pe. We can thus write the demand as
k=κ
e {E [ θ | x, p ] − pe}

√
where κ
e = κ αx . We now conjecture

E [ θ | x, p ] = δx + (1 − δ)e
p.

It follows that K = κ
eδ(θ − pe) and therefore

pe = θ −

1
ε.
κ
eδ

(42)

Hence, the observation of p is equivalent to the observation of pe, which is a public signal for
κ2 δ 2 αε . It follows that
θ with precision αp = e
where

E [ θ | x, p ] = E [ θ | x, pe ] = δx + (1 − δ)e
p,
δ=

αx
αx
=
.
αx + αp
αx + αε δ 2 κ
e2

√
This is the same as in the previous example, with κ
e replacing κ. Using κ
e = κ αx , we infer
δ=

1
,
1 + αε δ 2 κ2

so that δ is decreasing in αε but independent of αx . This means that αp is proportional to
αx , like in the benchmark model. Indeed, the critical ratio is now given by
αp
κ
e2 δ 2 αε ¡ 2 2 ¢ √
= κ δ αε αx ,
√ = √
αx
αx

(43)

and is increasing in both αε and αx .
The rest of the analysis is similar to the second example. In particular, the thresholds

30

θ∗ (p) and x∗ (p) are uniquely determined and are given by
µ

¶
√
αx
αp
−1
θ (p) = Φ √
Φ (1 − c/b) −
p ,
αx + αp
αx + αp
1
x∗ (p) = θ∗ (p) + √ Φ−1 (θ∗ (p)),
αx
∗

with αp as in (43). Next, combining (41) and (42), we infer that the equilibrium price solves
p=

√
√
1
αx θ − ε − αx x∗ (p).
κδ

√
√
If αp / αx < 2π, the above has a unique solution. If instead αp / αx > 2π, the above has
multiple solutions. QED
Proof of Corollary 4. Part (i). From conditions (31) and (32) we have that, for every y,
θ∗ (y) → 1 − c = θ̂ and x∗ (y) → θ̂ + σx Φ−1 (θ̂) = x̂ as σ ε → ∞. Condition (28) then implies
θ − σ x ε = x∗ (y) − σ x y → x̂ − σ x y and therefore the unique signal function in the limit is
Y (θ, ε) → (x̂ − θ)/σ x + ε.
Part (ii). First, note that y → −∞ and y → +∞ as σ x → 0. Next, note that both
2
|σ ε σ x − φ(y)| and |σ 2ε σ x − φ(y)| vanish. Since limy→−∞ φ(y)y = limy→+∞ φ(y)y = 0, the
latter implies σx y → 0 and σ x y → 0. Hence, z → Φ(−∞) = θ and z → Φ(+∞) = θ as
σ x → 0. Moreover, for every θ and ε, θ − σx ε → θ as σ x → 0. It follows that
£
¤
Pr θ − σ x ε ∈ (z, z) | θ ∈ (θ, θ) → 1 as σ x → 0.

Next, let Y (θ, ε) ≡ min Y(θ − σx ε) and Y (θ, ε) ≡ max Y(θ − σ x ε) and consider (θ, ε) such
that θ − σ x ε ∈ (z, z). Note that Y (θ, ε) < y < y < Y (θ, ε) and therefore
Y (θ, ε) → −∞ and Y (θ, ε) → +∞ as σ x → 0.
From (32), θ∗ (y) is independent of σ x , θ∗ (y) → Φ(−∞) = θ as y → −∞, and θ∗ (y) →
Φ(+∞) = θ as y → +∞. It follows that, as long as θ ∈ (θ, θ),
£
¢ ¤
¡
Pr [ θ ≤ θ∗ (Y (θ, ε)) ] → 0 and Pr θ ≤ θ∗ Y (θ, ε)
→ 1 as σ x → 0,

which establishes the result. QED

Proof of Propositions 6, 7 and 8. See main text.
Proof of Proposition 8.

For any µ ∈ (0, 1) and any x∗1 ∈ R, Γ(θ, x∗1 ) is continuous in
31

θ, with Γ(θ, x∗1 , µ) = −∞ and Γ(θ, x∗1 , µ) = ∞, where θ = θ (x∗1 , αx , µ) and θ = θ (x∗1 , αx , µ)
¢ª
©
¡√
µ
θ − Φ αx [x∗1 − θ] = 0 and = 1, and therefore satisfy 0 <
solves, respectively, θ + 1−µ
¡ ¢
θ < θ < 1. It follows that (38) always admits a solution θ∗ (z) ∈ θ, θ . That is, for any
¡ ¢
given x∗1 ∈ R, (38) defines at least one function θ∗ : R → θ, θ .
We next examine under what conditions the function that solves (38) is unique. Note
that
αz
∂Γ
= − √ + Λ (θ; x∗1 , αx , µ)
∂θ
αx
where
Λ (θ; x∗1 , αx , µ)

≡

1
√
µ
φ(Φ−1 (θ+ 1−µ
{θ−Φ( αx [x∗1 −θ])}))

½
1+

¾
√
√
µ
∗
[1 + αx φ ( αx [x1 − θ])]
1−µ

As θ → θ or θ (equivalently, z → ±∞), Λ (θ; x∗1 , αx , µ) → +∞. Let
K (x∗1 , αx , µ) ≡ inf Λ (θ; x∗1 , αx , µ)
θ∈R

√
and note that, since φ takes values in (0, 1/ 2π],
K

(x∗1 , αx , µ)

1
≥ √
1/ 2π

½
1+

√
¾
√
µ
2π
[1 + αx 0] =
.
1−µ
1−µ

³
³
¡ ¢
¢ª´´
©
¡√
µ
−1
∗
θ + 1−µ θ − Φ αx [x1 − θ]
∈ θ, θ be the solution to φ Φ
=
Moreover, letting θ̂ =
√
¢ª
©
¡√
µ
1/ 2π, or equivalently the solution to θ+ 1−µ θ − Φ αx [x∗1 − θ] = 1/2, and using again
√
the fact that the maximal value of φ is 1/ 2π, we have
θ̂ (x∗1 , αx , µ)

K

(x∗1 , αx , µ)

½
³
´
³√ h
i´i¾
√
µ h
1
∗
∗
1+
≤ Λ θ̂; x1 , αx , µ = √
αx x1 − θ̂
1 + αx φ
1−µ
1/ 2π
½
∙
√ ¸¾
√
αx
µ
2π 1 +
1+ √
≤
1−µ
2π

Combining, we conclude that, for all (x∗1 , αx , µ) ,
K (αx , µ) ≥ K (x∗1 , αx , µ) ≥ K (µ)
where

½
√
K (αx , µ) ≡ 2π 1 +

∙
√ ¸¾
αx
µ
1+ √
1−µ
2π

and

Note that, importantly, neither bound is a function of x∗1 .

32

√
2π
K (µ) ≡
.
1−µ

Case (i): √ααzx ≤ K (µ).
In this case, √ααzx ≤ K (µ) ≤ inf x∗1 K (x∗1 , αx , µ) and therefore Γ is strictly increasing in
¡ ¢
θ for all θ and all x∗1 . It follows that (38) defines a unique function θ∗ : R → θ, θ for any
given x∗1 . Moreover, since Γ is decreasing in x∗1 and g is decreasing in z, the function θ∗ is
decreasing in z and increasing in x∗1 . Finally, θ∗ is continuous in both z and x∗1 .
¡ ¢
Next, consider (37). For any given θ∗ : R → θ, θ , (37) admits a unique solution x∗1 ∈ R.
Moreover, this solution is continuous and increasing in θ∗ .
¡ ¢
Let C be the set of continuous (and bounded) functions θ∗ : R → θ, θ . Then, (38) is
a mapping R → C and (37) is a mapping C → R. Together, they define a continuous and
increasing mapping T : R → R.
It is easy to check that T (−∞) > −∞ and T (+∞) < ∞. Hence, a fixed point always
∗
∗∗
∗
be the
exists. Moreover, for arbitrary x∗1 and a > 0, let x∗∗
1 = x1 + a and let θ and θ
∗
∗∗
solutions to (38) for x1 and x1 , respectively. Then, (38) and (37) give
µ
¶
√
1 ∗
αz ∗
∗
−1
∗
−√ θ + Φ
= g
θ − Φ ( αx [x1 − θ ])
αx
1−µ
µ
¶
√
αz ∗∗
1 ∗∗
∗∗
−1
∗
−√ θ + Φ
θ − Φ ( αx [x1 + a − θ ])
= g
αx
1−µ

Z
Since √ααzx <
solves

Z

√
√
√
Φ ( αx [T x∗1 − θ∗ (z)]) α1 φ ( α1 [T x∗1 − z]) dz = 1 − c

√
√
√
∗∗
∗∗
Φ ( αx [T x∗∗
1 − θ (z)]) α1 φ ( α1 [T x1 − z]) dz = 1 − c

√
2π
,
1−µ

we clearly have θ∗∗ < θ̃ = θ∗ + a and, by implication, T x∗∗
1 < x̃1 , where x̃1

Z

√
√
√
Φ ( αx [x̃1 − θ∗ (z) − a]) α1 φ ( α1 [x̃1 − z]) dz = 1 − c

If x̃1 = T x∗1 +a (> T x∗1 ), the above would have been positive, so it must be that x̃1 < T x∗1 +a.
∗
Therefore, T x∗∗
1 < T x1 + a, which proves that the slope of the mapping T is less than one
for every x∗1 . It follows that T has a unique fixed point.
Case (ii): σ 2ε σ x < √12π (1 − µ − µσ 2ε ) , or equivalently √ααzx > K (µ).
In this case, √ααzx > K (µ) ≥ supx∗1 K (x∗1 , αx , µ) and therefore Γ necessarily has a nonempty region of non-monotonicity in θ for all x∗1 . It follows that, for any x∗1 , there is a nonempty interval Z = (z, z) = Z (x∗1 ) such that (38) admits three distinct solutions whenever
z ∈ Z and a unique one otherwise. Let θ∗L (θ∗H ) be the function defined by selecting the
lowest (highest) solution whenever z ∈ Z and the unique one whenever z ∈
/ Z. Let TL
33

(TH ) be the associated mappings. Each of the mappings TL and TH are continuous and
satisfy T (−∞) > −∞ and T (+∞) < ∞. Hence, there is a fixed point (at least one) for
each mapping. Moreover, for any given x∗1 , θ∗L (z) < θ∗H (z) for all z ∈ Z, which in turn
implies (because of the monotonicity in (37) and the fact that Z has positive measure) that
TL (x∗1 ) < TH (x∗1 ) for any x∗1 . It follows that the fixed point of TL is lower than the fixed
point of TH , which together with the fact that θ∗L < θ∗H for any given x∗1 implies that the
associated x∗2 and θ∗ satisfy the same ordering.

References
[1] Angeletos, George-Marios, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan (2003) “Coordination and Policy Traps,” MIT/UCLA/Northwestern working paper.
[2] Angeletos, George-Marios, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan (2004) “Information Dynamics and Equilibrium Multiplicity in Global Games of Regime Change,”
MIT/UCLA/Northwestern working paper.
[3] Atkeson, Andrew (2000), “Discussion on Morris and Shin,” NBER Macro Annual.
[4] Barlevy, Gadi, and Pietro Veronesi (2003), “Rational Panics and Stock Market Crashes,”
Journal of Economic Theory 110, 234-263.
[5] Calvo, G. (1988), “Servicing the Public Debt: the Role of Expectations.” American
Economic Review, 78(4), 647-661.
[6] Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme (1993), “Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,” Econometrica 61, 5, 989-1018.
[7] Chari, V.V., and Patrick Kehoe (2003), “Hot Money,” Journal of Political Economy
111, 1262-1292.
[8] Cole, Harold, and Timothy Kehoe (1996), “Self-fulfilling Debt Crises,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis staﬀ report 211.
[9] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Bernardo Guimaraes, and Nouriel Roubini, (2004), “International
Lending of Last Resort and Moral Hazard: A Model of IMF’s Catalytic Finance,”
working paper, University of Rome.
34

[10] Dasgupta, Amil (2002), “Coordination, Learning and Delay,” working paper, London
School of Economics.
[11] Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-19.
[12] Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner (2000), “Demand Deposit Contracts and the Probability of bank Runs,” working paper, Duke University and Tel Aviv University.
[13] Green, Jerry “Information, Eﬃciency and Equilibrium,” Harvard Institute of Economic
Research Discussion Paper No. 284, Harvard University.
[14] Grossman, Sanford (1977), “The Existence of Futures Markets, Noisy Rational Expectations and Informational Externalities,” Review of Economic Studies 44, 431-449.
[15] Grossman, Sanford (1981) “An Introduction to the Theory of Rational Expectations
under Asymmetric Information,” Review of Economic Studies, 48, 541-559.
[16] Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), “On the Impossibility of Informationally
Eﬃcient Markets,” American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
[17] Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz (1976), “Information and Competitive Price
Systems,” American Economic Review 66, 246-253.
[18] Hellwig, Martin (1980) “On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets”
Journal of Economic Theory, 22, 477-498.
[19] Hellwig, Christian (2002), “Public Information, Private Information, and the Multiplicity of Equilibria in Coordination Games,” Journal of Economic Theory, 107, 191-222.
[20] Hellwig, Christian, Arijit Mukherji, and Alej Tsyvinski (2004), “Coordination Failures
and Asset Prices,” working paper, UCLA.
[21] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (1998), “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of SelfFulfilling Currency Attacks”, American Economic Review, 88, 3, 587-597.
[22] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (1999), “Private versus Public Information in
Coordination Problems”, Yale/Oxford mimeo.
[23] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2000), “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomics,” NBER Macro Annual.

35

[24] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2001), “Global Games - Theory and Applications,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 8th World Congress of the Econometric Society (M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen, and S. Turnovsky, eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[25] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2003), “Coordination Risk and the Price of
Debt,” forthcoming in European Economic Review.
[26] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2004), “Liquidity Black Holes,” forthcoming in
Review of Finance.
[27] Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises”,
American Economic Review 76, 1, 72-81.
[28] Obstfeld, Maurice (1996), “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features,”
European Economic Review 40, 3-5, 1037-47.
[29] Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Xavier Vives (2004), “Coordination Failures and the Lender
of Last Resort: Was Bagehot Right After All?,” working paper, University of Toulouse.
[30] Velasco, Andres (1996), “Fixed Exchange Rates: Credibility, Flexibility and Multiplicity,” European Economic Review 40, 3-5, 1023-36.

36

