                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE MACROECONOMICS OF SUBSISTENCE POINTS

                                            Morten O. Ravn
                                        Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
                                             Martin Uribe

                                          Working Paper 11012
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11012


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by Morten O. Ravn, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
PIPE Dreams? The Performance of Companies Issuing Equity Privately
Morten O. Ravn, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 11012
December 2004
JEL No. D10, D12, D42, E30

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper explores the macroeconomic consequences of preferences displaying a subsistence point.

It departs from the existing related literature by assuming that subsistence points are specific to each

variety of goods rather than to the composite consumption good. We show that this simple feature

makes the price elasticity of demand for individual goods procyclical. As a result, markups behave

countercyclically in equilibrium. This implication is in line with the available empirical evidence.

Morten O. Ravn
European University Institute
morten.ravn@iue.it

Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe
Department of Economics
Duke University
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
grohe@duke.edu

Martin Uribe
Department of Economics
Duke University
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
uribe@duke.edu
1       Introduction
There is a long literature in microeconomics, going back to the seminal work of Stone (1950)
and Geary (1954), studying the role of non-homothetic preferences for the specification of
demand functions. The existence of subsistence points also has macroeconomic implica-
tions. In particular, subsistence points affect the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
of consumption and therefore aggregate savings. For this reason, in macroeconomic theory
Stone-Geary preferences have been studied mostly for understanding the process of economic
development and transitional dynamics (for recent studies, see Matsuyama 2002; and Ste-
ger, 2000). Comparatively little work has been devoted to exploring the consequences of
Stone-Geary preferences for business-cycle fluctuations.
   The contribution of this paper is to show that Stone-Geary preferences can have im-
portant consequences for the propagation of aggregate shocks. The novel element of our
analysis is to introduce subsistence points at the level of individual varieties of goods, as
opposed to at the level of aggregate consumption goods. We embed the assumption of good-
specific subsistence points into an economy with imperfectly competitive product markets
a la Dixit-Stiglitz.1 Modeling subsistence points in consumption of individual goods vari-
eties implies that the demand for individual varieties features a time-varying price elasticity.
Specifically, the price elasticity of demand is procyclical. We assume that goods are supplied
by monopolistically competitive firms. In setting prices, producers of individual varieties
take into account the procyclicality of the price-elasticity of demand and as a result charge
countercyclical markups.
    The intuition behind the countercyclicality of markups in a model with good-specific sub-
sistence points is straightforward. Under the standard Dixit-Stiglitz aggregation assumption,
the demand for individual varieties is of the form qit = p−η
                                                          it qt , where qit denotes the demand
for good i, pit denotes the (relative) price of good i, and qt is a measure of aggregate de-
mand. This formulation of demand obtains either in the absence of subsistence points or
when subsistence points are modeled at the level of aggregate consumption. The above de-
mand function features a constant price elasticity equal to η. As a result, monopolistically
competitive producers charge a constant markup of prices over marginal costs. When subsis-
tence points are good specific, the demand function for good i becomes qit = p−η         ∗    ∗
                                                                                it (qt −q )+qi .
Here, qi∗ denotes the subsistence level of consumption of good i, and q ∗ is a constant. This
demand function is the sum of an isoelastic term, p−η         ∗
                                                    it (qt − q ), with price elasticity η, and a
    1
    Atkeson and Ogaki (1996) also allow for goods specific subsistence points but concentrate on the impli-
cations of this assumption for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In particular, these authors do
not consider the supply-side ramifications of good-specific subsistence points, which are at the center of our
analysis.



                                                      1
price inelastic term, qi∗ . Thus, the price elasticity of demand is a weighted average of η and
0. The weight on the price-elastic term is determined by the importance of the price-elastic
component of demand in total demand. It follows that an expansion in aggregate demand
(i.e., an increase in qt ), is associated with a rise in the price elasticity of demand. Because
markups are inversely related to the price elasticity, implies that Stone-Geary preferences at
the level of individual goods give rise to a theory of countercyclical markups. The counter-
cyclical behavior of markups is in line with the available empirical evidence. For a survey of
this evidence, see Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999.
    Countercyclical markups are potentially important for understanding the propagation
of aggregate shocks. In particular, countercyclical movements in markups have important
consequences for the way in which the economy is affected by aggregate demand shocks. To
see this, note that the reciprocal of the markup acts as a shifter of the aggregate labor demand
schedule. Hence, models with countercyclical markups have the potential to account for the
empirical facts that wages and consumption rise in response to positive demand shocks. In
this respect, the model with good-specific Stone-Geary preferences brings data and theory a
step closer.
    One may question the relevance of studying the role of subsistence points for the prop-
agation of business cycles in developed countries on the grounds that as an economy grows,
the relative importance of subsistence absorption in aggregate demand may be expected to
vanish. This view is correct if subsistence points are understood in a narrow sense. That
is, as referring to the minimum amount of food, clothing, and shelter necessary to sustain
life. However, a broader interpretation of necessities would include those dictated by social
norms. A luxury in a poor society, such as tab water, inside plumbing, and health care are
considered necessities in developed countries. Thus, it is conceivable that subsistence points
might be appropriately modeled as an increasing function of long-run measures of output. In
this case, non-homotheticities in preferences may remain relevant for understanding business
cycle fluctuations even for economies traveling along a stable development path.
   The remainder of the paper is organized in 3 sections. Section 2 presents the model.
Section 3 discusses the business-cycle implications of the model. Section 4 concludes.


2    The Model
The basic structure of the model is the standard real-business-cycle model augmented with a
monopolistically competitive structure of product markets a la Dixit-Stiglitz. The innovation
of the model is to assume the existence of subsistence consumption at the level of individual
varieties as opposed to at the level of the composite good and the combination of this aspect

                                               2
with monopolitic competition.


2.1    Households
Consider an economy populated by a continuum of identical households with preferences
described by the utility function

                                                     X
                                                     ∞
                                             E0                β t U (xct − vt , ht ),               (1)
                                                         t=0


where xct denotes consumption of a composite good, ht denotes labor effort, and vt denotes
an exogenous and stochastic preference shock following a univariate autoregressive process
of the form
                                                         vt = ρv vt−1 + vt ,

with ρv ∈ [0, 1) and vt distributed i.i.d. with mean zero and standard deviation σv . This
shock is meant to capture innovations to the level of private non-business absorption.
   The composite consumption good xct is composed of a continuum of differentiated goods
indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Specifically, xct is assumed to be given by
                                            Z       1                              1/(1−1/η)
                                  xct   =                (cit −   c∗i )1−1/η   di                ,   (2)
                                                 0


where c∗i denotes the subsistence level of consumption of good i. The demands for individual
varieties are the solution to the dual problem of minimizing consumption expenditure, given
    R1
by 0 Pit cit di, where Pit denotes the nominal price of good i, subject to the aggregation
constraint (2) given xct . The resulting demand for any variety i is of the form
                                                                     −η
                                                                Pit
                                             cit =                          xct + c∗i ,              (3)
                                                                Pt
              hR              i 1−η
                                 1
                 1
where Pt ≡      0
                  Pit1−η di  , is a nominal price index. The presence of a good-specific
subsistence point alters the demand function implied by the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator in a
fundamental way. For in the presence of good-specific subsistence points, the price elasticity
of demand is no longer constant. Now the demand function is the sum of an isoelastic term,
(Pit /Pt )−η xct , and a price inelastic term, c∗i . The price elasticity of demand is therefore a
weighted average of the elasticity of the isoelastic term, η, and the elasticity of the inelastic
term, 0. Thus, the price elasticity of demand is no larger than η. This implies that the pres-
ence of good-specific subsistence points increases the market power of the monopolistically

                                                                      3
competitive producers of good i. More importantly, the price elasticity of demand is time
varying and increasing in aggregate demand. This is because the weight on the isoelastic
component increases with xct , which is a measure of aggregate demand. In other words, in
expansions subsistence points affect aggregate demand relatively less than in recessions. The
procyclicality of the price elasticity of demand is the basic element driving the result that in
equilibrium markups are countercyclical.
   Households are assumed to own physical capital. The capital stock held by the household,
denoted kt , is assumed to evolve over time according to the following law of motion

                                         kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + xit ,                                (4)

where xit denotes investment in period t. Investment is a composite good produced using a
continuum of differentiated goods via the following technology:
                                        Z       1                              1/(1−1/η)
                              xit   =                (iit −   i∗i )1−1/η   di                .   (5)
                                             0


Here, i∗ > 0 denotes a minimum level of good-specific investment required to produce new
capital goods. We introduce this feature to maintain symmetry across the various com-
ponents of aggregate absorption. In this way, we isolate the effects of good specific price-
inelastic demands on the dynamic behavior of markups. Assuming alternatively that i∗ = 0
implies that shocks to the economy not only changes the price elasticity of consumption
demand but also the weight of the components of aggregate demand that are subject to
time-varying price elasticity. Here we choose to focus of the former of these effects, ie.
i∗ > 0.
   For any given levels of xit , purchases of each variety i ∈ [0, 1] in period t must solve
                                                                      R1
the dual problems of minimizing total investment expenditure, 0 Pit iit di, subject to the
aggregation constraint (5). The optimal level of iit for i ∈ [0, 1] is then given by
                                                                −η
                                                           Pit
                                         iit =                         xit + i∗i .               (6)
                                                           Pt
                                     R1
At the optimum, we have that Pt xit = 0 Pit (iit − i∗i )di.
   At the beginning of each period t ≥ 0, households rent their stock of capital to firms at
the rate ut . Households are assumed to have access to complete contingent claims markets.
Let rt,t+j denote the stochastic discount factor such that Et rt,t+j zt+j is the period-t price of
a random payment zt+j in period t + j. In addition, households are assumed to be entitled
to the receipt of pure profits from the ownership of firms, Φt . Then, the representative


                                                                 4
household’s period-by-period budget constraint can be written as

                      xct + xit + ψt + Et rt,t+1 dt+1 = dt + wt ht + Φt + ut kt ,                  (7)
            R1
where ψt ≡ 0 Pit /Pt (c∗i + i∗i )di. The variable wt denotes the real wage rate. In addition,
households are assumed to be subject to a borrowing constraint that prevents them from
engaging in Ponzi games. The household’s problem can then be stated as consisting of
choosing processes xct , ht , xit , dt+1 , and kt , so as to maximize the lifetime utility function (1)
subject to (4), (7), and a borrowing constraint that prevents it from engaging in Ponzi-type
schemes, given processes vt , ωt , wt , rt,t+1 , ut , and Φt . The optimality conditions associated
with this problem are (4), (7), a transversality condition, and

                                                  Uh (xct − vt , ht )
                                          −                           = wt
                                                  Ux (xct − vt , ht )

                    Ux (xct − vt , ht ) = βEt Ux (xct+1 − vt+1 , ht+1 )[1 − δ + ut+1 ]

                          Ux (xct − vt , ht )rt,t+1 = βUx (xct+1 − vt+1 , ht+1 )

The above 3 optimality conditions are identical to those arising from the standard neoclassical
model. Note, however, that the presence of subsistence points also affects the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption as well as the intratemporal elasticity of substitution
between consumption and leisure. These effects are the same in our model as in models that
assume subsistence points at the level of aggregate consumption.


2.2     The Government
Each period t ≥ 0, nominal government spending is given by Pt gt . We assume that real
government expenditures, denoted by gt , are exogenous, stochastic, and follow a univariate
first-order autoregressive process of the form

                                     ln(gt /ḡ) = ρg ln(gt−1 /ḡ) + gt ,

where the innovation gt is assumed to be distributed as an i.i.d. process with mean zero
and standard deviation σg . The government allocates spending over individual varieties of
goods, git , so as to maximize the quantity of a composite good produced with differentiated
varieties of goods according to the relationship
                                         Z       1                            1/(1−1/η)
                               xgt   =                (git −   gi∗ )1−1/η di                .
                                              0


                                                                5
The parameters gi∗ denote good-specific levels of subsistence consumption of public goods. As
in the case of investment demand, good-specific subsistence levels of government consumption
is introduce to preserve symmetry in the specification of aggregate demand. Later, we will
also consider the case gi∗ = 0 for all i. The government’s problem consists in choosing git ,
                                                                    R1
i ∈ [0, 1], so as to maximize xgt subject to the budget constraint 0 Pit git ≤ Pt gt . The
resulting government demand for each differentiated goods i ∈ [0, 1] is
                                                       −η
                                                  Pit
                                      git =                         xgt + gi∗ ,             (8)
                                                  Pt

where                                                   Z       1
                                                                    Pit ∗
                                      xgt   = gt −                     g di.
                                                            0       Pt i
Public spending is assumed to be fully financed by lump-sum taxation.


2.3     Firms
Each good i ∈ [0, 1] is manufactured by a monopolist using labor and capital as inputs via
the following production technology:

                                      yit = At F (kit , hit ) − φ,                          (9)

where yit denotes output of good i, kit and hit denote services of capital and labor, and φ
denotes fixed costs of production. While we assume that F is homogeneous of degree one, the
presence of fixed costs introduces increasing returns to scale in the production technology.
We include fixed costs to ensure that profits are relatively small on average as is the case for
the U.S. economy in spite of equilibrium markups of price over marginal cost significantly
above zero. The variable At denotes an aggregate technology shock. We assume that the
logarithm of At follows a first-order autoregressive process

                                      ln At = ρa ln At−1 + at ,                           (10)

where at is a white noise disturbance with standard deviation σa .
   Firms are price setters. In exchange, they must stand ready to satisfy demand at the
announced prices. Formally, firm i must satisfy

                                At F (kit , hit ) − φ ≥ cit + iit + git ,                  (11)

where cit , iit , and git are given by equations (3), (6), and (8), respectively.

                                                        6
   Firm i’s problem consists of choosing processes pit ≡ Pit /Pt , cit , git , iit , hit , and kit , so as
to maximize the present discounted value of profits, which is given by

                                X
                                ∞
                           E0         r0,t [pit (cit + iit + git ) − wt hit − ut kit ] ,              (12)
                                t=0


subject to (3), (6), (8), and (11), given processes r0,t , wt , ut , At , xct , xgt , and xit . Letting
xt = xct +xgt +xit , x∗i = c∗i +cgi +cii , and mcit denote the Lagrange multiplier on constraint (11),
the first-order conditions associated with the firm’s problem are equations (3), (6), (8), (11),
and
                                                   wt
                                      mcit =
                                             At Fh (kit , hit )
                                                    ut
                                      mcit =
                                             At Fk (kit , hit )
                                                               −1
                                  pit                1
                                      = 1−
                                 mcit         η(1 − x∗i /yit )
The first two of these optimality conditions simply state that the marginal cost of producing
good i equals the factor price divided by its marginal product.
   The third optimality condition contains the essence for why the model with good-specific
subsistence points provides a theory of countercyclical markups. It relates the markup of
prices over marginal costs, pit /mcit , to the price elasticity of demand, η(1 − x∗i /yit ). In the
absence of subsistence points, x∗i = 0, the price elasticity of demand is constant and equal
to η. As a result, in this case the markup is also time invariant and equal to η/(η − 1). In
the economy with subsistence points, x∗i > 0, the price elasticity is increasing in sales, yit ,
and therefore the markup is decreasing in this variable.2


2.4     Symmetric Equilibrium
For simplicity we assume that the level of subsistence of each component of absorption is
invariant across varieties. That is, c∗i = c∗ , gi∗ = g ∗ , and i∗i = i∗ , for all varieties i ∈ [0, 1]. As
in much of the related literature, we restrict attention to symmetric equilibria in which all
firms charge the same price. It follows that in equilibrium the relative price of each variety,
pit , equals unity. It also follows that we can drop the subscript i from all variables. Moreover,
in equilibrium xct = ct − c∗ , xit = it − i∗ , and xgt = gt − g ∗ . A stationary symmetric equilibrium
is then given by stationary stochastic processes kt+1 , ht , wt , ut , yt , ct , it , and µt satisfying
equations (13)-(19) given in the appendix, given the stochastic processes describing vt , At ,
   2
     Had we assumed the absence of subsistence points in investment or in government spending, the com-
position of aggregate demand would enter this expression.

                                                         7
gt , and the initial condition k0 .


3       The Cyclical Behavior of Markups
From the optimality conditions of the firm, it is straightforward to see that the equilibrium
markup, which we denote by µt , is given by
                                                                  −1
                                                       1
                                       µt = 1 −                          .
                                                  η(1 − x∗ /yt )

Clearly, because the subsistence level of absorption, x∗ , is necessarily less than total ab-
sorption, yt , it follows immediately that for a given value of η, the equilibrium markup is
larger than the markup that would obtain in the absence of subsistence absorption, given by
η/(η − 1).3 Furthermore, it is clear that, given x∗ , the larger is the level of aggregate activity,
yt , the smaller is the markup. In other words, the markup is countercyclical. Intuitively, this
effect is brought about by the fact that an increase in aggregate demand makes subsistence
points less important and therefore increases the price elasticity faced by producers. The
issue is then how important this effect is. Letting µt denote the elasticity of the equilibrium
markup with respect to aggregate demand, we have that

                                                      x∗ /yt
                             µt = −                                      < 0.
                                       (1 − x∗ /yt ) [η(1 − x∗ /yt ) − 1]

Under the maintained assumption that the price elasticity of demand exceeds unity, the
output elasticity of the markup is negative. Table 1 illustrates how the size of the markup
and the elasticity of the markup change as the share of subsistence absorption in total output
increases from 0 to 0.8. In the table we assume that η takes a value of 6. The table shows
that for low values of the markup the income elasticity of the markup is quite small. For
example, in the extreme case when subsistence demand accounts for 50 percent of total
absorption, the equilibrium markup is 50 percent, a high value given the available empirical
evidence. Nevertheless, the output elasticity of the markup is only 0.5, which means that
a 1 percent increase in output lowers the markup by less than 1 percentage point, from 50
to 49.25 percent. Thus, it appears that although this model has the potential of generating
countercyclical markups, the elasticity of the markup to output is moderate for realistic
values of the steady-state markup.
    3
     For the individual firm’s problem to be well defined, it must be the case that the price elasticity is
greater than one, that is, it must be the case that η(1 − x∗ /yt ) > 1. In what follows we will assume that
this condition is satisfied.



                                                     8
Table 1: The Markup and the Output Elasticity of the Markup as Functions of the Share of
Subsistence Absorption

                                      x∗ /yt   µt     µt
                                      0        1.2    0
                                      0.1      1.23   -0.03
                                      0.2      1.26   -0.07
                                      0.3      1.31   -0.13
                                      0.4      1.38   -0.26
                                      0.5      1.5    -0.5
                                      0.6      1.71   -1.07
                                      0.7      2.25   -2.91
                                      0.8      6.0    -20.0

      Note: x∗ denotes subsistence absorption, yt denotes aggregate demand, µt denotes
      the gross markup, and µt denotes the elasticity of the markup with respect to
      aggregate demand. The parameter η is assumed to be 6.


   Figure 1 displays impulse responses to preference, government spending, and productivity
shocks. The calibration of the model follows Ravn, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2004). We
set the share of subsistence absorption in total absorption to 30 percent (x∗ /y = 0.3). In
this case the average markup equals 37 percent. Table 2 displays the values assigned to the
remaining deep structural parameters of the benchmark economy. This economy is shown
with solid lines in the figure. For comparison, we include with broken lines, the response of
an economy without subsistence absorption (x∗ /y = 0).
  The model economy without subsistence absorption exhibits no movements in markups.
We note that in an economy with subsistence points at the level of aggregate absorption
(as opposed to at the level of each variety of goods) markups are also constant along the
business cycle. This is because in this case the demand functions faced by the monopolistic
producers of each variety are price isoelastic.
   By contrast, in the economy with good-specific subsistence points the markup responds
countercyclically to all 3 shocks. However, quantitatively the predicted markup movements
are small. In particular, the decline in markups in response to demand shocks is not strong
enough to overturn the negative response of wages. The reason why wages decline less in the
model with good-specific subsistence points than in the model without this feature is that
changes in the markup affect the aggregate labor demand curve. Specifically, the demand
for labor takes the form wt = At Fh (kt , ht )/µt . So a decline in the markup shifts the demand
schedule out. Thus, when the markup is countercyclical its effect on the demand for labor


                                                9
  Figure 1: Impulse Responses to Positive Preference, Government Spending, and Productivity
  Shocks
              Markup                     Output                          Wage                       Consumption
 0.01                          0.4                         0                               1

   0                           0.3

−0.01                          0.2                      −0.05                             0.5

−0.02                          0.1
−0.03                           0                        −0.1                              0
        0        10      20          0    10       20           0          10      20           0        10       20
            −3
        x 10 Markup                      Output                           Wage                      Consumption
  10                          0.06                              0                          0

   5                                                    −0.005
                              0.04                                                      −0.01
                                                         −0.01
   0
                              0.02                                                      −0.02
                                                        −0.015
  −5
                                0                        −0.02                          −0.03
        0        10      20          0    10       20               0      10      20           0        10       20

              Markup                     Output                          Wage                       Consumption
   0                            2                         1.5                             0.4

                               1.5                                                       0.35
 −0.1                                                      1
                                1                                                         0.3
 −0.2                                                     0.5
                               0.5                                                       0.25
 −0.3                           0                          0                              0.2
        0        10      20          0    10       20           0          10      20           0        10       20
                                               ∗                                                     ∗
                Subsistence Point Model (x /y = 0.3)                    No Subsistence Point (x /y = 0)

            Row 1: Preference Shock. Row 2: Government Spending Shock. Row 3: Tech-
            nology shock. Impulse responses are measured in percent deviations from steady
            state. Horizontal axes display the number of quarters after the shock.




                                                   10
                                       Table 2: Calibration

           Symbol          Value   Description
                β         0.9902   Subjective discount factor
                σ              2   Inverse of intertemporal elasticity of substitution
                c∗         0.064   subsistence level of consumption
                g∗         0.011   subsistence level of public consumption
                i∗         0.016   subsistence level of investment
                α           0.25   capital elasticity of output
                δ           0.01   Quarterly depreciation rate
                η            5.3   Elasticity of substitution across varieties
               hw           1.3   Frisch elasticity of labor supply
                h            0.2   Steady-State fraction of time devoted to work
                ḡ        0.0367   Steady-state level of government purchases
                φ         0.1129   Fixed cost
           ρv , ρg , ρa      0.9   Persistence of exogenous shocks


is similar to the effect of positive productivity shocks. Rotemberg and Woodford (1992)
show that in U.S. postwar data wages increase in response to demand shocks in the form of
innovations in public consumption. They use this feature of the data to judge the empirical
plausibility of various models of the business cycle.
   In the model without good-specific subsistence points, an increase in government pur-
chases is associated with a decline in private consumption. This effect is a consequence of
a negative wealth effect caused by the increase in unproductive government spending. In
the economy with good-specific subsistence points, consumption also falls in response to the
increase in public absorption, but by less than in the economy with homothetic preferences.
The reason is that in the economy with good-specific absorption the decline in markups
leads to a smaller fall in wages which causes a substitution effect toward consumption and
away from leisure. This substitution effect is not sufficiently strong to offset the negative
wealth effect. As a result, consumption falls. This prediction of the model brings theory
and data a step closer. For available evidence suggests that positive government purchases
shocks are associated with expansions in private consumption (see, e.g., Galı́ et al., 2003;
and Blanchard and Perotti, 2002).


4    Conclusion
This paper demonstrates that the simple introduction of subsistence points at the level of
individual goods in the context of an otherwise quite standard dynamic general equilibrium


                                                 11
model gives rise to a theory countercyclical markups. The resulting theory contributes to
understanding two important aspects of the data, namely, the cyclical behavior of real wages
and private consumption in response to government spending shocks. In effect, the standard
neoclassical model implies a strong negative correlation between wages and aggregate spend-
ing, originating in negative wealth effects associated with unproductive public spending. The
countercyclicality of markups induces expansions in the demand for labor during booms and
the reverse during contractions, thereby reducing the tendency for wages and government
spending to move in opposite directions.
   While the model with Stone-Geary preferences at the level of individual varieties repre-
sents a step in the right direction, it leaves much ground to be covered. In particular, like
other theories of endogenous markups, the good-specific subsistence point model faces a steep
tradeoff between the level of the markup and the elasticity of the markup with respect to
output. The higher the markup, the higher the output elasticity of the markup. For realistic
markup levels the subsistence point model implies a relatively small elasticity, which limits
the model’s ability to explain the observed wage and consumption dynamics in response to
demand shocks. Alleviating the level-elasticity tradeoff of markups is an important challenge
for future research.




                                             12
Appendix
Stationary Competitive Equilibrium: A stationary symmetric equilibrium is a set of
stationary stochastic processes kt+1 , ht , wt , ut , yt , ct , it , and µt satisfying

                                        Uh (ct − c∗ − vt , ht )
                                    −                           = wt                        (13)
                                        Ux (ct − c∗ − vt , ht )

               Ux (ct − c∗ − vt , ht ) = βEt Ux (ct+1 − c∗ − vt+1 , ht+1 )[1 − δ + ut+1 ]   (14)

                                   At F (kt , ht ) − φ = ct + it + gt                       (15)

                                     kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + it − i∗                             (16)
                                         Fh (kt , ht )   wt
                                                       =                                    (17)
                                         Fk (kt , ht )   ut
                                                             −1
                                                       1
                                    µt = 1 −                                                (18)
                                               η(1 − x∗ /yt )
                                           yt = ct + gt + it                                (19)

given stochastic processes vt , At , gt , and the initial condition k0 .




                                                   13
References
Atkeson, Andrew, and Masao Ogaki, “Wealth-Varying Intertemporal Elasticities of Substi-
   tution: Evidence from Panel and Aggregate Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 38,
   1996, 507-34.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti, “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
   Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 117, 2002, 1329-68.
Galı́, Jordi, David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the Effects of Govern-
   ment Spending on Consumption,” manuscript, CREI, September 2003.
Geary, R., “A Note on a Constant Utility Index of the Cost of Living,” Review of Economic
   Studies 18, 1950, 55-56.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, “The Rise of Mass Consumption Societies,” Journal of Political
   Economy 110, October 2002, 1035-1070.
Ravn, Morten, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martı́n Uribe, “Deep Habits,” manuscript,
   Duke University, October 27, 2004.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Ag-
   gregate Demand on Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy 100, December
   1992, 1153-1207.
Steger, Thomas, “Economic growth with subsistence consumption,” Journal of Development
   Economics 62, August 2000, 343-361.
Stone, J., “Linear Expenditure Systems and Demand Analysis: An Applicaiton to the Pat-
   tern of British Demand,” Economic Journal 64, 1954, 511-527.




                                            14
