NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PLACE OF WORK AND PLACE OF RESIDENCE:
INFORMAL HIRING NETWORKS AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Patrick Bayer
Stephen Ross
Giorgio Topa
Working Paper 11019
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11019

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

The authors are grateful for helpful suggestions and comments from Joe Altonji, Pat Bajari, Ed Glaeser,
Kevin Lang, Rob McMillan, David Neumark, Stuart Rosenthal, Wilbert van der Klaauw, Ken Wolpin,
the editor and two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at AEA, Boston College, Brown,
Columbia, Cornell, Econometric Society, Miami, NY Fed, NYU, Southern Methodist, Stanford and
Yale. Shihe Fu, Anupam Nanda and Chris Huckfeldt have provided excellent research assistance.
The authors are grateful to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University
of Connecticut for financial support. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were
Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center
(BRDC). Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential
data are revealed. The views and opinions offered in this paper do not necessarily reflect the position
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, any other agency of the U.S. Government, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2005 by Patrick Bayer, Stephen Ross, and Giorgio Topa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes
Patrick Bayer, Stephen Ross, and Giorgio Topa
NBER Working Paper No. 11019
January 2005, Revised April 2008
JEL No. J41,R14
ABSTRACT
We use a novel research design to empirically detect the effect of social interactions among neighbors
on labor market outcomes. Specifically, using Census data that characterize residential and employment
locations down to the city block, we examine whether individuals residing in the same block are more
likely to work together than those in nearby blocks. We find evidence of significant social interactions
operating at the block level: residing on the same versus nearby blocks increases the probability of
working together by over 33 percent. The results also indicate that this referral effect is stronger when
individuals are similar in socio-demographic characteristics (e.g., both have children of similar ages)
and when at least one individual is well attached to the labor market. These findings are robust across
various specifications intended to address concerns related to sorting and reverse causation. Further,
having determined the characteristics of a pair of individuals that lead to an especially strong referral
effect, we provide evidence that the increased availability of neighborhood referrals has a significant
impact on a wide range of labor market outcomes including labor force participation, hours and earnings.

Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Stephen Ross
University of Connecticut
stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
Giorgio Topa
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Domestic Research Function
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
giorgio.topa@ny.frb.org

1

INTRODUCTION
The relevance of social networks and local interactions for economic outcomes has been

increasingly recognized by economists in a variety of contexts.1 An important strand of this
literature has focused on the detection and measurement of social interactions that operate at the
level of the residential neighborhood.2 The proper identification of such neighborhood effects is
complicated, however, by the non-random sorting of households into neighborhoods and the
likely presence of unobserved individual and neighborhood attributes.3 The resulting correlation
in unobservables among neighbors can lead to serious bias in the estimation of social effects in
the absence of a research design capable of distinguishing social interactions from these
alternative explanations.
In this paper, we propose a new empirical strategy for identifying neighborhood effects
that is based on isolating block-level variation in the characteristics of neighbors within narrowlydefined neighborhood reference groups. 4 In particular, using Census data that detail the city block
on which each individual in the Boston metropolitan area resides, we compare outcomes for
neighbors that reside on the same versus nearby blocks. The key identifying assumption
underlying this design (which is testable on observable attributes) is that there is no block-level
correlation in unobserved attributes among block residents, after taking into account the broader
neighborhood reference group.
We use this approach to study the impact of neighborhood referrals on labor market
outcomes. Rather than focusing on more general forms of neighborhood effects, we exploit the
fact that our restricted Census dataset characterizes the precise location of both an individual’s
place of residence and place of work to study the propensity of neighbors to work together.
Specifically, we examine the propensity of a pair of individuals to work in the same location,
comparing such propensities for pairs of individuals that reside on the same versus nearby blocks.
1

Some recent examples include crime (Glaeser et al. (1996), Bayer et. al. (2008)); welfare program
participation (Bertrand et al. (2000)); the adoption of new technologies (Conley and Udry (2005), Bandiera
and Rasul (2006), Burke et al. (2007)); peer effects in education (Hoxby (2000), Sacerdote (2001),
Zimmerman (2003), Zax and Rees (2002)); knowledge spillovers and economies of agglomeration (Jaffe et
al. (1993), Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Glaeser et al. (1992)). For a more extensive review of the
literature, both theoretical and empirical, see Brock and Durlauf (2001).
2
Case and Katz (1991) explore the role of neighborhood effects on several behavioral outcomes using a
spatially auto-regressive model. Crane (1991) also looks at neighborhood influences on social pathologies,
focusing on non-linearities and threshold effects. See Durlauf (2004) for a recent review of the literature
and Jencks and Mayer (1990) for a survey of the older literature on neighborhood effects.
3
See Manski (1993) and Moffitt (2001) for a general discussion of the identification of social interactions
in the presence of correlated unobservables.
4
As we explain below, we consider two different definitions of a reference group of nearby blocks, the
Census block group and the ten nearest blocks. The Census block group is a geographic area defined by the
Census Bureau that represents the next level of geographic aggregation from an individual city block.

1

We take the propensity to work in the same location as an indication that one member of the pair
provided a referral (or more generally information) to the other member about jobs available in
her place of work.
Our results indicate the existence of significant social interactions at the block level;
based on our most conservative estimates, residing on the same versus nearby blocks increases
the probability of working together by over 33 percent. As a consequence, individuals are about
6.9 percentage points more likely to work with at least one person from their block of residence
than they would be in the absence of referrals. This result is robust across various specifications
intended to address the possibility of sorting into specific blocks within neighborhoods and
reverse causation (i.e., the idea that referrals may flow in the opposite direction, from friends and
acquaintances in the workplace to residential opportunities).
Our identification strategy relies crucially on the absence of correlation in unobserved
traits at the block level within a neighborhood reference group. We conduct a number of exercises
that suggest that bias arising from sorting within these reference groups is minimal. First, we
examine mobility rates at the block level and find that the housing market is quite thin at low
levels of geography. Maybe most convincingly, we examine the degree to which the observed
block-level sorting on these attributes would alter the likelihood that individuals on the same
versus nearby blocks work together. Remarkably, we find that block-level sorting on observables
would actually predict a slight reduction in the propensity to work together, suggesting that
sorting at this level does not appear to be directly related to employment outcomes. Finally, we
show that our findings are robust to the inclusion of individual fixed effects. This specification
controls for a form of sorting on unobserved attributes, and thus gives us even greater confidence
in our findings.
Our analysis also indicates that there is considerable variation in the likelihood of
referrals across different types of worker pairs. We estimate, for example, that a referral is
significantly more likely among pairs of high school graduates, pairs of young adults, and pairs in
which members have children of a similar age. This analysis of heterogeneous referral effects
serves a second purpose in our analysis. In particular, it allows us to develop an individualspecific measure of the availability of referral opportunities on each block in the metropolitan
area. The resulting estimate of match quality provides a novel measure of neighborhood quality
based on the specific match between an individual’s characteristics and those of her neighbors.
We include this measure in a series of standard regressions for labor force participation,
employment, hours and weeks worked, wages, and earnings. The results of this portion of our
analysis reveal that neighborhood referral effects tend to have a (statistically and economically)

2

significant positive impact on several labor market outcomes under consideration; a one standard
deviation increase in the match quality, for example, raises expected hours worked per week by
1.8 hours and earnings by 3.4 percent for the average male individual in our preferred
specification. For females, the earnings effect is weak but expected labor force participation
increases by about 3.4 percentage points.
In addition to providing new evidence on the importance of neighborhood referrals for
labor market outcomes, our analysis also demonstrates the potential strengths of the general
research design that we introduce in this paper. In a manner that deals directly with the
correlation of individual and neighbor characteristics (e.g., due to sorting), this design allows for
the identification of neighborhood effects operating (i) through a specific mechanism, (ii) for a
broad population and a wide variety of subsets of that population, and (iii) for individuals that
have resided in a neighborhood for a variety of tenure lengths. The applicability of this design
extends to the study of neighborhood effects in other spatial contexts (e.g., other metro areas,
specific types of neighborhoods), on specific populations (e.g., youths), and for alternative
outcomes (e.g., education, health, welfare participation, bankruptcy and home foreclosures),
provided the researcher can demonstrate that the within-reference group correlation in observable
neighbor characteristics does not contribute significantly to outcomes, thereby ensuring that the
key identifying assumption on unobserved characteristics is at least plausible.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 places this paper in the
context of the broader literature on neighborhood effects and employment referrals. Section 3
describes the data set that we have assembled for the Boston metropolitan area. Section 4
describes our research design and presents evidence concerning the orthogonality of the blocklevel variation in individual and neighbor characteristics. We also discuss several extensions of
our methodology designed to deal with additional issues related to identification. We report our
empirical findings in Sections 5 and 6 and conclude in Section 7.
2

PREVIOUS LITERATURE
This paper is situated in a broader literature that aims to identify neighborhood effects.

An important line of research in this literature relies on a random component of neighborhood
choice induced by special social experiments. Popkin et al. (1993) pioneered this approach using
data from the Gautreaux Program conducted in Chicago in the late 1970's, which gave housing
vouchers to eligible black families in public housing as part of a court-imposed public housing

3

de-segregation effort.5 Most notably, Katz et. al. (2001) and Ludwig et al. (2001) have used the
randomized housing voucher allocation associated with the Moving To Opportunity
demonstration (MTO) to examine the impact of relocation to neighborhoods with much lower
poverty rates on a very wide set of individual behavioral outcomes including health, labor market
activity, crime, education, and more. Especially in the case of MTO, the advantages of this
approach are clear – the randomization inherent in the program design in principle ensures a clean
comparison of treatment and proper control groups.
There are, however, important limitations in the extent to which the treatment effects
identified through relocation are informative about the nature of general forms of neighborhood
effects per se. First, individuals studied must be eligible for a relocation program in the first
place; this typically implies that the resulting sample is special (i.e. so as to be a resident in public
housing) and may not be as sensitive to neighborhood effects as other individuals. More
generally, even if the eligible population is representative of the target population, the results of
an experiment based on a small sample may not extend to broader populations because of the
strong possibility that general equilibrium effects may arise in that case. Second, the experimental
design involves relocation to new neighborhoods that are, by design, very different from baseline
neighborhoods; this implies that the identified treatment effect measures the impact of relocating
to a neighborhood where individuals initially have few social contacts and where the individuals
studied may be very different than the average resident of the new neighborhood. In this way, the
treatment effects identified with this design are necessarily a composite of several factors related
to significant changes in neighborhoods that are not easily disentangled.6
A second broad approach seeks to deal with the difficulties induced by correlation in
unobserved attributes at the neighborhood level by aggregating to a higher level of geography.
Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992), Cutler and Glaeser (1997), Ross (1998), Weinberg (2000,
2004), Ross and Zenou (In Press), and Card and Rothstein (2007) identify the effect of location
on outcomes using cross-metropolitan variation. For example, Cutler and Glaeser (1997) analyze
the impact of segregation within a metropolitan area on a variety of outcomes including
education, labor market activity, and teenage fertility, and Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992) use
metropolitan area poverty rates as an instrument for neighborhood level poverty. Again, the
advantages of this approach are clear – aggregation certainly eliminates the problem of
5

Similarly, Oreopolous (2003) and Jacob (2004) study the impact of relocations arising from
administrative assignment to public housing projects in Toronto and from the demolition of the public
housing projects in Chicago, respectively.
6
Moffitt (2001) and Sobel (2006) present detailed discussions of the potential pitfalls of using randomized
experiments in the study of neighborhood effects.

4

correlation in unobservables among neighbors (although potential correlation in unobservables at
the metropolitan level becomes an issue). The effects identified through aggregation, however,
include not only the average neighborhood effects operating in a metropolitan area but also any
broader consequences of living in a segregated or high poverty metropolitan area.7 Thus, the
strict interpretation of the estimated effects as neighborhood effects requires the assumption that
metropolitan segregation does not directly affect outcomes.8
The research design developed in this paper can be viewed as the converse of designs
based on across metropolitan area variation. That is, instead of aggregating to the metropolitan
level, we disaggregate below the level of the neighborhood to isolate block-level variation in
neighbor attributes.

While the strict identification of neighborhood effects with the across

metropolitan area design requires the assumptions of no metropolitan effects and no correlation in
unobservables at the metropolitan level, strict identification with our design requires the
assumptions that social interactions among neighbors are very local in nature – operating at the
level of the block – and that there is no correlation in unobservables across blocks within
reference groups.9 Thus, we offer a complementary approach to the existing literature that allows
researchers to identify a wide range of causal neighborhood effects using an alternative set of
assumptions (testable on the observables) than have been used in previous studies.10
Our paper also contributes to a vast literature on both neighborhood and referral effects in
the labor market (see Ioannides and Loury (2004) for an excellent survey of this literature). For
instance, Weinberg et al. (2004) use longitudinal data from the NLSY to study the impact of
neighborhood quality on employment outcomes.

Rees and Schultz (1970), Corcoran et al.

(1980), Holzer (1988), Blau and Robbins (1990), Blau (1992), Granovetter (1995), Addison and
Portugal (2002) and Wahba and Zenou (2005) all document the importance of referrals and other
informal hiring channels in the labor market, using both U.S. and non-U.S. data.11 Additional
7

More residentially segregated metropolitan areas might be associated, for example, with increased racial
taste-based discrimination in the labor market, in the application of criminal justice, etc. due to decreased
levels of regular inter-racial contact in residential neighborhoods.
8
It is important to point out that Cutler and Glaeser (1997) do not claim that the effects identified in their
analysis are strictly a neighborhood effects.
9
We provide some evidence regarding the very local nature of social interactions in Section 4.
10
Only one contemporaneous study, Grinblatt et al. (2004) on automobile consumption, has used variation
arising from location in very local neighborhoods as a source of identification. This study assumes that the
composition of an individual’s ten closest neighbors is exogeneous after conditioning upon a neighborhood
made up of the 50 closest neighbors. Also see Ioannides and Zabel (2008) for a model of housing demand
and neighborhood choice that uses two levels of geography.
11
The use of informal channels such as referrals by employers can be rationalized as a means to reduce the
uncertainty regarding the quality of a prospective employee. Montgomery (1991) was the first to formally
model a labor market in which both formal and informal hiring channels coexist. Focusing more closely on
the information exchange among workers, Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2004) analyze an explicit

5

studies including Datcher (1983), Devine and Kiefer (1991), Marmaros and Sacerdote (2002),
and Loury (2006) find evidence that use of informal networks increases the quality of the match
as captured by job tenure or earnings.12
Moreover, considerable evidence exists to suggest that the use and impact of job
information networks varies across demographic groups, which is consistent with our own
findings. According to Ioannides and Loury (2004), the evidence on usage differences is mixed
in general, but suggests that younger, lower-education and male workers are more likely to use
informal job networks. In terms of relative productivity, Bortnick and Ports (1992) find that these
networks are slightly less productive for women as compared to men. Holzer (1987), Bortnick
and Ports (1992), and Korenman and Turner (1996) find that such networks are substantially less
productive for African-Americans.
3

DATA
The data for our analysis are drawn from a restricted version of the 1990 US Census of

Population for the Boston metropolitan area. For the full (1-in-7) sample of individuals that filled
out the long form of the Census, these data contain the complete set of variables that are available
in the public-use version of the Census PUMS, but, in addition, detail each individual’s
residential and employment locations down to the Census block level. In addition to these
geographic variables, the Census also provides a wide range of socio-demographic information:
age, gender and marital status, education, race, family structure, and residential tenure as well as
information on labor market outcomes including labor force status, weeks and hours worked, and
salary and wage income if employed.
With regard to the geographic structure of the data, Census blocks correspond roughly to
actual city blocks; they are typically rectangular regions delimited by the four intersections that
constitute the corners of the block.13 Our sample consists of approximately 25,500 Census blocks

network model of job search in which agents receive random offers and decide whether to use them
themselves or pass them on to their unemployed contacts depending on their own employment status and
current wage.
12
See Elliot (1999) and Loury (2006) for counter examples where the use of informal networks led to lower
wages. Of course, the lower wages may be associated with increased match quality on desirable job
attributes causing the individual to accept a lower wage as a compensating differential.
13
Notice that this definition implies that Census blocks are not constituted as the set of buildings that face
each other on the same street. To the extent that social interactions are also strong between residents on
opposite sides of the same street, a comparison of interactions between individuals that reside on the same
Census block versus other blocks in the same block group will tend to understate the increased effect of
immediate neighbors as those on the opposite side of the same street will count in the control group. For
some blocks, however, one may argue that the opposite holds: streets may effectively act as dividers of
local communities, and interactions may be strongest in the alleys and courtyards connecting the rear sides

6

arranged into 2,565 Census block groups, i.e., an average of 10 blocks per block group. The
distribution of blocks per block group is depicted in Figure 1; the median number of blocks per
block group is 8, and about 95 percent of all block groups have 20 blocks or fewer. Census block
group is used as our primary definition of a neighborhood.14 For robustness we also perform our
analysis using an alternative reference group for a given block, defined as the set of ten closest
blocks to that block using physical distance between block centroids.
It is the precise geographical information for each individual in these restricted Census
data that provides the backbone of our research design, permitting us to isolate the block-level
variation in neighbor exposure by conditioning on reference group fixed effects. The first stage of
our analysis considers the propensity of a pair of individuals to work in the same location,
comparing this propensity for a pair that lives on the same versus nearby blocks. For this portion
of our analysis, we construct a sample that contains of individuals that (i) are currently employed,
(ii) are between 25 and 59 years of age, (iii) do not work at home, and (iv) for whom the Census
data on place of work has not been imputed.15 The total number of workers in the Census sample
that meet these criteria is 129,175 (5.1 per block, 50 per block group). Figure 2 reports the
corresponding histogram of workers meeting these criteria across blocks.16
In constructing a sample of pairs for our analysis, we apply two additional criteria,
selecting all pairs that (i) reside in the same reference group within the Boston metropolitan area
and (ii) do not belong to the same household. Overall, the samples contain 2,037,600 and
2,671,270 pairs that meet all of the above criteria for the block group and alternative reference
group samples, respectively. The first two columns of Table 1 characterize these samples of
matched pairs, reporting the percentage of pairs that fit the description in the row heading:

of buildings on the same block. In either case, our research design should detect (although may understate)
particularly local interactions provided that the block group contains a reasonable number of blocks.
14
The Census Bureau Statistical Participant Areas Program provides individuals in the local community a
major role in the development of census block group and census tract definitions. The participant
guidelines explicitly enable participants to draw on local knowledge and consider features that might “unify
a community” in order to “better encompass similar community patterns” (Census Bureau, 1997, p. 9).
15
Currently employed refers to the reference week in the calendar year 1990 used by the Census. We focus
on prime-age adults in this paper so as to avoid empirical issues related to labor market participation versus
continued schooling of youths and young adults. We drop all individuals for whom place of work is
imputed for obvious reasons. Finally, individuals who work at home are deleted because their presence
would create a mechanical correlation in our estimates, i.e. a pair of such individuals must by definition
only work on the same block if they also live on the same block.
16
In the analysis below, we consider specifications that limit the analysis to blocks with five or more
sample workers. Our results remain stable when we use all blocks.

7

depending on the definition of reference group, at least one member of roughly 65 to 72 percent
of the pairs has children; about 15 to 20 percent of pairs match two single individuals.17
Examining the characteristics of the samples of pairs shown in Table 1 highlights two key
dimensions of heterogeneity in which our study will be limited due to the small size of the
corresponding sample in the Boston metro area. In particular, (i) less than one percent of all pairs
reflect a match between two high school dropouts and (ii) only 0.5 to 2.6 percent of all pairs
reflect a match between two non-white workers. Given the nature of the samples, it is not
surprising that our analysis tends to be more precise in other dimensions of individual
heterogeneity including age, the presence of children, education (aside from high school
dropouts), gender, and marital status.
For the second stage of our analysis, which examines the impact of neighborhood
characteristics on labor market outcomes including labor force participation and employment, we
add to the sample those prime age (25 to 59) individuals that are not currently employed; this
sample has 163,594 observations.18 Table 2 reports summary statistics for this sample. The first
column reports the sample frequencies for each individual characteristic, while the remaining five
columns report labor market and commuting information: the fraction of individuals that are
currently employed, average weeks worked in the previous year, average hours worked per week
in the previous year, average earnings for the sample of individuals that were fully-employed in
the previous year, and average commute for those that are currently employed.19 College
graduates, married males, and whites display the strongest attachment to the labor force, with
respect to employment rates as well as hours and weeks worked. These groups also tend to work
the farthest away from home. On the other hand, high school dropouts and married females tend
to have weak labor force attachment and work close to home when employed.
4

EMPIRICAL DESIGN – DETECTING REFERRAL EFFECTS
Given the structure of the dataset just described, it is straightforward to characterize our

general research design. Our primary analysis explores the propensity for two individuals to work
in the same location, comparing this propensity for a pair that lives in the same block with that of

17

It should be noted that the sample contains only a small fraction of Asians and Hispanics and so these
two groups are combined. Specifications where these groups are separated yield very similar results.
18
We again limit the sample used in each labor market outcome equation to individuals for which the
corresponding dependent variable has not been imputed.
19
The Census provides information on current employment and labor force participation as well as the
location of current workplace at the time of the survey in April 1990. Information on earnings, hours, and
weeks are reported for the previous year. Fully-employed in 1989 refers to any individual who worked at
least 45 weeks and at least 30 hours per week.

8

a pair that lives in the same reference group but not the same block. The implementation of this
design is straightforward and can be summarized in the following equation:

(1)

Wijb = # g + " 0 Rijb + ! ij

where i and j denote two individuals that reside in the same reference group (Census block group
or alternative reference group) but not in the same household, Wijb is a dummy variable that is
equal to one if i and j work in the same Census block, Rijb is a dummy variable that is equal to one
if i and j reside in the same Census block, and !g denotes the residential reference group fixed
effect – this is the baseline probability of working in the same block for individuals residing in
the same reference group. The statistical test of the null hypothesis that no local social interaction
effect exists is simply a test of whether the estimated coefficient "0 equals zero.20
The inclusion of reference group fixed effects in equation (1) is designed to control for
any correlation in unobserved attributes among individuals residing in the same neighborhood.
Such correlation can arise because of positive sorting into neighborhoods or because of
unobserved factors present in those neighborhoods, e.g. similar access to the urban transportation
network (See Manski (1993) and Moffitt (2001) for a detailed discussion of these issues).
In interpreting "0 as a social interaction effect, therefore, we are implicitly making two
key assumptions to achieve identification. First, that while individuals are able to choose their
residential neighborhood (reference group), there is no correlation in unobserved factors affecting
work location among individuals residing on the same block within a reference group. The
plausibility of this assumption is motivated by two considerations. First, that the thinness of the
housing market at such small geographic scales – for instance, the vast majority of block groups
in our sample are less than 0.10 square miles in area – restricts an individual’s ability to choose a
specific block versus a wider neighborhood. Secondly, that it may be difficult for individuals to
20

The sampling scheme, which is based on drawing matched pairs of individuals who reside in the same
reference group, makes it very difficult to compute appropriate standard errors for our estimates. In fact,
suppose that individuals a and b work in the same block. Suppose further that individuals b and c work in
the same block. Then, by transitivity, individuals a and c must also work in the same block. As a
consequence, if we compute standard errors via the basic OLS formula, we may tend to understate their
size because we are not taking into account this inherent correlation structure in the data. There is also the
reasonable concern of heteroscedasticity across reference groups that may bias standard errors in fixed
effects analyses. To address these issues, all standard errors are estimated based on pairwise bootstraps. It
should be noted that some concerns have been raised concerning pairwise bootstrap in small samples
(Horowitz, 2000). While our sample is quite large, we have a very small number of ones in our dependent
variable, which may create similar problems. We verified the accuracy of the pairwise bootstraps by also
estimating standard errors using a pairwise bootstrap with the HC3 correction and with a wild bootstrap
(Mammen (1993); Flachaire (1999), (2005)).

9

identify block-by-block variation in neighbor characteristics at the time of purchase or lease. That
is, while an individual may have a reasonable sense of the socio-demographic structure of the
neighborhood more generally, that variation across blocks within a neighborhood is less easily
observed a priori.
That the housing market is relatively thin at any particular point in time at the block level
is supported by an analysis of mobility rates in the Census. In our sample, only 11 percent of the
blocks have an owner-occupied unit that changed owners in the two years prior to the Census.
Given that the Census is a 1-in-7 sample and assuming a uniform probability for a house to be on
the market in this two year period, this implies that the chances that any owner-occupied unit is
available on a given block within a given 3 month period is only about 11 percent.21 Thus, it may
be difficult for households searching in a given timeframe to select a house on a particular block.
Moreover, the fact that households have heterogeneous tastes for particular housing attributes
implies that the availability of a suitable house on a given block at any point in time is likely to be
much lower.
The second key assumption underlying our research design is that a significant portion of
interactions with neighbors are very local in nature – i.e., occur among individuals on the same
block. A well-established literature in sociology documents the extent to which individual social
networks are local in a geographic sense.22 Most relevantly to our approach, Lee and Campbell
(1999) use data from a 1988 survey of Nashville, Tennessee to look at social ties with immediate
neighbors. Their definition of “micro-neighborhoods” is similar to ours: they use “partial face
blocks consisting of 10 adjacent housing units each, five on either side of a single street.” They
find that 31% of these immediate neighbors are judged close or very close by respondents.
Further, they specifically ask respondents to whom they would turn for help in finding a job.
About 13% of helpers in these networks resided in the respondents’ micro-neighborhoods; 73%
resided elsewhere in Nashville; the residual 14% were not Nashville residents. To the extent that
individuals do have some interaction with neighbors on surrounding blocks rather than on the
same block, our design will provide only a lower bound on the overall strength of local
interactions – measuring only the difference between these very local and broader effects. In this
21

The comparable figure for renter-occupied units for blocks that contain at least one rental unit in our
sample is 45 percent. This suggests that it is generally easier, although far from certain, for renters to find
housing on a specific block within a particular search window.
22
In a study of Toronto residents in 1978, Wellman (1996) finds that 42% of yearly contacts in individual
networks took place with neighbors that lived less than one mile away. Guest and Lee (1983) perform a
similar analysis for the city of Seattle, and find that for about 35% of respondents the majority of their nonkin social contacts resided in the same local community. Otani (1999) uses 1986 General Social Survey

10

way, the design will allow us to detect interactions provided that they are significantly stronger at
closer distances, but may understate the strength of those interactions.
Specification with Individual Fixed Effects. The analysis of block-level sorting on observable
individual attributes presented below suggests that sorting within neighborhood reference groups
(Census block group or ten closest blocks) is minimal. To further assess concerns about sorting
on the basis of unobserved individual characteristics, we also consider a generalization of
equation (1) that includes individual fixed effects for each member of the pair rather than the
block group.23 In particular, since each worker appears multiple times in our sample of pairs, we
can estimate:

(2)

Wijb = #i + # j + " 0 Rijb + ! ij

where i and j again denote two individuals that reside in the same neighborhood reference group
and #i and #j represent individual fixed effects.24
The inclusion of individual fixed effects in equation (2) allows us to deal to some degree
with block-level sorting on the basis of unobserved attributes. In particular, if certain workers
were more likely to work with others from their neighborhood for unobserved reasons (e.g.,
because they are employed in jobs very close to home) and these workers tended to sort
themselves onto similar blocks within the neighborhood reference group, our baseline analysis
would mis-attribute their increased propensity to work together to the fact that they live on the
same block. Of course this bias could just as easily go in the opposite direction if workers who
tend not to work in the same place as others from the same neighborhood (e.g., white-collar

data for the U.S. (in a comparative Japan-U.S. study) and finds that roughly one in five contacts listed in
individual networks are physical neighbors.
23
We would like to thank an anonymous referee for giving us this suggestion.
24
The individual fixed effects model is estimated using a differencing approach where 10 individuals k
within pair (i,j)’s reference group are matched with each individual in the pair and these matches are mean
differenced over the new i and j pairs, respectively. Specifically,

& 1
Dib = Wikb ' $$
% Nk

# & Nk '1#
1
!!,k '
Nk
" % Nk "

( Wikb' !! = $$

k ')i , j

&

& 1

## &

& 1

##

%

%

"" %

%

""

( ,k ' + + 0 $$ Rikb ' $$ N ( Rikb ' !! !! + $$ * ik ' $$ N ( * ikb ' !! !!

k ')i , j ,k

k k ')i , j

k k ')i , j

where Nk is the number of individuals k. The differencing of Djb from Dib eliminates the fixed effects
associated with each individual k, as well as the fixed effects associated with the k’ individuals. See
Arcidiacono et al. (2007) for methods to estimate paired fixed effects of this type in non-linear models,
which is tractable for sample sizes that are smaller than the samples used in this paper.

11

workers commuting long distances) were more likely to sort onto the same block (perhaps due to
the types of homes that they purchase).
As we discuss in more detail below, the inclusion of individual fixed effects has little
impact on the overall social interaction effect, "0, but does in fact change a couple of the
estimates from the heterogeneous model that we now present.
Heterogeneous Specification. The initial specifications shown in equations (1) and (2) can easily
be extended to include a set of covariates Xij that describe the pair of individuals (e.g., those
summarized in Table 1) both in levels and interacted with Rijb:

(

)

(3)

Wijb = $ g + # ' X ij + " 0 + " 1' X ij Rijb + ! ij

(4)

Wijb = $i + $ j + # ' X ij + " 0 + "1' X ij Rijb + ! ij

(

)

In this case, the estimated coefficients on the cross terms, "1, allow us to investigate whether the
social interaction effect is weaker or stronger for specific socio-demographic characteristics of the
matched pair. There are two aspects to this: first, certain pairs are more likely to interact because
of the assortative matching present in social networks: for instance, two individuals of similar
age, education, race, or with children of similar age.25 Second, certain individuals may be more
strongly attached to the labor market and may thus provide better referrals or information on jobs
– for example, college graduates, married males or individuals with children. In this case,
matches between pairs in which one individual is strongly attached to the labor market and the
other generally more likely to need a referral should also lead to an increased number of referrals.
Examining Block-Level Sorting. To study whether our first key assumption – that there is no
correlation in unobserved factors affecting work location among individuals residing on the same
block within a reference group – is reasonable, we analyze the correlation between observable
individual and neighbor characteristics at the block level. While this kind of analysis does not
prove anything with respect to the importance of potential correlation in unobserved factors, it
provides an indication of whether this assumption is at all reasonable.26
For each block in the sample, a single prime age adult is selected randomly and the
characteristics of other individuals that reside in the same block but not the same household are
25

See Marsden (1987), (1988) for a discussion of the evidence from the General Social Survey on
assortative matching in networks.
26
This is in the same vein of Altonji et al. (2005): their approach to correct for selection bias suggests that
selectivity in terms of unobserved heterogeneity is in some sense proportional to selectivity on observables.

12

used to construct a measure of average neighbor characteristics.27 Table 3 reports the average
correlations for our baseline sample of blocks with at least five workers:28 the first column reports
unconditional correlations, while the second conditions on block group fixed effects, and the third
conditions on the alternative reference group definition based on the ten closest blocks. In each
case, both the individual and block measures are first regressed on the corresponding variables
(e.g., block group fixed effects) and the correlation between the residuals is reported.
The results indicate a significant amount of sorting on the basis of education, race, age,
and the presence of children across the neighborhoods of the metropolitan area as a whole. The
correlation between whether an individual is a college graduate and the fraction of neighbors that
are college graduates is 0.29, while that between whether an individual is black and the fraction
of black neighbors is 0.59. The second and third columns provide an explicit test of our
identification strategy, providing a measure of sorting on observables within reference groups. As
these successive columns clearly demonstrate, the correlation between observable individual and
neighbor characteristics falls to near zero as only within-reference group variation is isolated. The
inclusion of block group fixed effects reduces the estimated correlations by 70-90 percent for
most categories, with a remaining maximum correlation of 0.05 across all characteristics, except
for Asian and Hispanic. Using the alternative definition of reference groups, residual correlations
drop even further. This evidence is broadly consistent with that reported by Ioannides (2004),
who find a similar correlation among neighbor’s incomes where neighborhood is defined as the
10 closest neighbors or as a census tract.
The magnitude of the remaining correlation between individual and neighbor attributes
within reference groups provides clear support for the notion that the amount of sorting on
observables within reference groups is less extensive than across the neighborhoods of the
metropolitan area as a whole. This evidence is particularly compelling for our identification
27

By sampling only one individual per block, we avoid inducing a mechanical negative correlation that
would come about if all individuals were used in estimating the correlation between individual and average
neighbor characteristics. This negative correlation arises because each individual is counted as a neighbor
for all of the others in the same block, but not for herself. For estimates of the correlation that do not
condition on reference group fixed effects, this bias is inconsequential because an individual’s own
characteristics contribute very little to the average neighborhood characteristics of others in the full sample.
For estimates that condition on reference group fixed effects, however, this negative bias is quite large in
magnitude because an individual’s own characteristics contribute a significant amount to the average
neighborhood characteristics of others within the same reference group. By sampling only one individual
per block, we report an unbiased estimate of the correlation between individual and neighborhood
characteristics at the block level.
28
We drop blocks with fewer than five workers for two reasons. First, blocks with a small number of
residents are largely non-residential and, consequently, interactions among neighbors may be limited on
such blocks. Second, as we discuss in greater detail below, a measurement error arises related to the use of

13

strategy because a number of these attributes, such as residents’ race or the presence of families
with children, would be the characteristics of one’s immediate neighbors that might be most
observable at the time of moving into a new residence. Thus, by controlling for these observables,
it may be the case that within-reference group sorting on other characteristics is even less
extensive.
A Direct Test of the Importance of Block-Level Sorting on Observables. While the
correlation estimates reported in Table 3 are small, they are not identically zero. An obvious
question, then, is whether the remaining block-by-block sorting on the basis of observables within
reference groups, small though it may be, is enough to significantly increase the propensity of
pairs drawn from the same block within a reference group to work together.
To answer this question we turn to the heterogeneous version of the model presented in
equation (3) and (4). In these equations, $'X measures how the propensity to work together of
two individuals that reside in the same reference group but not the same block varies with the
observable characteristics of the pair. Given an estimate of !ˆ , this heterogeneous specification
provides a way to test whether the remaining within-reference group correlation between
observable neighbor attributes would lead to a significantly higher predicted propensity for pairs
on the same block to work together. Specifically, we compare the average !ˆ ' X for those pairs
that reside on the same block with those that reside on nearby (but not the same) blocks within the
reference group. In other words, we apply the !ˆ estimated for pairs not in the same block to
pairs in the same block, to see whether block-level correlation in the X’s alone is sufficient to
induce a higher propensity to work together for pairs on the same block.
Given the !ˆ that we estimate for the block group fixed effects model, the predicted
propensity for pairs that reside on the same block is 0.343 percent; this is 0.01 percentage points
lower than the observed (and predicted) propensity for pairs that reside in the same block group
but not on the same block (0.355). Thus, the remaining block-level sorting on observables does
not predict any increased propensity for individuals on the same block to work together. This
evidence strongly favors the notion that our research design is credible in the face of the small
amount of within-block sorting that exists in the data.

the 1-in-7 sample of individuals observed in the Census to estimate neighborhood effects. In this case,
blocks with only a small number of workers may be particularly prone to measurement error.

14

Additional Specifications and Robustness. As described above, our empirical design relies
critically on the assumption that social interactions are especially strong at the block level, while
households are only able to choose a broader neighborhood (block group or other set of nearby
blocks) at the time of the location decision, due perhaps to the thinness of the housing market.
While the analysis of correlation between observable neighbor characteristics described above
provides assurance that this assumption is reasonable, we also consider the robustness of our
results to alternative samples designed to isolate those reference groups that are most
homogenous along a number of dimensions including: race, education, and the presence of
children in the household. In particular, in each case, we select the 50 percent of reference groups
that display the least amount of within-reference group correlation between the corresponding
individual and neighbor characteristics and re-estimate the baseline model for the restricted
sample in order to see if our results are robust across samples.29
A separate confounding issue is the possibility that the estimated social interaction effect
may be due to reverse causation: workers could receive tips and referrals about residential
locations from their co-workers at a given firm. We address this issue in several ways. First, the
empirical focus on the difference between reference group- and block-level propensities again
mitigates this problem because residential referrals are unlikely to result in people residing in
exactly the same block, due to the thinness of the housing market at the block level.
We also tackle the potential for reverse causation directly by estimating equations (1) and
(2) on a sub-sample of the data in which both respondents in a given matched pair have lived in
that neighborhood for at least two years, but one of them was not employed for the full year in the
previous year, defined as having worked less than 45 weeks in 1989 (for robustness, we also use a
more restrictive definition of “not employed for the full year”, using 20 weeks in 1989 as the
cutoff). In this case, we can be fairly certain that if we see the same individuals working together
in the current year then the referral was among residential neighbors rather than work colleagues.
Unfortunately the Census does not contain any direct information on job search activity.
Therefore, we use the “not employed for the full year in 1989” category as a proxy for the set of
individuals who are most likely to have been actively searching for a job last year.30 The goal of
this analysis is to examine whether evidence of referrals is present in this sub-sample.
Importantly, because this sub-sample is (by construction) very different from the main sample,
29

While the resulting analysis obviously changes the nature of the sample, the results described below do
provide some re-assurance that our baseline results are not sensitive to sorting.
30
Note that in estimating earnings and wage equations in Table 8 we condition on a set of individuals that
were fully-employed in the previous year defined as having worked at least 45 weeks and at least 30 hours

15

we do not expect the resulting extent of social interactions to be identical to our baseline results.
Finally, we also perform a counter-factual experiment to look at a situation in which a residential
referral may be most likely: namely, a sample in which one member of each pair lived in a given
block at least five years, the other is a recent arrival (less than two years in residence), but both
workers were employed for the full year in 1989.
5

RESULTS – DETECTING REFERRAL EFFECTS
We now present the results of our primary analysis, beginning with an examination of the

propensity for two individuals to work together. Table 1 contains summary statistics for our
matched pairs sample. As described above, the first two columns report the fraction of pairs
residing in each reference group definition, that fit the description in the row heading. The next
two columns report – for each category – the empirical frequency that two individuals that reside
in the same reference group but not the same block work together. The last column reports the
probability that two individuals that reside on the same block work together. In this way, the first
row indicates that the baseline probability of working together for two individuals that reside in
the same reference group but not the same block is 0.36 percent for block groups and 0.38 percent
for the ten closest blocks; this figure rises to 0.94 percent for two individuals that reside on the
same block. As we will see below, much of this increased propensity for individuals residing on
the same block to work together results from the fact that the sample of individuals that reside on
the same block is disproportionately weighted to larger blocks – i.e., dense block groups. The
inclusion of reference group fixed effects in our main empirical specification ensures that our
social referral effects are estimated purely on the basis of comparisons within the same reference
group.
The remaining rows of Table 1 reveal how these patterns vary with the characteristics of
the pair of individuals. First, notice that individuals residing on the same versus nearby blocks
show an increased propensity to work together across all of the types of pairs characterized in the
table. This increased propensity to work together for individuals on the same block versus block
group is especially strong for pairs of individuals in which (i) both have children and especially
similar aged young children; (ii) both are married; (iii) both are young; and (iv) both are high
school graduates.
Table 1 also makes clear that the propensity that two individuals residing in the same
block work together is not a simple monotonic function of the baseline propensity for individuals
per week. This definition is different than that for not employed for the full year in 1989 used here, which
is not at all based on hours.

16

residing in the same reference group but not the same block. While pairs of all age combinations
residing in the same reference group but not the same block are about equally likely to work
together, pairs of young workers residing on the same block are especially likely to work
together. Similarly, while pairs of workers with children in nearby blocks are about as equally
likely to work together as pairs without children, the corresponding propensity of pairs with
children to work together is more than twice that of those without at the block level.
Baseline Specifications. While Table 1 provides suggestive evidence as to the presence and
nature of a social interaction effect operating at the very local (block) level, our regression
specifications help clarify this evidence, since they include reference group fixed effects. This
ensures that the estimation of our social interaction effects is based exclusively on comparisons of
block- versus neighborhood-level propensities to work together within the same reference group.
Table 4 reports the results of three specifications. The first two columns report the
parameter estimate of the average social interaction effect, "0, in our baseline model (1) for each
definition of neighborhood reference groups. The last column reports the results of the estimation
of equation (2), which includes individual worker fixed effects, using block group as the
reference group. In all cases, our baseline sample is based on dropping blocks with fewer than
five workers.
The estimated social interaction effect is positive and highly statistically significant in
each case, indicating a strong additional propensity for two workers living in the same block to
also work in the same block (distinct from the residential one), over and above the estimated
propensity for matches in their reference group. The magnitude is 0.12 percentage points for the
specification that uses Census block groups. This effect is sizeable: it is roughly 33 percent the
size of the baseline propensity to work together for two individuals that reside in the same block
group but not the same block (0.36 percent).31
An increased propensity to work with a given neighbor implies a much larger propensity
to work with at least one neighbor. For our baseline sample, which restricts the sample to blocks
with at least five sampled workers, given the average of 80 individuals per block,32 an estimated

31

As noted above that this effect is less than the mean difference reported in Table 1 suggests that a portion
of the differences in mean between those residing in the same block versus those in the same block group
but not the same block was driven by variation across block groups related to population density. See
Section 4 for a discussion of this issue.
32
While the average number of workers meeting our sample criteria for the match model is only 5.1
workers, the fact that the Census is a 1-in-7 sample and that many workers are excluded from our analysis
due to the presence of imputed data accounts for the larger average number of actual prime-age workers per
block.

17

referral effect of 0.12 percentage points translates to approximately a 6.9 percentage point
increase in the propensity that an individual works with at least one individual on the same
block.33 Thus, the referral effect estimated here is certainly economically meaningful.
The estimated average referral effects are almost three times as large as the baseline
effect for the specification based on the alternative definition of neighborhood reference group
(ten closest blocks). The increase in magnitude is driven by the fact that the social interaction
effect is increasing in population density (we present this finding below). Because Census block
groups are defined in such a way as to keep the total population of block groups relatively stable
across the sample, very few reference blocks are included for dense blocks in our baseline
sample. Thus, changing the definition of the reference group to include the ten nearest blocks has
the effect of including many more reference blocks for the densest blocks in the sample, i.e.,
weighting the sample towards dense blocks, thereby increasing the estimated effect size.
The estimated interaction effect is also slightly larger for the specification that includes
individual fixed effects (compared to our baseline specification). We take this as a strong sign
that our research design is fundamentally solid and controls effectively for block-level sorting on
the basis of both observed and unobserved attributes.
Robustness – Sorting within Block Groups and Reverse Causation. While the correlation
analysis presented in Section 4 and the results of the specifications reported in Table 4 provide a
great deal of re-assurance regarding the robustness of our analysis to concerns about the sorting
of households across blocks within reference groups, we seek to provide additional evidence that
such sorting is not fundamentally driving the results. To this end, as described in Section 4, Table
5 reports the results of estimates using subsamples based on the 50 percent of reference groups
that exhibit the least amount of block-by-block sorting in three dimensions: education, the
presence of children in the household, and race. It is important to note, of course, that these
restrictions on the sample change the nature of the set of households for which social interaction
effects are identified so that there is no reason to expect the results to be identical to the full
specification. In our minds, then, this exercise serves mainly as a broad check regarding blocklevel sorting.
Table 5 is organized as follows: the columns report estimation results for each
homogeneous subsample, whereas the row panels refer to our three main specifications: Census
33

For computational ease, this calculation treats the likelihood of working with each neighbor as an
independent event. The reported 0.069 = (1 - 0.00355)^80 – (1 – (0.00355+0.0012))^80, where 80 is the
average number of adults on the same block, 0.00355 is the baseline propensity for individuals to work
with someone in the same block group and 0.0012 is our estimated social interaction effect.

18

block groups, alternative reference groups, block groups with individual fixed effects. The
estimated referral effects remain fairly stable across subsamples, with the exception of the race
subsample for the specification using the ten closest blocks as reference group, where the effect
almost doubles. In the specifications using Census block groups the estimated average effects are
slightly attenuated relative to Table 4, but they remain statistically and economically significant.
In sum, our estimated social interaction effects persist, even in areas that do not
experience a significant degree of sorting below the reference group level with respect to
characteristics most likely to be observed at the time a household moves into a block. We believe
that this set of results further validates our attempt to isolate referral effects from sorting via the
general research design proposed in this paper.
Table 6 collects the estimation results of the specifications that address the reverse
causation issue. Here again the row panels refer to our three main specifications (block groups,
ten closest blocks, block groups with individual fixed effects), while the first three columns refer
to the different subsamples that aim at isolating instances in which it is more likely that the
residential location decision preceded the current job location. The last column reports the results
of our counter-factual experiment, in which is it relatively more likely that the current job
preceded the residential location decision of one member of a given worker pair.
Focusing on the first row panel to begin with, our estimated referral effects range from
0.09 to 0.19 for the first three columns. Again, the sampling schemes in columns 2 and 3 reduce
the possibility of reverse causation, since we are considering workers who are more likely to have
made a transition to full employment during the past year and whose residential tenure is longer
than two years. At the same time, by looking at pairs in which one was employed for the full year
while the other was not, we are focusing on instances in which it is most likely that a referral or
information exchange actually took place. The largest estimated effect, 0.19, occurs for the
sample where one individual had worked less than 20 weeks last year, an individual who quite
likely needed a labor market referral during the last year. On the other hand, the estimated effect
for our counter-factual (column 4) is 0.05 or roughly half the size of the effect for most samples,
and is no longer significant at the 5% level. This pattern is consistent with our interpretation of
the estimated effect as the result of a job referral mechanism. The other panels are broadly
consistent with this pattern, again with the estimated effect in the last column being smaller and
less statistically significant than in the previous columns, which are less likely to be consistent
with reverse causation.34
34

Weinberg et al. (2004) also find little evidence of reverse causation. They look at hours worked before
and after a move to try to assess the possibility of an exogenous change in employment status taking place

19

Heterogeneous Referral Effects. Table 7 reports our estimation results for the heterogeneous
specifications described in equations (3) and (4). The structure of the table is identical to Table 4,
with each column reporting results for our three main specifications (alternative definitions of
reference groups and individual fixed effects). All results are for the baseline sample of blocks
with at least five workers. To enhance the readability of the table, only the coefficients for the
interaction terms (i.e., those interacted with whether the two workers live on the same block,
bmatch) are reported in Table 7.35
The vast majority of the estimated interaction effects are robust across the three main
specifications with a couple of key exceptions that are highlighted by our choice of the excluded
category for each set of characteristics.36 Focusing first on the robust findings, the results for
education, age, the presence of children of similar ages, gender and marital status (except pairs of
married females), and race (except Asian/Hispanic pairs) are very stable across all three
specifications. These robust results imply that stronger interactions occur (i) for pairs in which
both individuals are high school versus college graduates, (ii) for pairs in which both have
children, and especially those with elementary or secondary school-aged children of the same
age, (iii) between the youngest adults in the sample, and (iv) for married males relative to other
gender-marital status combinations.
In general, these findings are broadly consistent with two common empirical findings in
the existing literature on social networks and on informal hiring channels: that there is strong
assortative matching within social networks and that referrals can only occur when at least one
member of the pair is well-attached to the labor market.37 That referral effects are stronger for
high school than for college graduates is consistent with two other common results in the referrals
and the social networks literatures. One is that informal hiring channels are used more intensively
by individuals with less education (see Corcoran et al. (1980) and Topa (2001)); the other is that
the more educated tend to have more spatially dispersed social networks.38 This result also
before a move; they find that hours are flat in the years preceding a move, but increase after a move to
neighborhoods with higher employment and better access to jobs.
35
The results for the level coefficients are available from the authors upon request.
36
A negative intercept for the specification with covariates means that the effect is negative (but barely
statistically significant) for the left out category: this is for matches between Asians/Hispanics and Blacks,
where one person is a high-school graduate and the other is a college graduate, and one person is 25 years
old while the other is 35, who live on very small (rural) blocks. Such a category is a very tiny portion of all
pairs in the sample. The estimated social interaction effect is estimated to be positive for over 99 percent of
pairs observed in the data for each specification shown in Table 7.
37
See, for example, Corcoran et al. (1980).
38
See Fischer (1982) for evidence from Northern California, and Kadushin and Jones (1992) for evidence
from a 1988 survey of New York City residents.

20

suggests that reverse causation (referrals from jobs to residences) is not a primary driver of our
findings. Since college-educated workers are more likely to be spatially footloose and thus more
likely to take a job in a location that subsequently requires a residential move, we might have
expected to see large effects for college-educated workers if reverse causation were a major issue.
Our finding that referral effects are stronger for younger pairs of workers is also
consistent with the literature on job networks. Corcoran et al. (1980) report that use of informal
hiring channels declines with age, and Granovetter (1995) finds that workers are more likely to
have found their first jobs through informal rather than formal means (relative to subsequent
jobs), in his study of Boston. Ioannides and Loury (2004) also discuss similar findings in their
survey.
The results presented in Table 7 differ across specifications in ways that highlight the
impact of including individual fixed effects and the role of geography. Focusing first on the
results that include individual fixed effects, the coefficient estimates for gender-marital status and
race relative to the excluded groups (both married females and both Asian or Hispanic,
respectively) are largely much smaller in magnitude and often change sign. This suggests that the
large (negative and positive, respectively) effects found for these two excluded groups in the
specification without individual fixed effects are largely driven by the way in which individuals
in these groups sort across blocks. Notice, however, that in both cases the relative ordering and
magnitude of the estimated effects remain consistent across the included categories. Thus, the
inclusion of individual fixed effects seems to be helpful in controlling for unobserved block-level
sorting related to employment for married females (without kids) and Asians and Hispanics.
Comparing the results using the alternative definitions for a neighborhood reference
group also reveals another key difference. In particular, the estimated coefficient on block size
(population) is essentially zero when the Census block group is used as the reference group and
substantially positive when the ten nearest blocks are used. The key difference between these
specifications is the way that very dense blocks are treated in the samples. In this way, the large
block size interaction effect presented in Table 7 is consistent with the larger overall interaction
effect presented in Table 4 when the reference group includes the ten nearest blocks; both results
suggest that the magnitude of our referral effect is sharply increasing in density – especially for
the most dense blocks in the sample.
6

LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Having analyzed the impact of local interactions on job referrals, we conduct a second

portion of our analysis that is designed to study whether such referrals have an impact on labor

21

market outcomes more generally. In particular, given the characterization of how the strength of
social interactions related to job referrals (i.e., the propensity to work together) varies with the
attributes of a pair of individuals identified in the first portion of our analysis, we explore whether
an individual’s labor market outcomes are related to the idiosyncratic quality of the strength of
the potential networks available on her block. Specifically, we estimate a series of labor market
outcome regressions that include a measure of match quality defined at the individual level along
with controls for individual and average neighbor characteristics (measured at the block level) as
well as reference group fixed effects.
The goals of this portion of our analysis are two-fold. First, since we detect informal
hiring effects indirectly, it serves as a check on the plausibility of the first portion of our analysis.
Second, by focusing on outcomes we hope to provide a better sense of the magnitude of our
estimated network effects. It is certainly possible that referrals may be more likely among
neighbors but may have little effect on labor market outcomes – i.e., that without the referral the
individual would find a comparable job through another search method. Thus, it is important to
be able to say something about the impact of an individual network’s potential on outcomes.
For this analysis, the unit of observation is an individual rather than a pair. For the
employment and labor force participation outcomes, the econometric model is a linear probability
model.39 For all other outcomes, such as weeks worked, hours-per-week worked, wages and
earnings (in logs), we use a simple linear regression.
We then add – for each model specification – a ‘network quality’ proxy variable for each
individual, which is constructed by examining that individual’s matches with other adults in her
block, using the coefficient estimates "1 from the estimation of equations (3) and (4).
Specifically, the average match quality for individual i, Qib, is constructed using a sample of all
possible pairings of individual i with other individuals who reside in the same block b and do not
belong to the same household. For each pair, a linear combination Mij of the pair's covariates is
created using the estimated parameters from the interaction of these variables with Rijb in
equations (3) and (4): M ij = !ˆ 1' X ij . Then, Qib is computed as the mean value of Mij over all
matches for individual i:

(5)

Qib =

1
N ib

! M ij

j"Nib

39

We have also performed our analysis using a multinomial logit specification, with three discrete
outcomes: out of the labor force, unemployed, and employed. The results are qualitatively very similar.

22

where Nib is defined as the set of other individuals that reside on the same block b but not in the
same household as individual i.
We would generally expect individuals with good potential matches in their block – high
value of Qib – to have better labor force outcomes on average, after controlling for the direct
effect of their individual characteristics and block level fixed effects. The resulting specification
is given by:

(6)

Eib = " b + ! 3' Qib + ! 4' X ib + uib

where ! b denotes a block level fixed effect and X ib is a vector of individual attributes (the same
as those used in the workplace clustering specification).
In the context of traditional linear-in-means social interaction models (of the type
described in Manski (1993) and Moffitt (2001)), the block fixed effect ! b in equation (6) can be
thought of as replacing block averages of individual outcomes and attributes ( E b and X b ,

respectively); one could in fact rewrite (6) as:

(7)

Eib = " 0 + " 1' E b + " 2' X b + " 3' Qib + " 4' X ib + uib ! # b + " 3' Qib + " 4' X ib + uib

In such models, endogenous and exogenous social effects (!1’ and

!2’) are typically not

separately identified without imposing some additional structure. In our case, the block fixed
effects capture the influence of mean neighborhood outcomes and observables without attempting
to decompose these two effects.40 Our variable of interest Qib then identifies the additional
influence of social interactions that are heterogeneous across individuals based on our specific
mechanism for detecting labor market referrals, i.e. the propensity to work together.
Finally, it is important to point out a limitation of this exercise. In particular, what is
actually identified by the first-stage analysis are types of pairs that are more likely to work
together due to the strength of the referral effect between the pair. As discussed above, we expect
this effect to be large in two cases: (i) when a pair is more likely to interact within their
residential neighborhood and (ii) when one person is well attached to the labor market and the
40

Using block fixed effects is also preferable since mean outcomes and attributes may be measured with
error at the block level, and block attributes may influence outcomes in a non-linear fashion.

23

other likely to need a referral. In this way, for a person that is not well attached to the labor
market, the measure of match quality described here should do a good job of characterizing the
quality of matches in a neighborhood. For a person better attached to the labor market, however,
our match quality variable may actually measure neighborhoods in which such a person provides
rather than receives referrals. In this way, to the extent that our estimated social interaction effects
in the first stage of our analysis are driven by the asymmetry in labor market attachment rather
than by the strength of neighborhood interactions, our analysis of the effect of match quality on
labor market outcomes is likely to understate the benefits of improved matches.
Labor Market Outcome Regressions. We now present a series of labor market outcome
regressions based on each of the specifications of the matched pairs equations reported in Table 7.
Each regression includes a set of individual and average neighbor characteristics for each sociodemographic characteristic included in the work match specification as well as a set of reference
group fixed effects. The three broad columns of Table 8 report the effect of a one standard
deviation increase in match quality on labor market outcomes for specifications corresponding to
the three columns of Table 7. Separate results are reported for males and females. In this table, we
only report the coefficient estimates associated with match quality for the sake of expositional
clarity.4142 Note also that the number of observations varies across specification due to the
number of observations with imputed dependent variables in each case; we drop such
observations from the analysis.
For the specifications based on the baseline sample with Census block groups, match
quality has a positive and (statistically and economically) significant impact on all dependent
variables under consideration, except for wages.43 For this specification, a one standard deviation
increase in match quality raises labor force participation by about 3.3 percentage points, average
hours worked per week by about 1.8 hours, and earnings by 3.4 percentage points for males. The
results for females are similar to those for males in terms of labor force participation and
employment conditional on participation, whereas they are slightly larger for weeks and hours
worked, and earnings. In this way, our estimated referral effects are indeed associated with

41

The estimation results for the full sets of individual and block-level covariates are quite standard and are
available from the authors upon request.
42
The first two dependent variables refer to labor market outcomes for the week preceding the census
survey. The last four variables represent labor market outcomes for the preceding year. Earnings and wage
regressions are run for the sample of individuals that were fully-employed in the previous year, defined as
having worked at least 45 weeks and at least 30 hours per week.

24

improved labor market outcomes especially as it concerns participation in the labor market and
the intensity of that participation.44 The latter is especially true for women, for whom the increase
in hours and weeks worked more than compensates for the drop in hourly wages, so that there is
still a positive effect on earnings.
A subset of these results is broadly confirmed in the specification with the alternative
reference group definition and with individual fixed effects (second and third sets of columns),
although the size of the estimated effects is generally smaller. In interpreting the magnitudes of
the results in Table 8, it is important to keep in mind that, as shown in the row heading, the
estimated standard deviation of match quality across blocks is significantly smaller in the
individual fixed effects specification. This means that even though the coefficients on match
quality in the set of labor market outcome regressions are similar in magnitude to those obtained
for the other specifications, the reported effect of one standard deviation increase in match quality
is much smaller, as seen in the table.
For males, an increase in match quality has a statistically significant positive effect on
hours worked and earnings across all three specifications: the earnings effect ranges from two to
almost four percentage points. For female workers, labor force participation and employment
conditional on participation are positively affected by match quality across all specifications; here
the effects range from one to about three percentage points.
It is not surprising that the availability of potential referrals as measured by our match
quality variable has a differential impact on labor market outcomes for male and female workers.
Several studies in the literature on informal hiring channels find that both usage and productivity
of referral networks vary across gender. Bradshaw (1973), Ports (1993) and Rosenbaum et al.
(1999) all find that unemployed women are less likely to use informal job networks. Loury (2006)
finds that female contacts have lower impact on outcomes than male impacts; since personal
networks are assortative along gender lines, this implies that referrals tend to be less productive
for female than for male workers. Bortnick and Ports (1992) similarly find that referral networks
are less productive for females.
The magnitudes of the labor force participation and employment effects estimated in
Table 8 are generally consistent with the increased propensity to work with at least one neighbor
in the same block estimated in the corresponding employment match models presented in Table
43

Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the block level in all labor market outcome regressions
reported in the paper.
44
Recall from our discussion above that this analysis will tend to understate the benefits of improved match
quality at the block level as the quality of local matches will typically be overstated for individuals who
generally provide referrals.

25

4. Consider, for example, the results presented for our primary specification (Census block
group, no individual fixed effects, sample includes blocks with five or more workers). In this
case, a one standard deviation increase in match quality in the employment match model
corresponds to a 10.1 percent increase in the probability that an individual works with at least one
neighbor at the mean.45 Given that one person in a match is providing the referral, this in turns
implies an increase in the propensity to find a job through a neighborhood referral of 5.0 percent.
This number corresponds to the increased propensity to work with someone on exactly the same
block and, therefore, provides a lower bound on the number of neighborhood referrals more
generally.
When compared to the employment effect estimated for the corresponding sample (3.2
percent for men, 3.6 percent for women), this then suggests that at most 65-75 percent of referrals
result in the employment of an individual who would not be employed in the absence of the
referral, while the other 20-30 percent of neighborhood referrals go to individuals who would find
employment through another search method. Again, because the denominator in this calculation
is expected to be understated while the numerator is not, the actual fraction of referrals that result
in a non-infra-marginal employment may be much less.46
7

CONCLUSION
This paper aims at detecting and measuring the importance of neighborhood referrals on

labor market outcomes by using a novel data set and identification strategy. Using Census data
that detail the exact block of residence and workplace for a large sample of prime-age workers in
the Boston metro area, we identify social interactions by comparing the propensity of individuals
on the same versus nearby blocks to work together. We find significant evidence of social
interactions: residing on the same block increases the probability of working together by over 33
percent. This finding is robust across various specifications intended to address biases caused by

45

As discussed above, match quality is measured with error due to the 1-in-7 nature of the Census sample.
As a result, the measured standard deviation reported in the column heading of Table 8 overstates the true
variation in match quality. For the specification described here, we estimated (using Monte Carlo
simulations) that the true standard deviation of match quality is about 0.18 percentage points (as compared
to the measured standard deviation of 0.29 reported in Table 8). Following the same procedure as in the
example worked out in footnote 33, an 0.18 percentage point increase in working with each neighbor leads
to a 0.101 = (1 - 0.00355)^80 – (1 – (0.00355+0.0018))^80 increase in the likelihood of working with at
least one neighbor. Please see footnote 33 for more details regarding this calculation.
46
We expect the labor market outcome regressions to provide an estimate of the ultimate impact of all
actual referrals from the neighborhood including individuals in both the same and nearby blocks. In
particular, with limited sorting within block groups, expected match quality for individual with others in the
same block group is the same as their actual block match quality. Consequently, the block level index for
match quality is likely to capture the effect of referrals both within the block and from neighboring blocks.

26

sorting below the reference group level and housing market referrals exchanged between people
who work together as well as to the introduction of detailed controls for socio-demographic
characteristics and individual fixed effects. Furthermore, the relationship between sociodemographic characteristics and the strength of social interactions makes sense. Social
interactions tend to be stronger when the match involves individuals who are likely to interact
because they are similar in terms of education, age, and presence of children, which is consistent
with the notion of assortative matching in social networks. Interactions also appear to be stronger
when they involve at least one type of individual who is strongly attached to the labor market
leading to stronger interactions when both members of the pair are married males.
In the second half of our analysis we use our heterogeneous referral effect estimates to
construct an individual-specific measure of the availability of referral opportunities on her block
of residence. Even after controlling for individual attributes, observable block attributes, and
reference group or individual fixed effects, this measure is a statistically significant determinant
of several labor market outcomes across all of our specifications. In terms of economic
magnitude, a one standard deviation increase in referral opportunities raises expected earnings by
2.0-3.7 percentage points for men, and labor force participation by 0.9-3.4 percentage points for
women.
More generally, this paper provides a new approach for examining the effect of social
interactions based on variation in geographic scale. In presenting the results related to
neighborhood referrals and labor market outcomes, we also provide direct evidence on the
reasonableness of this new design by testing whether its key assumptions hold on observable
characteristics. In particular, we demonstrate that based on their observable characteristics, pairs
of individuals residing on the same block would actually be slightly less likely to work together
than pairs in the same reference group but not the same block. This provides strong evidence that
our research design is likely to be robust to within-reference group sorting. Further, the inclusion
of individual fixed effects allows us to control for a form of sorting on unobservables.
This evidence also suggests that the research design proposed in the paper may be useful
in a variety of contexts. For example, in the case of welfare participation, the block of residence is
unlikely to greatly influence access to public service providers after controlling for the reference
group. More generally, this design might be extended to the study of neighborhood effects in
specific contexts (e.g., specific types of neighborhoods), on specific populations (e.g., youths),
and for alternative outcomes (e.g., education, teenage fertility, health, welfare participation,
bankruptcy and mortgage delinquency), provided the researcher can demonstrate that the withinreference group correlation in observable neighbor characteristics is zero, thereby ensuring that

27

the key identifying assumption on unobserved characteristics is at least reasonable. In future
work, we also intend to extend this analysis to young adults for whom neighborhood contacts
might be an especially important source of job referrals.
REFERENCES
Addison, John T. and Pedro Portugal (2002), “Job Search Methods and Outcomes,” Oxford Economic
Papers, Vol. 54 (3), 505-33.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber (2005), “Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools”, Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 113 (1), pp. 151-84.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Gigi Foster, Natalie Goodpaster, and Josh Kinsler, (2007) “Estimating Spillovers using
Panel Data, with an Application to the Classroom,” mimeo, Duke University.
Audretsch, David B. and Maryann P. Feldman (1996), “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
and Production,” American Economic Review, 86(3), 630-640.
Bandiera, Oriana and Imran Rasul (2006), “Social Networks, and Technology Adoption in Northern
Mozambique,” Economic Journal, Vol. 116, 862-902.
Bayer, Patrick, Randi Pintoff, and David Pozen (2008), “Building Criminal Capital Behind Bars: Peer
Effects in Juvenile Corrections,” unpublished manuscript, Duke University.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2000), “Network Effects and Welfare
Cultures,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 1019-55.
Blau, David and Phillip Robbins (1990), “Job Search Outcomes for the Employed and Unemployed,”
Journal of Political Economy, 98 (3), 637-55
Blau, David (1992), “An Empirical Analysis of Employed and Unemployed Job Search Behavior,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45, 738-52.
Bortnick, Steven and Michelle Ports (1992), “Job Search Methods and Results:
Unemployed,” Monthly Labor Review, 115 (12), 29-35.

Tracking the

Bradshaw, Thomas F. (1973), “Jobseeking Methods Used by Unemployed Workers”, Monthly Labor
Review, Vol. 96 (2), pp. 35-40.
Brock, William A.and Steven N. Durlauf (2001), “Interactions-Based Models” in Handbook of
Econometrics, edited by James J. Heckman and Edward Leamer, Vol. 5, 3297-3380.
Burke, Mary A., Gary Fournier and Kislaya Prasad (2004), “The Diffusion of a Medical Innovation: Is
Success in the Stars?”, Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 73(3), 588-603.
Calvo-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew O. Jackson (2004), “The Effects of Social Networks on
Employment and Inequality,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94 (3), 426-54.
Card, David and Jesse Rothstein (2007), “Racial Segregation and the Black-White Test Score Gap,” Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 91 (11-12), pp. 2158-84.

28

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz (1991), “The Company You Keep: the Effects of Family and
Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper no. 3705.
Census Bureau (1997), “United States Census 2000: Participant Statistical Areas Program Guidelines,”
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry (2005), “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in
Ghana,” Chicago GSB, unpublished manuscript.
Corcoran, Mary, Linda Datcher and Greg Duncan (1980), “Information and Influence Networks in Labor
Markets,” in Five Thousand American Families: Patterns of Economic Progress, edited by Greg Duncan
and James Morgan, vol. 7, 1-37, Ann Arbor, MI: Institute For Social Research.
Crane, Jonathan (1991), “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on Dropping Out and
Teenage Childbearing,” The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96 (5), 1226-1259.
Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser (1997), “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 112 (3), 827-872.
Datcher, Linda (1983), “The Impact of Informal Networks on Quit Behavior”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 65 (3), pp. 491-95.
Devine, Theresa and Nicholas Kiefer (1991), Empirical Labor Economics: The Search Approach, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Durlauf, Steven (2004), “Neighborhood Effects,” in The Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
Volume 4: Cities and Geography, edited by V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse. Elsevier Science/North Holland.
Elliot, James (1999), “Social Isolation and Labor Market Isolation: Network and Neighborhood Effects on
Less-Educated Workers,” Sociological Quarterly, 40 (2), 199-16.
Evans, William, Wallace Oates and Robert Schwab, (1992) “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Study of
Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(5): 966-91.
Fischer, Claude S. (1982), To Dwell among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and City, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Flachaire, E. (1999) “A Better Way to Bootstrap Pairs,” Economics Letters, 64, 257-262.
Flachaire, E. (2005) “Bootstrapping Heteroskedastic Regression Models: Wild Bootstrap versus Pairs
Bootstrap,” Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, Vol. 49 (2), 361-376.
Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, José A. Scheinkman, Andrei Shleifer (1992), “Growth in Cities,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, 1126-1152.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and José A. Scheinkman (1996), “Crime and Social Interactions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, 507-548.
Granovetter, Mark S. (1995), Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Seppo Ikaheimo (2004), “Interpersonal Effects in Consumption:
Evidence from the Automobile Purchases on Neighbors.” NBER Working Paper #10226.
Guest, Avery M. and Barrett A. Lee (1983), “The Social Organization of Local Areas”, Urban Affairs
Quarterly, Vol. 19, 217-240.

29

Holzer, Harry (1987), “Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment,” American Economic
Review, 77 (3), 446-52.
Holzer, Harry J. (1988), “Search Method Use by Unemployed Youth,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 6
(1), 1-20.
Horowitz, J.L. (2000) “The Bootstrap” In Handbook of Econometrics, Vol 5. J. Heckman and E. Leamer
(Eds). Elsevier Science.
Hoxby, Caroline (2000), “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,”
NBER Working Paper # w7867.
Ioannides, Yannis M. (2004), “Neighborhood Income Distributions,” Journal of Urban Economics, 56,
435-457.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Linda Datcher Loury (2004), “Job Information Networks, Neighborhood Effects,
and Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 42, 1056-93.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Jeffrey E. Zabel (2008), “Interactions, Neighborhood Selection, and Housing
Demand,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 63, 228-252.
Jacob, Brian (2004), “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence from Public
Housing Demolitions in Chicago”, American Economic Review Vol. 94 (1), pp. 233-58.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson (1993), “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, 577598.
Jencks, Christopher and Susan E. Mayer (1990), “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor
Neighborhood,” in Inner-City Poverty in the United States, edited by L. Lynn and M. McGeary,
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 111-186.
Kadushin, Charles and Delmos J. Jones (1992). “Social Networks and Urban Neighborhoods in New York
City”, City and Society, Vol. 6 (1), 58-75.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey Kling and Jeffrey Liebman (2001), “Moving To Opportunity in Boston: Early
Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116 (2), 607-54.
Korenman, Sanders and Susan Turner (1996), “Employment Contacts and Minority-White Wage
Differences,” Industrial Relations, 35 (1), 106-22.
Lee, Barrett A. and Karen E. Campbell (1999), “Neighbor Networks of Black and White Americans”, in
Networks in the Global Village: Life in Contemporary Communities, edited by Barry Wellman, Boulder,
Colorado: Westview Press, 119-146.
Loury, Linda Datcher (2006), “Some Contacts Are More Equal than Others: Informal Networks, Job
Tenure, and Wages”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 24 (2), pp. 299-318.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan and Paul Hirschfield (2001), “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime: Evidence
from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116 (2), 655-79.
Mammen E. (1993) “Bootstrap and Wild Bootstrap for High Dimensional Linear Models,” Annals of
Statistics, 21, 255-285.

30

Manski, Charles F. (1993), “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: the Reflection Problem,” Review
of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, 531-542.
Marmaros, David and Bruce Sacerdote (2002), “Peer and Social Networks in Job Search,” European
Economic Review, 46, 870-879.
Marsden, Peter V. (1987), “Core Discussion Networks of Americans,” American Sociological Review, Vol.
52, 122-131.
Marsden, Peter V. (1988), `”Homogeneity in Confiding Relations,” Social Networks, Vol. 10, pp.57-76.
Moffitt, Robert A. (2001), “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions”, in Social
Dynamics, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
Press; Cambridge and London: MIT Press, pp. 45-82.
Montgomery, James D. (1991), “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic
Analysis , The American Economic Review, vol. 81, no. 5, pp. 1408-1418.
Oreopoulos, Philip (2003), “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 118 (4), pp. 1533-75.
Otani, Shinsuke (1999), “Personal Community Networks in Contemporary Japan”, in Networks in the
Global Village: Life in Contemporary Communities, edited by Barry Wellman, Boulder, Colorado:
Westview Press, 279-297.
Popkin, Susan J., James E. Rosenbaum and Patricia M. Meaden (1993), “Labor Market Experiences of
Low-Income Black Women in Middle-Class Suburbs: Evidence from a Survey of Gautreaux Program
Participants,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 12 (3), 556-73.
Ports, Michelle Harrison (1993), “Trends in Job Search Methods, 1970-92”, Monthly Labor Review, Vol.
116 (10), pp. 63-67.
Rees, Albert and George P. Schultz (1970), Workers and Wages in an Urban Labor Market, Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press.
Rosenbaum, James E., Stefanie DeLuca, Shazia R. Miller and Kevin Roy (1999), “Pathways into Work:
Short- and Long-Term Effects of Personal and Institutional Ties”, Sociology of Education, Vol. 72 (3), pp.
179-196.
Ross, Stephen L. (1998) “Racial Differences in Residential and Job Mobility: Evidence concerning the
Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis,” Journal of Urban Economics, 43(1): 112-35.
Ross, Stephen L. and Yves Zenou. (In Press) “Effort, Location, and Urban Unemployment,” Regional
Science and Urban Economics.
Sacerdote, Bruce (2001), “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116 (2), 681-704.
Sobel, Michael E. (2006), “Spatial Concentration and Social Stratification: Does the Clustering of
Disadvantage ‘Beget’ Bad Outcomes?” in Poverty Traps, edited by Samuel Bowles; Steven N. Durlauf and
Karla Hoff, New York: Russell Sage Foundation; Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, pp.
204-29.
Topa, Giorgio (2001), “Social Interactions, Local Spillovers, and Unemployment”, Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 68, pp. 261-295.

31

Wahba, Jackline and Yves Zenou (2005), “Density, Social Networks and Job Search Methods: Theory and
Application to Egypt,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 78 (2), pp. 443-73.
Weinberg, Bruce, (2000) “Black Residential Centralization and the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis,” Journal
of Urban Economics, 48(1): 110-34.
Weinberg, Bruce, (2004) “Testing the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis Using Inter-city Variations in
Industrial Composition,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 34(5): 505-32.
Weinberg, Bruce, Patricia Reagan and Jeffrey Yankow (2004), “Do Neighborhoods Affect Hours Worked?
Evidence from Longitudinal Data”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 22 (4), pp. 891-924.
Wellman, Barry (1996), “Are Personal Communities Local? A Dumptarian Reconsideration,” Social
Networks, Vol. 18, 347-354.
Zax, Jeffrey S. and Daniel Rees (2002), “IQ, Academic Performance, Environment, and Earnings,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 84 (4), 600-616.
Zimmerman, David J. (2003), “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence From a Natural
Experiment,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 85 (1), 9-23.

32

TABLE 1: Composition of Pairs Residing in Same Neighborhood Reference Group

Sample

Pairs Residing in
Pairs Residing in
Same Census Block Ten-Closest-Blocks
Group
Reference Group

Variable Name

Percentage That Work in Same Location

Reside in Same
Census Block
Group but Not
Same Block

Reside in Ten
Closest Blocks but
Not Same Block

Reside on Same
Block

Full sample

100.00

100.00

0.36

0.38

0.94

Both high school drop out
Both high school graduate
Both college graduate
HS drop out - HS grad
HS drop out – College grad
HS grad – College grad

0.53
15.50
36.41
4.75
4.95
37.87

0.67
14.84
37.56
5.12
5.36
36.46

1.03
0.47
0.34
0.51
0.29
0.30

0.79
0.50
0.37
0.49
0.30
0.32

ND
1.33
0.98
0.82
ND
0.82

Both age 25-34
Both age 35-44
Both age 45-59
Age 25-34 and age 45-59
Age 35-44 and age 45-59
Age 25-34 and age 35-44

14.70
11.02
9.55
20.01
19.86
23.27

17.89
10.27
8.17
19.95
17.64
24.63

0.36
0.33
0.42
0.34
0.38
0.33

0.37
0.39
0.44
0.37
0.40
0.34

1.72
0.77
0.65
0.72
0.63
0.91

Both single male
Both single female
Single male–single female
Both married male
Both married female
Married male–married female
Single male-married female
Single male-married male
Single female-married female
Single female–married male

3.01
4.62
7.17
14.69
8.07
21.58
7.87
10.12
10.03
12.84

4.27
6.06
9.71
12.10
7.00
18.21
8.38
10.47
10.61
13.19

0.36
0.40
0.33
0.35
0.52
0.29
0.33
0.38
0.41
0.31

0.40
0.36
0.36
0.39
0.50
0.30
0.36
0.44
0.39
0.34

0.77
0.54
0.43
1.61
1.78
1.35
0.54
0.85
0.64
0.48

Both have children
Both have children age 0-5
Both have children age 6-12
Both have children age 13-17
Both have children age 18-24
No children

26.98
3.37
4.12
2.85
3.01
27.71

22.55
2.88
3.39
2.29
2.62
34.57

0.36
0.33
0.37
0.42
0.48
0.37

0.39
0.37
0.42
0.44
0.51
0.40

1.58
3.10
2.50
1.57
ND
0.72

Both White
White – Black
White – Asian/Hispanic
Both Minority

86.51
3.59
8.31
0.51

82.64
4.67
10.07
2.62

0.35
0.30
0.39
0.47

0.37
0.35
0.43
0.43

0.77
1.34
1.69
2.38

Both 2 years in residence or less
One <= 2 years months , one > 2 years in residence
Both > 2 years in residence

3.18
25.60
71.22

4.13
28.47
67.40

0.35
0.35
0.36

0.45
0.38
0.37

1.70
1.24
0.73

Both fully employed
One not fully employed one fully employed
Both not fully employed

74.21
23.81
1.98

81.78
17.26
0.97

0.37
0.31
0.50

0.37
0.38
0.61

0.84
1.17
2.07

Both own house
Both rent
One rent one own

54.93
14.52
30.54

44.50
21.80
33.69

0.34
0.46
0.35

0.35
0.49
0.34

0.44
2.38
0.42

Notes: The full sample for Census Block Groups includes 2,037,600 pairs of currently-employed, prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the same block group but not the
same household within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. The full sample for the alternative neighborhood reference groups includes 2,671,270 pairs of currentlyemployed, prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the ten closest blocks to a given block, but not the same household within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. For the
type of pair denoted in the row heading, the table describes the fraction of such pairs in the full sample, and the propensity of such pairs to work together (in same block)
for individuals in the same block group but not the same block, those in the ten closest blocks but not the same block, and those on the same block, respectively. All
figures are expressed as percentages. ND indicates that a value was not disclosed because the number of individuals that work in the same block is less than 75.

Table 2: Sample of Prime-Age Adults in Boston Metropolitan Area
Full Sample

Variable Name

Full sample
High school drop out
High school graduate
College graduate
Age 25-34
Age 35-44
Age 45-59
Single male
Single female
Married male
Married female
Has no children
Has children
Has children age 0-5
Has children age 6-12
Has children age 13-17
Has children age 18-24
White
Black
Asian/Hispanic
In residence <= 2 years
In residence > 2 years
Employed < 45 weeks in 1989
Employed >= 45 weeks in 1989

Sample Fully
Employed in
1989

Sample
Currently
Employed in
1990

Percentage of
Sample

Percent
Currently
Employed
(1990)

Avg. Weeks
Worked in
1989

Avg. Hours per
Week in 1989

Avg. Earnings
in 1989 in
$1000's

Avg. Commute
Distance

100.0
10.2
42.0
47.8
38.2
31.6
30.2
17.5
20.0
30.6
31.9
48.1
51.9
19.7
20.5
15.6
17.0
87.9
5.1
7.0
16.7
83.3
31.0
69.0

75.1
55.4
71.9
82.0
74.8
77.0
73.4
73.0
75.1
86.7
65.0
77.3
73.0
68.3
71.6
75.8
74.7
76.7
63.7
63.1
73.7
75.3
40.2
90.8

40.5
31.5
39.4
43.4
40.8
41.1
39.6
41.7
40.6
46.7
33.9
42.2
39.0
36.9
37.6
40.0
40.4
41.2
37.2
34.9
39.9
40.7
16.2
51.5

34.9
27.7
33.1
37.9
35.9
35.0
33.3
38.0
34.0
42.9
25.9
36.9
33.0
31.8
31.6
33.5
33.8
35.3
32.4
31.6
36.2
34.6
19.6
41.7

34.3
22.0
26.9
42.1
28.7
37.3
38.3
31.2
26.5
46.8
24.0
32.5
36.2
37.6
37.6
37.1
33.3
35.3
25.8
26.7
31.4
34.9
ND
34.3

7.0
5.3
6.5
7.6
6.9
7.3
6.8
6.4
5.9
8.6
6.2
6.7
7.3
7.9
7.2
6.9
6.7
7.2
5.4
5.5
6.8
7.0
5.8
7.2

Notes: The full sample includes 163,594 prime-age (25-59), adults that reside in the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. For the type of
individual denoted in the row heading, the table describes the fraction of such individuals in the full sample, the fraction currently
employed in 1990, average weeks worked in 1989, average hours per week in 1989, average earnings for those fully-employed in 1989,
and average commute distance for those currently employed, respectively. For the purposes of examining earnings throughout the
paper, fully-employed in 1989 refers to any individual who worked at least 45 weeks and at least 30 hours per week; there are 113,575
such individuals for whom earnings are not imputed.

TABLE 3: Correlation Between Individual and Average Characteristics of Neighbors Residing on Same Block
Blocks with 5+ Workers in Sample

Unconditional

Conditional on
Census Block
Group

Conditional on "Ten
Closest Blocks" Reference
Group

HS Graduate
Col Graduate

0.182
0.294

0.040
0.060

0.021
0.030

Age 45-59
Age 35-44
Age 25-34

0.051
0.017
0.098

0.008
-0.004
0.027

-0.020
-0.031
-0.005

Single Female
Single Male
Married Female
Married Male

0.110
0.094
0.080
0.088

0.033
0.027
0.005
0.026

0.014
0.004
-0.015
0.011

Children
Children 0-5
Children 6-12
Children 13-17
Children 18-24

0.142
0.046
0.058
0.048
0.064

0.046
0.019
0.017
0.015
0.022

0.006
-0.007
-0.017
-0.025
-0.014

Black
Asian or Hispanic

0.593
0.275

0.054
0.084

0.017
0.049

Note: Table reports unbiased estimates of correlation between a series of individual characteristics and the corresponding average characteristics of other individuals
residing on the same block but not in the same household. Blocks with fewer than five workers have been dropped from this sample. The first column reports
unconditional correlation, the second conditions on block group fixed effects, and the third conditions on fixed effects for neighborhood reference groups based on the
ten closest blocks to each block..

TABLE 4: Estimates of Employment Location Match Regressions
Sample
Neighborhood Reference Group
Individual Fixed Effects

Blocks with 5+ Workers

Blocks with 5+ Workers

Blocks with 5+ Workers

Census Block Group
No

Ten Closest Blocks
No

Census Block Group
Yes

Specification Without Covariates - Average Effects Only
Reside on Same Block
Sample Size:
Includes Reference Group Fixed Effects:

bmatch

coef

t-stat

coef

t-stat

coef

t-stat

0.1200

6.80

0.3345

33.02

0.1688

33.09

1,234,494
Yes

2,198,183

1,234,494

Yes

Yes

Notes: This table reports results for three specifications of a regression in which an observation is a pair of currently-employed, prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the same
neighborhood reference group but not the same household within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. In each specification, the dependent variable equals one if both individuals work
in the same location (Census block) and zero otherwise. All specifications are for a sample that drops blocks with fewer than five workers, which includes 1,234,494 pairs. The first
column reports results using Census block groups as reference groups. The second column reports results using the ten closest blocks as the neighborhood reference group. The third
column adds individual fixed effects to the first column. Neighborhood reference group fixed effects are included in all specifications (although these are redundant in the specification
that includes individual fixed effects). The coefficients have been multiplied by 100 to reflect percent changes. Standard errors in all cases are estimated by pair-wise bootstraps and tstatistics are reported.

TABLE 5: Employment Location Match Regressions for Homogeneous Sub-Samples
Reference Groups Most
Homogeneous w.r.t.
Education

Reference Groups Most
Homogeneous w.r.t.
Presence of Children

Reference Groups Most
Homogeneous w.r.t. Race

Specification Without Covariates - Census Block Group Fixed Effects
Reside on Same Block

bmatch

coef
0.0974

t-stat
6.03

980,548
Yes

Sample Size
Includes Block Group Fixed Effects:

coef
0.0883

t-stat
5.64

1,032,037
Yes

coef
0.0989

t-stat
5.95

921,277
Yes

Specification Without Covariates - "Ten Closest Blocks" Reference Group Fixed Effects
Reside on Same Block

bmatch

coef
0.3632

t-stat
26.42

1,732,535
Yes

Sample Size
Includes Reference Group Fixed Effects:

coef
0.3923

t-stat
29.85

1,918,414
Yes

coef
0.6677

t-stat
29.81

800,909
Yes

Specification Without Covariates - Census Block Group Geography with Individual Fixed Effects
Reside on Same Block
Sample Size
Includes Individual Fixed Effects:

bmatch

coef
0.1226

t-stat
19.75

980,548
Yes

coef
0.1048

t-stat
19.19

1,032,037
Yes

coef
0.1305

t-stat
20.71

921,277
Yes

Notes: This table reports result for nine specifications of a regression in which an observation is a pair of currently-employed, prime-age (25-59) adults that
reside in the same reference group but not the same household within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. The dependent variable equals one if both individuals
work in the same location (Census block) and zero otherwise. Each specification is based on the sample of pairs in blocks with at least five workers. The
columns report results for samples of the most homogeneous reference groups in terms of education, the presence of children, and race, respectively. Reference
group fixed effects are included in all specifications (although these are redundant in the specifications that includes individual fixed effects). The upper panel of
the table reports results for specifications that include only Census block group fixed effects and an indicator for whether the individuals reside on the same
block. The middle panel uses the same specifications as the upper panel but with the alternative neighborhood reference groups based on the ten closest blocks
geography. The lower panel reports results for specifications that include block group fixed effects, individual fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the individuals reside on the
The coefficients have been multiplied by 100 to reflect percent changes. Standard errors in all cases are estimated by pair-wise bootstraps and t-statistics are
reported.

TABLE 6: Employment Location Match Regressions - Tenure-Based Sub-Samples
Both in Residence at Least Two
Years

Both in Residence at Least Two Both in Residence at Least Two
Years;
Years;
One Not Employed for Full Year One Not Employed for Full Year
1989
1989 (Alternative Definition)

One in Residence Less than
Two Years;
Other in Residence at Least
Five Years;
Both fully
employed in 1989

Specification Without Covariates - Census Block Group Fixed Effects
Reside on Same Block

bmatch

coef
0.1016

Sample Size:
Includes Block Group Fixed Effects:

t-stat
4.07
846,061
Yes

Specification Without Covariates - "Ten Cloest Blocks"Reference Group Fixed Effects
coef
Reside on Same Block
bmatch
0.2609
Sample Size
Includes Reference Group Fixed Effects:

coef
0.0918

t-stat
2.28

coef
0.1917

196,167
Yes
t-stat
15.12

coef
0.2801

1,417,125
Yes

t-stat
1.92

coef
0.0531

41,979
Yes
t-stat
6.28

coef
0.6474

230,424
Yes

t-stat
1.44
130,229
Yes

t-stat
9.27

coef
0.1584

74,227
Yes

t-stat
5.99
265,269
Yes

100.00
Specification Without Covariates - Census Block Group Geography with Individual Fixed Effects
coef
Reside on Same Block
bmatch
0.1577
Sample Size
Includes Individual Fixed Effects:

846,061
Yes

t-stat
24.73

coef
0.1582

t-stat
8.64
196,167
Yes

coef
0.1949

t-stat
14.00
41,979
Yes

coef
0.1392

t-stat
8.61
130,229
Yes

Notes: This table reports result for twelve specifications of a regression in which an observation is a pair of currently-employed, prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the same reference group but not the same household
within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. The dependent variable equals one if both individuals work in the same location (Census block) and zero otherwise. Each specification is based on the sample of pairs in blocks
with at least five workers. The first column is based on a sample that includes only individuals that have lived in their current residence for at least two years. The second column uses a sample that includes only those
individuals that have lived in their current residence for at least two years but where one member of the pair was not employed for the full year in 1989 (defined as employed for 45 weeks or less). The third column uses a
sample where "not employed for the full year in 1989" is defined as employed for 20 weeks or less. The fourth column reports results for a sample where one member has lived in their current residence less than two years and
the other member has lived in their current residence at least five years; both were employed for the full year in 1989.
Reference group fixed effects are included in all specifications (although these are redundant in the specifications that includes individual fixed effects). In the upper panel of the table, results are reported for a specification that
includes only block group fixed effects and an indicator for whether the individuals reside on the same block. The middle panel reports results for a specification that includes only reference group fixed effects and an indicator
for whether the individuals reside on the same block using the new ten closest blocks geography. The lower panel adds individual fixed effects to the upper panel. The coefficients have been multiplied by 100 to reflect percent
changes. Standard errors are estimated by pair-wise bootstraps and t-stats are reported.

TABLE 7: Estimates of Employment Location Match Regressions
Sample
Neighborhood Reference Group
Individual Fixed Effects

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Census Block Group
No

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Ten Closest Blocks
No

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Census Block Group
Yes

coef
0.0427

t-stat
0.09

coef
-0.9431

t-stat
-5.60

coef
0.0969

t-stat
1.93

Specification With Covariates
Reside in same block

bmatch

Both high school drop out
Both high school graduate
Both college graduate
HS drop out - HS grad
HS drop out – College grad

bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*

hsd_hsd
hsg_hsg
clg_clg
hsd_hsg
hsd_clg

-0.0284
0.1851
0.0124
-0.0606
-0.1103

-0.15
3.80
0.17
-1.47
-2.28

-0.1764
0.2622
-0.0981
0.0174
-0.1363

-0.73
6.64
-3.59
0.38
-3.05

-0.0991
0.1025
0.0214
0.0373
-0.0055

-1.20
5.02
2.80
2.96
-0.35

Both have children
Both have children age 0-5
Both have children age 6-12
Both have children age 13-17
Both have children age 18-24

bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*

child_m
c05_05
c612_612
c1317_1317
c1824_1824

0.0779
0.3742
0.3070
0.3190
-0.1522

0.71
1.77
2.18
2.57
-0.86

0.2999
0.5852
0.4956
0.3773
-0.4504

4.90
5.32
5.40
3.30
-3.97

-0.0301
0.0687
0.0659
0.2345
-0.0615

-2.14
3.61
1.88
8.38
-2.16

Both age 25-34
Both age 35-44
Both age 45-59
Age 25-34 and age 45-59
Age 35-44 and age 45-59

bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*

a25_25
a35_35
a45_45
a25_45
a35_45

0.2094
-0.0063
0.0166
0.0167
-0.0126

2.62
-0.09
0.24
0.37
-0.16

0.3110
-0.1440
-0.0729
0.0116
-0.1181

10.39
-4.12
-1.50
0.34
-2.40

0.2049
0.1585
0.1102
0.0583
0.0649

13.44
13.13
6.40
3.71
5.22

Both single male
Both single female
Single male–single female
Both married male
Married male–married female
Single male-married female
Single male-married male
Single female-married female
Single female-married male

bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*

sm_sm
sf_sf
sm_sf
mm_mm
mm_mf
sm_mf
sm_mm
sf_mf
sf_mm

0.8642
0.6649
0.6135
1.2782
0.6091
0.5544
0.8861
0.7149
0.6892

2.39
2.08
1.73
4.46
3.53
1.90
2.51
2.52
1.92

0.1906
0.0916
-0.0561
0.8214
0.3404
0.0127
0.2532
0.1895
0.0858

1.63
1.00
-0.61
9.45
3.63
0.12
3.45
2.45
1.05

-0.1010
-0.2654
-0.2611
0.0934
-0.2870
-0.2773
-0.1321
-0.1566
-0.2012

-4.08
-11.05
-13.62
4.15
-11.54
-10.31
-5.61
-4.76
-9.10

Both White
Both Black
White – Black
White – Asian/Hispanic

bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*
bmatch*

wht_wht
bl_bl
bl_wht
ashi_wht

-0.7491
-0.7038
-0.7858
-0.4746

-2.78
-2.80
-2.63
-1.76

-0.3965
-0.4563
-0.3367
-0.1571

-3.32
-3.67
-2.04
-1.21

0.0277
0.1182
0.1252
0.0422

0.57
1.48
2.42
0.67

Combined time in residence
Minimum time in residence
Moved w/in 5 year of each other

bmatch* lngth
bmatch* lngth_min
bmatch* lngth_win_5

-0.0017
0.0048
0.0387

-0.87
1.44
1.38

0.0048
-0.0026
0.1562

2.16
-0.71
5.14

-0.0019
0.0077
0.0351

-1.63
3.92
2.04

Block size (population)

bmatch* blocksize

-0.0010

-0.09

0.0227

39.07

0.0001

0.49

Sample Size
Includes Reference Group Fixed Effects

1,234,494
Yes

2,198,183
Yes

1,234,494
Yes

Notes: This table reports results for three specifications of a regression in which an observation is a pair of currently-employed, prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the same
reference group but not the same household within the Boston metropolitan area in 1990. In each specification, the dependent variable equals one if both individuals work in the same
location (Census block) and zero otherwise. All specifications are for a sample that drops blocks with fewer than five workers, which includes 1,234,494 pairs. The first column reports
results using Census block groups as reference groups. The second column reports results using the ten closest blocks geography. The third column adds individual fixed effects to the
first column. Reference group fixed effects are included in all specifications (although these are redundant in the specification that includes individual fixed effects). The coefficients
have been multiplied by 100 to reflect percent changes. Standard errors in all cases are estimated by pair-wise bootstraps and t-statistics are reported.

TABLE 8: The Effect of Match Quality on Labor Market Outcomes
Effect of a One Standard Deviation Increase in Block-Level Match Quality
Sample
Neighborhood Reference Group
Individual Fixed Effects in Employment Match Model

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Census Block Group
No

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Ten Closest Blocks
No

Blocks with 5+ Workers
Census Block Group
Yes

Standard Deviation of Match Quality (as percentage)

0.294

0.401

0.079

Males
Labor Force Participation
Employment
Weeks Worked Last Year
Hours Worked Per Week
Log(Earnings)
Log(Wage)
Females
Labor Force Participation
Employment
Weeks Worked Last Year
Hours Worked Per Week
Log(Earnings)
Log(Wage)

N

coef

t-stat

coef

t-stat

coef

t-stat

128,916
128,916
118,679
118,679
84,773
70,215

0.033
0.032
1.526
1.801
0.034
-0.014

6.60
5.52
5.24
6.85
2.67
-1.51

0.008
0.013
0.995
0.721
0.037
0.006

1.94
2.81
4.14
3.33
3.59
0.77

0.000
0.004
0.238
0.309
0.020
0.020

0.15
1.23
1.60
2.27
3.23
4.07

128,916
128,916
118,679
118,679
84,773
70,215

0.034
0.036
2.162
2.417
0.081
-0.045

5.57
5.72
6.88
8.99
5.30
-5.11

0.011
0.012
0.398
-0.042
0.031
-0.036

1.96
1.87
1.28
-0.16
1.97
-4.38

0.009
0.008
0.020
0.223
-0.006
0.004

2.87
2.49
0.12
1.62
-0.85
0.88

Notes: This table reports results for three specifications of six labor market outcome regressions. The labor market outcomes are labor force participation
status in 1990, current employment in 1990, weeks worked in 1989, average hours worked per week in 1989, the log of 1989 earnings, and the log of 1989
hourly wage. For the first four of these outcome measures, respectively, the sample consists of all prime-age (25-59) adults that reside in the Boston
metropolitan area in 1990. For the last two outcomes, the sample consists of all such individuals that were fully employed in 1989. In these earnings and
wage regressions, fully-employed refers to individuals that worked at least 45 weeks and at least 30 hours per week. All specifications use a sample that drops
blocks with fewer than five workers, which includes 128,916 individuals. In all cases any observations for which the Census imputed the dependent variable
were dropped.
Census block fixed effects are included in all labor market outcome regressions along with controls for the full set of characteristics reported in Table 2
associated with race, education, age, sex, marital status, immigration status, time in residence, and presence of children. For each dependent variable a single
regression was estimated allowing the match quality coefficient to vary by gender; the reported number of observations for each specification refers to the
total number of both men and women. The coefficients reported in the table characterize the effect of a one standard deviation increase in match quality on
the corresponding labor market outcome. For the three specifications reported match quality was constructed using the estimated coefficients from the
corresponding employment match model presented in Table 4. The standard deviation of match quality across blocks for each specification is shown in the
column heading. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the block level and t-statistics are reported.

Figure 1: Distribution of Blocks per Block Group
0.18

0.16

0.14

Frequency

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
1to2

3to4

5to6

7to8

9to10 11to12 13to14 15to16 17to18 19to20 21to22 23to24 25to26 27to28 29to30 31to32 33to34
Number of Blocks

>34

Figure 2: Distribution of Sampled Workers per Block
0.25

0.2

Frequency

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Number of Workers

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

>20

