                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TRADE IN GOODS AND FACTORS WITH
              INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TECHNOLOGY




                         James R. Markusen

                         Lars E.O. Svensson




                      Working Paper No. 1101




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            March 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity in the World
Econonr. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1101
                                                       March 1983



                           Trade in Goods and Factors with

                        International Differences inTechno1or


                                       ABSTRACT


       A general model of trade caused by international differences in produc-

 tion technolor is developed using techniques of duality theory. For the case

of product-augmenting differences in techno1or, it is shown that there is a

positive correlation between net export and
                                              technological superiority, such that
a country will "on average" export goods for which the country has superior

technolor. If some factors are permitted to be
                                                   internationally traded, it is
demonstrated via this correlation that the volume of trade must increase. Thus

unlike trade caused by factor endowment
                                          differences, goods trade caused by

product—augmenting differences in production technolor is always in this sense

complementary    with factor trade. For factor—augmenting technolor differences,
in   the absence of factor trade the goods trade pattern is as if it was caused
                                                                                  by
factor   endowment differences. With factor trade, goods trade and factor trade

can then be either complements or substitutes.


James R. Markusen
                                                     Lars E.0. Svensson
Department of Economics
                                                     Institute for International
University of Western Ontario                        Economic Studies
London
Canada                                               University of Stockholm
(519) 679—3975                                       s—i06 91 Stockholm, Sweden
                                                     46—8—163075

                                                             and

                                                     NBER (Visitor 1982—83)
                                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                     (617) 868—3900
 1.     Introduction

        There has in recent years been a considerable amount of effort devoted to

 generalizing factor proportions models of international trade. Results have
 been   produced in higher dimensional models where a "we—can't—say—anything"        atti-
 tude previously prevailed (see Ethier (1983) for a recent survey). Dixit and
Woodland (1982), for instance, use duality techniques to derive certain rela-
tions which generalize standard two—by—two results such as the Heckscher—Ohlin
theorem.1 While     these   results do not permit   us to predict the direction of
trade    in individual goods, they do demonstrate, for example, that a country will

"on average" export goods, which in some sense, use intensively the country's

abundant factors.

        Far less work has been done in the direction of generalizing models of

alternative (non—factor proportions) determinants of trade such as differences

in production technoior, increasing returns to scale, imperfect competition,

and domestic distortions. Differences in
                                              production technolor, although viewed

as important in explaining US—EEC—Japan trade, have received little attention

past fixed—coefficient Ricardian models.2 Other theories such as those based on

economies of scale are in an even more rudimentary state of development.

      The first purpose of this paper is to try to develop a more general

approach to trade due to international differences in
                                                            production techno1or.
The goal is to derive some relations between the direction of trade and

differences in technology.

      The second task of the paper revolves around factor mobility. The tradi-

tional presumption derived from the Heckscher—Ohlin model is that factor
                                          —2—



movements and commodity trade are substitutes; that is, factor movements lead to

a reduction in the volume of corrinDdity trade. Recently, there has been a great

deal of work on the welfare effects of factor mobility and it turns out that,

when there are trade distortions, these welfare effects are often closely

related to the effects of factor movements on the volume of commodity trade.

Thus, the substitutability between factor movements and comidity trade plays a

key   role   in the welfare analyses of Bhagwati (1973), Brecher and Alejandro

(1971) and Markusen and Melvin (1979).

      More    recently, Svensson (1982) and Markusen (1983) explicitly address the
question of whether or not corimodity trade and factor trade are substitutes or
complements. Svensson analyzes a very     general factor proportions model and

shows    that commodity and factor trade are not always substitutes, but may     some-

times be     complements, depending upon whether traded and nontraded factors are

"cooperative"     or "non—cooperative". Markusen takes a very   different   approach by
analyzing a series of extremely simply non—factor—proportions model in order to
show how conipelementarity can arise. While suggestive, Markusen's models give
little hint    as to the generality of the results.3 The second purpose of the

paper is thus to examine whether or not general results concerning factor mobil-

ity and the volume of trade can be derived in a model of technological differ-

ences.

      It is perhaps not very surprising that few results can be obtained for any

arbitrary differences in technology-. On the other hand, fairly strong results
can be obtained for product augmenting technical differences. Results include

the following. First, we can indeed derive a correlation coefficient which
relates the differences in technology to net trade flows. This coefficient is

the inner product of the vector    of product—augmenting technology parameters with
                                              —3—

 the    vector of net exports, and it is shown to be positive. This result states

 that countries will on average export goods for which they have superior tech-

 nology. Second, it is demonstrated that the value of this correlation coeffi-

 cient increases when trade in some factors is allowed, indicating an increase in

 the volume of trade.

        Thus unlike the case of trade based on differences in factor endowments,

 trade based on product augmenting differences in technology is always, in a spe-

 cific sense, complementary to trade in factors.        The intuition behind this
 result      is straightforward. With trade caused by such differences in technology,
 each country tends to have relatively high prices for those factors used inten—

siver in export (import) industries. In the post—factor            movement equilibrium,
each    country will therefore   be observed to be relatively well endowed with fac-
tors used      intensively in its export industries. In the Heckscher—Ohljn model,
this    is of course the cause   of trade in goods whereas in the present model it is
the                  of trade in factors.

       We also consider factor—augmenting technical differences. In the absence

of factor trade, it IS      straightforward   to show that   the pattern of goods trade
is    as if it was caused by factor endowment differences. With factor trade

results are less clear cut. Goods trade and factor trade can be either comple-

ments or substitutes. Roughly, if traded and non—traded factors are coopera-

tive, and if the dennd for traded factors is
                                                    inelastic, goods trade and factor
trade tend to be substitutes.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with trade in goods

only. Section 3 considers product—augmenting technical differences. Section 1

introduces trade in factors. Section 5 covers factor—augmenting technical dif-

ferences both with and without     factor trade, and Section 6 contains     a summary
and   some   conclusions.
                                                       —4—




2.       Trade in Goods

         The model has n goods (i1,...,n) and m factors (ji,...,m). We let

     =
         (y)   and v =
                          (vi)   denote the n— and rn—vectors of goods outputs and fac-

tor inputs, respectively. We take a to be a vector of technology parameters.

Y(cz) will denote the production possibilitys set such that (y,v) is feasible if

and only if (y,v) e Y(cz). p and r are n— and rn-vectors of goods and factor
prices respectively. c•             denotes    the consumption of good i   while   x=y   —




denotes the net export of good 1.                   c and x are then n—vectors of consumption and

net exports. There are two countries, the home and the foreign. Foreign

variables will be denoted with a *                  subscript.
         Throughout the paper we will assume that there is perfect competition, non—

increasing returns to scale, and no distortions in production. Then we can use

the domestic product or revenue function, which is given by


(1)             G(p,v,a) = Max{py: (y,v) e


where py denotes the inner product E.P.Y.. The domestic product function is

assumed to be twice differentiable. Given the other assumptions about produc-

tion, differentiability is assured if there are at least as many factors (later

as many non—traded factors) as goods. The vector of price derivatives of G

gives outputs as per the usual duality properties,


(2)            y =   G   (p,v,cx)   =   (aG/op.).

(Subindices will denote derivatives throughout the paper.)

         The demand side of the econonr is summarized by a twice differentiable

expenditure function of prices and the welfare level u,


(3)             E(p,u)      Min{pc: U(c) >      u}.
                                                              —5—



 Price      derivatives of E give commodity demands,


               c = E (p,u) =
 (4)
                    p
                                         (3E/ap.).
                                              1

 The equilibriujn of the economy can then be
                                                                    represented by the budget constraint

 (5)           E(p,u) =


 stating     that expenditure equals donstic product.                       Equation (5)   expresses the
 welfare     level as an implicit function of (p,v,a) and hence we can write

 (6)           u = H(p,v,a).


     Equation (6) plus equations (2) and () allow us in turn to write the net
export function as

(1)           X(p,v,cz) =       G       (p,v,a) — E       (p,H(p,v,cz)).
                                    p                 p

Trading equilibirum is then given by the condition that the two countries' net

exports sum        to zero,

(8)           X(p,v,c)        + X*(p,v*,a*) = 0.


       Assume that the two countries have identical
                                                                           preferences, endowments, and
technology (v =          v,    x =      a*).    It then follows that (A) X( ) and X*( )         are   iden-
tical functions, (B) x                          0 at the free—trade equilibrium, and Cc) free—

trade prices equal autarky prices.                        It will be very practical to start from this
initial zero trade equilibrium.

       To   find   how   differences           in technology influence the pattern of trade in
goods, we now let the technology change by the vector dc in the home country-.
Differentiating (7) and (8) we have respectively
                                                   —6—


(9)          Xdp+Xda=dx,and
              p   a


(10)         X dp +   X   da + X*dp =   0;   X    da/2 =   —x   dp,
              p       a         p             a              p


where the second equation in (10) follows from the fact that X =
                                                                             p
                                                                                   Xp   initially.

Substituting (10) into (9), the latter becomes


(ii)         dx = X da/2,
                   a

that is, home country net export will be one half of the initial excess supply

at constant prices.

       The result given in equation (ii) is illustrated in Figure 1 for the two—

goodscase. Here X1( ) = x( ) are the two countries' initial identical net
export supply curves for good 1, say. The initial equilibrium is at point A
where there is no trade. Suppose that technical change in good 1 shifts the
home    country's export supply curve to the right as shown. The horizontal shift
is equal to AB or X1ada. But         there       is now excess supply in   the   market for
good 1 and its relative price must fall to reestablish equilibrium. With the
countries initially identical, the local change in P1/p2 must be such that each

country absorbs exactly one half of the initial excess supply. Thus the new

equilibrium    occurs at price C and a value of x1 equal to CD             or exactly half the

initial    excess supply. We then have the equilibrium x1 given by Xiada/2 as in
(11),    following the price adjustment.

       We now turn our attention to the underlying determinants of Xda. Differ-

entiating (7) at constant prices gives us


(12)         XdaG da—E duG da—(E /E)Edu.
              a       pa        pu    U      pa            pu U
                   —7--


                 Figure 1

         pup2



                                  X1(p,v,)              X(p,v*,a*)

                                 --
                                      X1(p,v,c+dc)

                             B




            0
                       X1d       x1,x



                Figure 2

Cl ,xl




    T




         =a




                                  =              = Ga

                                      C2   ,X2
                                                  —8—


But (Epu/Eu) =            where C, denotes the vector of marginal propensities to con—
                    C,,

suine. Differentiating (5)            at   contant prices we also have Edu =     Gda and so
(12) becomes


(13)         XdcxG
              a
                   da—CGda.
                             pa


        In order to abstract from consumption effects, let us consider only cons-

pensated changes in technolor, defined as Gda = 0.                We will in other words

consider only changes which do not affect the value of production at constant

prices. There is then no consumption response at constant prices so that by

(13) (11) reduces to


(14)         dx =   G        dct/2.
                        pa


       An interpretation of these compensated technology changes is given in

Figure 2 for the two goods case. TT illustrates the initial production frontier

for    both countries with the initial equilibrium by ca = a• Initial prices are
given by the tangent to TT at ea and the initial value of G is given by pya
The assumption of compensating technical changes amounts to the assumption that
the new production frontier must be tangent to pya; that is, at the initial
prices    the value of G must not change. Such a compensating change is illus-
trated in     Figure 2 by the shift of TT to TT' and the corresponding shift of

production to poing y'. The value of G is thus unchanged at constant prices as

is the consumption point (c' =             a)   and the initial welfare level (Ua). The net

export    vector    at the initial prices is given by x' =       y'   —   c'.   The equilibrium

net export vector will by (14) be half of this.

        The assumption of compensating technical change eliminates demand effects,

even without assuming homothetic preferences, and assures us a one—to--one
                                          —9—



 relationship    between production changes and excess supply changes. This assump-

 tion is, of course, restrictive, but it may be justified on the grounds that we

 are inquiring into the role of production technology, not the role of demand, in

 determining trade flows. Perhaps we could also argue that this assumption is

 not significantly more restrictive than the assumption of homothetic preferences

which is traditionally used in these types of problems to neutralize demand

effects.

     The final point to note is that (i1) unfortunately does not tell us a great

deal about the relationship between technology and the direction of trade flows.

This is true even if we are willing to assume no joint production, to identify

technology parameters with production sectors (hence to let a. be a technology

parameter in sector i), and assume that all diagonal elements of G       are posi-
tive (ay./aa. > 0) and all off diagonal elements are negative
                                                                  (a.1'a < 0,   i *
j). This means that a technical improvement in sector i would increase output

in sector i and decrease it in all other sectors.      These assumptions do not, for
example, imply   that   G   is positive definite and more generally do not imply any
systematic   relationship between dx and dcz. More specific results will therefore

require specific technology changes, a problem which will form the subject
matter of Section 3.
                                                    —10—



3.      Product—augmenting Technical Change

       We shall introduce product—augmenting technical change in a somewhat gen-

eral way, allowing for joint production. Let Y be a given production possibil-

ity set with the corresponding domestic product function G(p,v) and supply func-

tion (p,v) (p,v). Let a = (at)                     be an n—vector. We shall refer to a change

da. as a product—augmenting technical change in the production of good i. More

precisely, let D(a) =
                              E6ja1     : 6i.j     1,   =   j;   61j =   o j      ii be the (n x n)

diagonal matrix whose diagonal consist of the vector a (s                         is   the Kronecker

delta.) Then define the production possibility set


(15)        Y(a)      {(y,v) y = D(a)y =           (a.j,     (,v) c

Then we define the domestic product function


(16)        G(p,v,a)         xnax{pr:    (y,v) £


where   py denotes the inner product                        and the prime denotes transpose.
Henceforth,   all vectors will be taken as column vectors, to keep track of the

matrix manipulations. We realize from the definition of Y(a) that we have


(11)        G(p,v,ci) =      G(D(a)p,v)    and


(18)        y(p,v,a)    =    G(p,v,a)     = D(a)G (D(a)p,v) = D(cx)y           (D(a)p,v).
Hence, product—augmenting technical change enters very much as price changes,

since D(a)p =      (a.p.).
                     11
       Equation (114) above gave us an expression for the net export vector for

goods. We differentiate (18) to get5


(19)        Gpa D(G) + D(a) D(p) = D(y) + GD(p),
                                                   —11—


 where D(y) is the diagonal matrix of the vector y, etc. ,              and where we without
 restriction have taken the initial value of all
                                                                  to equal unity, for which
         G=
                                      ij = I, the identity matrix, and Gpp
                          y, D(a) = [6.
 case         G       =
         P        p                       1                                      =   G      .   (This
                                                                                       pp
 can    always be done by choosing physical units of goods appropriately.) Using

 (19), (i4) now becomes

 (20)         dx = G        da/2    D(y)da/2 + G
                          pa                       D(p)da/2.
                                               pp
 Finally,we can pre—multiply both sides of (20) by the row n—vector
 (2D(p)da)' =       to get
                      (2pjcti)

 (21)         2dcx D(p)dx          da D(p)D(y)da +   daD(p)    GD()da >    0.
        The first of the additive terms on the right—hand side of (21) equals

                  which is strictly positive if y. > 0, which we may safely asswne.

The second term is a quadratic form in
                                                       which is a postive semi—definite
matrix, since the domestic product function is
                                                             convex in prices. This term is
non—negative, and expression (21) is hence strictly positive.

        The left—hand side of (21), which
                                                   equals Zidcz.p.dx., has a straightforward
interpretation as a correlation coefficient
                                                          relating differences in technology
to the direction of trade.            (21) notes that positive elements of da (technical

superiority) are associated with positive elements of dx (net exports) and vice

versa for negative da. (21) thus says that "on average" the country will export

those goods (dx. >          0) for which it has superior technolor               0).     Hence we
                                                                        (dat >
have a proposition about the direction of trade which is similar to propositions

about the direction of trade with differences
                                                           in factor endowments found in
Dixit and Woodland (1982). Indeed, the present results are stronger or clearer

than those of Dixit and Woodland in that
                                                    differences in production technolo&y

can be unambiguously defined, while differences in factor intensities can unfor-

tunately be defined only in a somewhat tautological fashion.
                                                 —12—



)4•     Trade   in Goods   and   Factors

        It is well known that factor prices are generally not equalized by trade

when there are international differences in technology. From the standard pro-

perties of of G, we have, with goods and no factor trade,


(22)         r = G (p,v,a); r* =
                   V                  G*(p,v*,a*)
                                       V
                                                     and



(23)        dr_dr*=G vpdp+G Va
                             da_G*dp=G dcx,
                                  vp

since   G   =
                G initially. Differences in factor prices are determined by the
matrix G whose elements depend on underlying factor intensities, elasticities

of substitution, and the form of technical change.

       Now, to introduce trade in factors as well as in goods, let v be decomposed

into two sub—vectors k and 2.. with corresponding prices r and w. k will be

traded factors and will be henceforth referred to as capital, while £ are

assumed to be immobile factors and will be referred to as labour. Ownership of

k is   assumed to remain in       the country of origin and hence     all foreign factor
income is   assumed to be repatriated. k will denote the home country's endowment

of capital while k will denote the capital actually used as input in the home

country. Net exports of capital will then be given by z = k —              k.    Similar nota-

tion applies to the foreign country. Factor mobility requires us to define a

modified revenue function, the national product function, as


(21)        G(p,r,k,2.,cx) =     Nax{G(p,k,2.,cz) + r(k—k): k > O}.

G thus corresponds to the usual concept of national product while G (the same

function employed above) corresponds to domestic product.

       From (214) we can derive a capital input function k(p,r,2.,a) which gives the

capital actually employed at home          as   a function of p, r, 2., and a.    It will
                                                               —13—


 fulfill


 (25)          Gk(p,r,k,,a) =              r.
 We assume that it is unique and differentiable.6
                                                                          This in turn gives us a capital

 export function,


 (26)                              =   k   —


        The   capital import and export functions are illustrated in Figure 3 for the
case with one capital good. Gk gives the marginal product of capital with the
capital input determined by the intersection of Gk and r. At constant prices,
the     endowment of capital (k) determines net exports (k—k) but not the capital

employed      at home.
        Note from (214) that we have the relationship

(27)          (p,r,k,,a) = G(p,k(p,r,&,),,)                           +

This    in turn gives us


(28)          y=G p =G p+Gkkp—rk p=G pand


(29)          z =
                    Gr
                         =
                             Gkk
                                   + (k—i) —         rk    = k—k,

Where both equations follow from (25).

        The budget constraint for the economy is now given by E = G, and the goods

export function by X =
                                   G
                                       —   E.       Equilibrium conditions are given by


(30)          (p,r,cz) +      X*(p,r,cz*)       = 0      and


(31)          Z(p,r,a) +      Z*(p,r,cz*)       =   0,
                   —14—



                  Figure   3

r,Gk




   r




                      k



                  Figure 4

r,Gk




                               Gkk


   r Gkda

             NN\\\\   \\\            Gk(a+da)


                               Gk (a)

            (a)   (a+da)
                                           —15—


 where for simplicity we have dropped k and £ from the goods and capital export

 functions.

         Differentiating X and Z we have

 (32)         dx=Xdp+Xdr+Xdaand
                  p   r    a


 (33)        dzZdp+Zdr+Zda
                p   r   a

 Noting again that x =      x=0   and z      = 0
                                                 initially, differentiation of (30)
and (31) gives us

 (3k)        Xada/2 = —Xdp —    Xrdr and

(35)         Zda/2=—Zdp_Zdr.
              a     p    r


        Substituting (314) and (35) into (32) and (33) we have equations similar to

(ii) above,


(36)         dx = Xda/2 and


             dz   Zda/2 =
(37)
                              ad2
        We can now   examine X , recalling that X = G — E .   We   use the same pro—
                              a                      p   p
cedure followed with equation (12) by considering only- compensated changes such

that there are no consumption effects (Gda =      0).   From (27), we see that


(38)
            Gda(Gk+G_rk)daGda,
            a    ka a  a   a

so that the same set of compensating changes is being examined with and without

factor movements. Similar to (14), this procedure allows us to rewrite (36)        as
                                                              —16—


 (39)             dx =   Gda/2.
Since         =   G      (equation (28)), we have from (27) that


 (140)         dx = G          dcz/2 = G        da/2 +   G    k dcz/2.
                          pa               pa                pka
         Since the same set of compensating changes is being considered, we can sub-

tract (i)4) from (140) to get the difference in goods trade with and without fac-

tor nDbility,


              dx — dx =
(141)
                                Gkkda/2.
             can be thought of as a matrix of generalized Rybczynski effects (Dixit

and Woodland (1982), Svensson (1982)). Element G.. gives the change in the out-

put of y at constant prices in response to a change in the amount of k. used

domestically. k is a matrix giving the effects at constant (p,r) of technical

change on the domestic use of capital. From (25) above, we get

(1.42)        ka =       _GkGk.
assuming that               is of full rank and invertible, an assumption generally valid

given minimal substitution possibilites in production and consumption.

Substituting this last equation into (141), we have

              dx — dx =
(143)
                                _[GkGGk]da/2
         The relationship in (142) is illustrated in Figure 14, where the slope of

Gk is Gkk. Gk is shifted up by a, with the shift equal to Gkada. At a constant

r, the horizontal shift kada is then equal to GkGk dcx.

         The bracketed matrix in (143), which is formed by the product of three

matrices, is a matrix which maps                    the      changes in technology into the changes in
                                                —17—


 goods trade. Gkk     is   by assumption negative definite and hence
                                                                                        —1
                                                                                             is also

 negative definite. Unfortunately, there is no simple relationship between

Gk and Gk for arbitrary forms of technical change. Thus the bracketed matrix
in (143) has no obvious properties which would allow us to advance a simple
                                                                            pro-
position about the relationship between technology and trade flows. We will

therefore again examine the specific form of product—augmenting technical change

in order to try to derive such a relationship.

        Hence, assuming product—augmenting technical change, from (ii), we know
that


(144)          =     and Gk =                  hence
                                  GkD(P),

(45)         k =
                   _GkGkD(P),

where we exploit that GkP =            since   D(a) =      I.    We can substitute (45) into (41)
to give us


(46)        d; — dx =              =
                        Gkkdcx/2       _GPkGkGkD(p)da/2.
Similarly   to (21), we can now pre—multiply (146)              by   2(D(p)dcL) and get
(4)         2dD(p)(dx—d) = _daD(p)GkGGkD(p)da

                              =                                            >   0.
                                  _(GkpD(p)da)G(GkD(p)da)

This expression is positive for all                             0, since            and hence
                                          GkD(p)da
is   negative definite given the assumption of full rank discussed above. We note

from (144) that the condition GD(p)d 0                 i
                                             —i8--



(148)       G
              kcz

which    is that the price r of capital, at constant goods prices and in the

absence of trade in capital, should not be unchanged for the technical change

considered. Hence, under (148) we rewrite (147) as


(149)        daD(p)dx >     daD(p)dx   > 0



where   the right—hand inequality is our result (21) above.

        The inequalities in (149) give us a very strong result. They state that,

with factor trade, the correlation between commodity exports and technolor dif-

ferences exceeds the same correlation without factor mobility. Since the same

d is being considered in both cases, (149) states that da < 0 is on average

associated with a larger level of exports of x with factor mobility than

without. Similarly dci. < 0 is associated on average with a larger volume of

imports of x with factor mobility.           (149) thus implies that factor mobility

leads to an increase in the volume of goods trade. In the present model, factor

trade and commodity trade are therefore, in this sense, complements.

        We can also briefly examine the pattern of factor trade by substituting the

expression for        in (145) into (37) to get


(50)         dz =   ;da/2   =
                                GkGkD(p)dc/2.

Now pre-multiply (50) by 2(D(p)da)Gk to get



(51)         2daD(P)GPkdz =                                  <   0,
                                  (GkPD(P)d)G;(GkPD(P)da)
which expression is negative for (148), by the previous argument.              is the

matrix of capital Rybczynski effects on output. In line with Dixit and Norman

(1980) (see also Dixit and Woodland (1982) and Svensson (1982)) we might define
                                          —19-



 generalized factor intensities in a somewhat tautological way so that

 82G/3P.3k =             > 0 is taken to mean that good i is intensive in the use of
                31/3k
capital j.     (51) can then be interpreted as stating that the home country will

 "on average" import factors (dz <     0) used intensively in goods in which produc-
tion the home country has technical superiority (da. >        0).
        Consider for example a simple two—good two—factor example in which good 1

is capital intensive and is the good in which we have techical superiority

(d1 > 0, da2 < 0, Gkl > 0,     G < 0).     With only one factor (capital) mobile, we
have


                                    (+)
(52)         GkD(p)d = [(+)(_)]    [J > 0
For    (51) to hold, we imist therefore have dz <   0.   Factor mobility must   lead to
inflow   of the factor used intensively in the production of the technically sup-

erior good (the export good). Following the factor movements, each country will

be relatively well endowed with the factor used intensively in its export

industry.
                                                           —20—




5.      Factor—augmenting Technical Chan_g
        Finally we shall examine the case of factor—augmenting technical change.

Let a =             be an rn-vector, where aj is the coefficient by which factor j is
           (a)
augmented. Then we can write


(53)           G(p,v,ci)         G(p,D(cx)v),


where G(p,v), as in Section 3, is the domestic product function corresponding to

a given productive possibility for Y, and where we recall that D(a)v =                        (ajvj).T
        From (53) we get


(5)4)          G      G and
                p      p


               pa =    GD(v).

Choosing the initial levels of the technolor parameters equal to unity, so that

D(a) =    I,   we have G
                               pv
                                    =   G
                                            pv
                                                 , and the relation (1)4) will read


(56)           dx =   G        D(v)da/2.
                          pv

This implies that, with no factor trade, the pattern of goods trade is exactly

                                                                   D(v)da =           and the situation
as if factor endowments have changed by dv =
                                                                              (vda)
is as in Dixit and Woodland (1982). If we interpret the positive signs of the

elements of Rybczynski matrix G as indicating generalized factor intensities,

we can interpret (56) as stating that the home country will export goods inten-

sive in factors for which it has technological superiority.

        We cannot derive any such straightforward result as that for product—

augmenting technical differences. Let us however look at a simple case where

with    no factor trade, the equation
                                                               —21—


 (57)        dx =     G      D(k)dcz /2 + G               D(L)da /2
                          pk           k             p2         £
                       (+)           (+)            (_)       (_)


refers to a good (subset of goods) that is capital intensive                                     0) and labor
                                                                                        (GPk >
non—intensive (G2 <             0),        say the two—good specific factors model, where (57)

refers to good 1, capital is the factor specific to good 1 and labor is the

factor specific to good 2. The vector of technolor parameters is here decom-

posed into the subvectors                       and a2, a =
                                                                    (cxk,a&), corresponding to the decomposi-
tion of factor endowments v =                       (k,t)   into traded factors, capital, and the non—

traded    factors, labor. Furthermore, let us assume that we have

(58)         dak > 0 and da2               <   0,


that is, the home country has a superiority for capital and disadvantage for

labor. Clearly, it will export the capital intensive good.

        How does the goods trade pattern differ with trade in capital? We have


(59)         dx   —   dx =
                               Gkkda/2.
                               (+)



Ifcapital import increases (ida > 0), export of capital intensive
goods will increase with factor trade, and factor trade and goods trade will be
complements. If capital import decreases (kda < 0), factor trade and goods and
goods trade will be substitutes.                                                  -



        To see what determines whether capital import increases or decreases, we

note that from (53) we have


(60)                  D(ak)Gk and

(61)
            Gkda D(Gk)dak + D(ctk)[GkkD(k)dak +
                                             —22-.



Then we can, by using (I2), write the change in capital import, at constant

goods prices and rentals, as



(62)        kda = [-GD(r)         -
                                      D(k))dak
                                                  —
                                                      GkGk,D(9idcx&


                   =
                       [D(r)      —
                                      D(k)]dak
                                            (+)
                                                  +
                                                            (_)



Here we have used D(a) =      I   as well as that the effect on capital input of changes

in labor, at constant goods and capital prices, is given by


(63)        k = —GG.

The bracketed expression on the righthand side is negative (positive) if the

demand for capital is inelastic (elastic). Using the same definition as in

Svensson (1982), capital and labor are cooperative (non—cooperative) if k& is

positive (negative).

        We conclude that capital import will decrease, and goods and factor trade

be substitutes, if capital demand is inelastic and capital and labor are cooper-

ative, whereas goods and factor trade are complements if capital demand is

elastic and capital and labor are non—cooperative.

        The intuition behind the dependence on the elasticity of demand for capital

can be simply explained as follows: Let there be only one capital good. From

(60),   we have


(6I)         r =       = D(ak)Gk(p,    D(c)v).

Equation (614) shows that an increase in ak has two conflicting influences on

r and therefore on the direction of trade in capital. Formally, we have
                                                        —23—




(65)    ar/aak
                 =
                     Gk
                          +
                              kGkkk
                                      =   r   +
                                                  kIr
since czk = 1   initially. Hence,

(66)                  0 if and only if rkr/k < 1


If   the demand for capital is inelastic (r/k <                i)   an increase in ak implies a

fall in r. Capital then flows out of the country when factor trade is permitted

leading to a smaller volume of exports of the capital intensive good than would

have occurred with factor trade.
                                           —2k—


6.      Summary   and   Conclusions

        The first purpose of this paper was to develop a general model of trade

caused by international differences in production technology and attempt to

derive a simple relationship between the direction of trade and the differences

in technology. The second purpose was to examine factor mobility within the

context of the model since it is well known that factor prices are generally not

equalized by trade in commodities alone when there are international differences

in technology.

     General expressions for the relationship between technology and goods trade

with and without factor trade were derived. While these expressions are fairly

simple    in   algebraic structure, they are not simple to interpret from an economic

point    of   view. We therefore moved from the general case to the specific case of

product—augmenting technical change in order to obtain clearer results.

     For the product—augmenting case, a specific result was derived for the

relationship between goods trade and technology. We showed that there is a

positive correlation between net export and technical differences, in the sense

that countries will on average export goods for which the country has technical

superiority.

     Very- strong results were then obtained for the case in which some factors

are allowed to move in response to international price differences. It was

shown that factor mobility leads to an increase in the correlation between goods

and factor trade, indicating an increase in the volume of goods trade relative

to the no—factor—trade situation. Factor trade and commodity trade are thus

complements as in Markusen (1983).

        The intuition behind this result can be captured by considering a simple

two—good, two—factor Heckscher—Ohlin model. With endowments initially equal,
                                        —25—


the production changes generated by trade will bid up the price of the factor

used intensively in each country's export industry (the industry in which the

country has technical superiority). Factor mobility then leads to a direction

of factor flows which acts to reinforce the pattern of comparative advantage and

trade caused by differences in technology.

     This example also helps provide the intuition behind our result relating

the vector of factor trade with the vector of technology parameters. Our result

indicates that countries will on average import those factors used intensively

in industries in which the country has technical superiority. But these

industries are, by earlier results, the export industries. Thus factor trade

leaves each country relatively well endowed with the factors used intensively in

the country's export industries. As noted in the introduction, this is the

cause of trade in goods in the Heckscher—Ohlin model, whereas it is the

quence of trade in factors in the present model.

     For the case with factor—augmenting technical change, results were not as

straightforward. We could easily show that with no factor trade, the goods

trade pattern is exactly as if there were factor endowment differences. With

factor trade, goods and factor trade can be either substitutes and complements

as in the case when trade is caused by endowment differences (Svensson (1982)).

For both factor—augmenting technology differences and for factor endowment dif-

ferences, goods trade and factor trade tend to be substitutes if traded and non—

traded factors are cooperative. But in the factor—augmenting case, the

substitute/complement relationship depends also on the elasticity of demand for

traded factors due to the fact that factor—augmenting technical change has an

ambiguous   effect on a factors marginal product.
                                      —26—



Footnotes


*    We are grateful for comments from participants in an lIES seminar.

     Henrik Horn and Torsten Persson contributed specific comments.

1.   See also Jones and Neary (1983) and Neary (1980).

2.   An important exception is Findlay and Grubert (1959).

3.   See also Purvis (19T2), where it is shown that with technological differ-

     ences in a Heckscher—Ohlin framework, capital nDbility rry lead to complete

     specialization in production and to increased volume of goods trade.

1.   See Dixit and Woodland (1982) and Svensson (1982) for a more complete dis-

     cussion of the role of demand in this type of problem.

5.   This relation is derived by Dixit and Norman (1980), for the no joint

     production case.

6.   This amounts to assuming that the matrix Gkk is negative definite.

7.   This way of introducing factor—augmenting technical change is followed by

     Dixit and Norman (1980) and Woodland (1982).
                                              —27—



 B e r en c e s


 Bhaati, Jagdish N. , 1973.          "The Theory of I7nrniserizing Growth: Further

         Applications," in Michael B. Connolly and Alexander K. Swoboda (eds.)

         International   trade   and money (Toronto: University of Toronto Press),
         )45_.5)4.



 Brecher,      Richard A. and Carlos Diaz Alejandro, 1977.
                                                                "Tariffs, Foreign Capital,
       and Irrirniserizing Growth," Journal of International      Economics 7',    317—322.
 Dixit, Avinash K. and Victor Norman, 1980.
                                                     Theo'_international          trade
         (Cambridge:    Cambridge University Press).

 Dixit, Avinash K. and Alan D. Woodland, 1982. "The
                                                              Relationship Between Factor
      Endowments and Com.iodity Trade," Journal_of         International Economics 13,
      201—21)4.

Ethier, Wilfred J., 1983. "Higher Dimensional Trade Theory," in Ronald W. Jones

      and Peter B. Kenen (eds.) Handbook of international economics, Volume 1

      (Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co.), forthcoming.

Findlay, Ronald and H. Grubert, 1959. "Factor
                                                       Intensities, Technological
      Progress and the Terms of Trade," Oxford Economics
                                                                 Pus    11—1, 111—121.
Jones,    Ronald W. and J.     Peter Neary, 1983. "The Positive Theory of     Inter-
     national Trade," in Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of
     4ernationaleconornics,         Volume 1 (Amsterdam:     North--Holland Publishing
     Co.),      forthcoming.

Markuseri, James H. and James H. Melvin, 1979. "Tariffs,
                                                                  Capital Mobility and
     Foreign Ownership," Journal of International Economics 9 , 395—)4l0.

Markusen, James R., 1983. "Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as
                                                                   Comple-
     ments," Journal of Interna ionalEconornjc 13,          forthcoming.
                                              —28—



Mundell,    R.,   1957. "International Trade and Factor Mobility," American

     Economic Review 17, 321—335.

Neary,    J. Peter, 1980. "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates,

     and Factor—Price Equalization: A Synthesis," lIES Seminar Paper No. 158.

Purvis,    Douglas D. ,     1972.   "Technolo, Trade and Factor Mobility," Economic

     Journal      82, 991—999.

Svensson, Lars      E.0.,    1982. "Factor Trade and Goods Trade," NBER Working Paper

     No. 999.

Woodland, Alan D., 1982. International trade and resource allocation
     (Amsterdam: North Holland).
