                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PIPE DREAMS? THE PERFORMANCE OF
                          COMPANIES ISSUING EQUITY PRIVATELY

                                           David J. Brophy
                                           Paige P. Ouimet
                                           Clemens Sialm

                                        Working Paper 11011
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11011


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2004




All authors are from the Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan. Contact
Information: 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234. E-mails: djbrophy@umich.edu;
pshelby@umich.edu; and sialm@umich.edu. We thank Sugato Bhattacharyya, Serdar Dinc, Ken French,
Radha Gopalan, Marcin Kacperczyk, Arif Khurshed, Han Kim, Bob Kyle, Tom Nohel, Amit Seru, Sophie
Shive, Tyler Shumway, Vijay Singal, Jeremy Stein, Lu Zheng, and seminar participants at the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the European Financial Management Association Meetings in
Basel, the Rutgers Conference on Financial Innovation, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and
the University of Michigan for helpful comments and discussions. We are very grateful to Sagient Research
for providing us with the PIPEs data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2004 by David J. Brophy, Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
PIPE Dreams? The Performance of Companies Issuing Equity Privately
David J. Brophy, Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 11011
December 2004
JEL No. G1, G2, G3

                                            ABSTRACT

Private Investments in Public Equity (PIPEs) have become an important source of financing for

young, publicly traded firms whose poor operating performance may limit alternative financing

options. We propose that firms are motivated to sell these securities to minimize costs associated

with asymmetric information. We find that both the security structure and the investor composition

of a PIPE security matter in the subsequent performance of the issuing firm. Poor post-issuance

performance is associated with securities where investors obtain significant repricing rights, which

protect them from future stock price declines. Furthermore, companies that obtain financing from

hedge funds tend to under-perform companies that obtain financing from other institutional

investors. We argue that hedge funds act as investors of last resort, playing an important role in the

market for young, high-risk firms with substantial asymmetric information. Hedge funds are willing

to fund such high-risk companies because they can protect against possible price declines in the

issuing companies by either negotiating PIPE securities with repricing rights or by entering into short

positions of the underlying stocks of the issuing companies.

David J. Brophy                                        Clemens Sialm
Stephen M. Ross School of Business                     Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan                                 University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street                                      701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
djbrophy@umich.edu                                     and NBER
                                                       sialm@umich.edu
Paige P. Ouimet
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
pshelby@umich.edu
1. Introduction
        Over the past several years, private investments in public equity (PIPEs) have become an
increasingly popular alternative to public equity offerings as a source of capital for small- and
medium-size public companies whose poor operating performance and high degree of
asymmetric information may limit alternative financing options. PIPE transactions are completed
within relatively short time periods with fewer regulatory requirements than Secondary Equity
Offerings (SEOs). The increasing importance of these securities – $77 billion was raised in 5,260
transactions between 1995 and 2002 – indicates that firms value these characteristics. However,
their popularity has come with controversy. PIPE securities recently have obtained unfavorable
attention in reaction to the poor performance of some firms following the issuance of PIPE
securities.1 We attempt to shed light on this controversy by arguing that PIPEs are a
heterogeneous group of securities bought by a variety of investors. We find that both the security
structure and the investor composition matter for the subsequent performance of the issuing
companies.
        PIPEs are financial contracts negotiated directly, or through financial intermediary
agents, with a small number of investors. This allows the investors and the issuing companies to
customize the specific security structure according to their preferences. We distinguish between
two basic security structures: traditional and structured PIPEs. Traditional PIPEs are private
placements of common stocks or fixed convertibles at predetermined prices or conversion ratios.
Investors in traditional PIPEs receive a fixed number of common stocks or can convert their
convertible securities into a fixed number of common stocks of the issuing company. Investors
are attracted to these issuances since the equity is typically issued at a discount relative to the
market price. On the other hand, structured PIPEs are private placements of variable convertibles
at conversion ratios that depend on the performance of the underlying stock after the PIPE
issuance. Structured PIPEs enable investors to convert their PIPE securities into a larger number
of common stocks if the stocks perform poorly after the issuance date, thus effectively protecting
investors against price declines. Though investments in traditional PIPEs are sensitive to changes
in the value of the underlying common stock, investments in structured PIPEs are protected
against value declines through a variable conversion ratio.


1
 Examples of recent negative media attention include “Pipe Dream or Problem?”, The New York Times, June 5,
2004, and “SEC Probes Hedge Funds, Brokers On `Pipe' Offerings”, The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2004.


                                                                                                        2
         In this paper, we document that companies issuing PIPEs, in general, and structured
PIPEs, in particular, tend to be young firms in high-growth or high-risk sectors, where market
imperfections are most prevalent. These qualities complicate external assessments, resulting in
significant information asymmetries between firm insiders and the external market. Myers
(1984) and Myers and Majluf (1984) propose that the presence of informational asymmetries can
reduce the value at which firms are able to sell their securities. They argue that such firms should
issue informationally insensitive securities, such as conventional debt. However, these same
attributes restrict such firms in their dealings in the debt market due to higher probabilities of and
costs associated with financial distress. Instead, PIPEs may be the optimal solution for these
firms. Since PIPEs are sold to a limited number of qualified investors, issuing a PIPE as
compared to an SEO can reduce the issuing costs associated with information production.2
Furthermore, as argued by Stein (1992), structured PIPEs with their variable conversion price,
may be the ideal security design in the presence of information asymmetries, potentially making
these securities “adverse selection-proof.” Structured PIPEs, although equity securities, can be
structured to be as informationally insensitive as straight debt, with smaller costs of financial
distress.
         Though PIPEs may theoretically be an ideal source of financing for firms with a high
degree of asymmetric information, arguments also have been made that these contracts, in
particular structured contracts, are faulty and leave the issuing firm prey to market manipulation.
Hillion and Vermaelen (2004) argue structured PIPEs are imperfect contracts since investors
may have the incentive to engage in manipulative short selling to receive a larger numbers of
shares. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has expressed concern after investigating
cases of market manipulation surrounding the issuance of variable convertible PIPEs and has
warned that these securities present the temptation for investors “to engage in manipulative short
selling of the issuer’s stock in order to receive more shares.”3 Corporate executives appear to
have heeded this advice since issuances of structured PIPEs have declined substantially in the
last years, while issuances of traditional PIPEs have grown.



2
  The cost of information production as it relates to the decision to sell equity privately versus publicly is explored in
Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1999). Habib and Johnsen (2000) discuss the private placement of debt and outside
equity as an information revelation mechanism.
3
  See http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2003-26.htm.


                                                                                                                        3
        In this paper, we focus on the stock-market and accounting performance of companies
issuing equity privately. We do not discuss the choice between public and private issuances of
equity and debt securities.4 We analyze the 5,260 PIPE transactions issued between 1995 and
2002. We argue that PIPEs are a heterogeneous group of securities bought by a variety of
investors. Approximately one-third of the transactions are structured PIPEs. Hedge funds are the
main investors in the PIPEs market and account for almost one-quarter of the total investments.
We find that hedge funds tend to focus their investments in structured PIPEs, where they are
effectively protected against price declines of the issuing companies: Hedge funds account for 72
percent of the investments in structured PIPEs and for just 16 percent of the investments in
traditional PIPEs.
        Using a multinomial logit model, we explain the interaction of traditional and structured
PIPEs with hedge and non-hedge fund investors as a function of issuer characteristics. We find
that companies where information asymmetries are typically assumed to be more important are
more likely to raise capital through structured PIPEs and are more likely to raise capital from
hedge funds. We also find that venture capital-backing in the pre-IPO period is an important
predictor of the security structure and investor composition, confirming Brav and Gompers
(1997), who show that venture capital-backing benefits companies even beyond the IPO.
        We show that the stock price and the accounting performance are related to the specific
security structure (traditional vs. structured PIPEs) and the category of the investors (hedge fund
vs. non-hedge fund investors). In the short term, the average PIPE studied has an average
abnormal return of 3.87 percent over a 10-day event window around the closing date of the deal,
confirming previous results on private placements by Wruck (1989). Furthermore, consistent
with Hertzel, Lemmon, Linck, and Rees (2002), we find the counter-intuitive result that PIPE
issuers, on average, experience negative long-term returns after positive announcement returns.
The poor long-term performance of companies issuing PIPEs confirms Barclay, Holderness, and
Sheehan (2003) and Wu (2004), who document that investors in private placements are typically
passive and do not appear to increase firm value through monitoring.




4
  Gomes and Phillips (2004) discuss in a recent working paper the choice between private and public security
issuances by publicly traded companies.


                                                                                                          4
       Our paper is the first paper that analyzes the impact of the security structure and the
investor composition on the performance of companies issuing PIPEs. We demonstrate that there
is substantial heterogeneity in the performance of PIPE companies. We find that firms issuing
structured PIPEs under-perform firms issuing traditional PIPEs in both the short (0.40 vs. 5.49
percent) and the long term (-38.83 vs. -13.03 percent). Our results of the dismal long-term
performance of variable convertible private placements are consistent with Hillion and
Vermaelen (2004), who analyze the performance of “death-spiral convertibles,” a specific form
of structured PIPEs.
       Our most interesting results show that the investors in the security matter. Though we
find no abnormal performance in firms issuing traditional PIPEs sold to non-hedge fund
investors, we find a significant negative abnormal performance following the PIPE issuance if
the traditional security is bought by a hedge fund. These results are consistent with
Krishnamurthy, Spindt, Subramaniam and Woidtke (2004) who show that private placements
which include an affiliated investor (defined as officers, directors, or affiliated institutions and
individuals) have no long-run declines in contrast to negative long-run returns when a private
placement is sold to unaffiliated investors.
       Having a dataset with both structured and traditional PIPEs as well as the identity of the
investor lets us test whether the poor performance of companies issuing structured PIPEs occurs
because of manipulative short selling by technical investors, which reduces the long-term value
of the issuing companies, or whether PIPEs are issued by companies in financial distress that are
subject to substantial asymmetric information. By separating between PIPEs sold to hedge fund
investors (which tend to extensively use short positions and derivatives) as compared to other
institutional investors such as corporations, mutual funds, and venture capital firms (which do
not tend to use short positions and derivatives as frequently), we are able to distinguish between
a faulty contract being manipulated by an aggressive investor and a troubled firm selling the only
viable security given the existence of substantial asymmetric information.
       The extraordinarily poor performance of companies issuing structured PIPEs, which are
primarily associated with hedge fund investors, could indicate that hedge fund investors cause
the price declines, possibly through manipulative short-selling. However, we do not find that
short-selling pressure is greater for companies issuing structured PIPEs than for companies
issuing traditional PIPEs. Moreover, companies issuing structured PIPEs purchased by hedge


                                                                                                  5
funds do not tend to perform significantly worse than companies issuing structured PIPEs
purchased by other investor classes. These results cast doubt on the hypothesis that hedge fund
investors systematically manipulate stock prices of companies issuing structured PIPEs by short-
selling the underlying stock. Further, we document that hedge funds tend to invest in companies
that are relatively more liquid and have higher trading volumes, conditions opposite to those
most conducive for successful stock price manipulation.
        We propose that hedge funds act as investors of last resort for firms with the fewest
alternatives captured by negative operating performance, large capital needs, and a high degree
of asymmetric information. Hedge funds are often only willing to invest in companies with
substantial asymmetric information, because they are able to hedge the downside risk by either
negotiating PIPE securities with repricing rights or by entering into short positions of the
underlying stocks of the issuing companies. This is in sharp contrast to other investors, such as
mutual and pension funds, where regulatory requirements limit the use of such strategies.5 Hedge
fund investors can still benefit from these investments, even if they are completely hedged,
because companies issue PIPEs at significant discounts from market prices.
        However, it is these same attributes which make hedge funds efficient investors in PIPEs
which also might lead those firms isusing PIPEs with multiple investor options to avoid selling
to hedge funds. Firms with interested mutual fund, corporation, or venture capital investors may
prefer these investors over hedge funds to avoid expected increases to the outstanding short
interest in their firm or out of concern that the hedge fund will manipulate their equity prices.
Firms also could be seeking a certification from these non-hedge investors as first hypothesized
by Booth and Smith (1986).
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we give a general
overview of PIPE securities. Section 3 describes our data sources and provides summary
statistics of the PIPE transactions. Section 4 analyzes the determinants of the investor and the
security structure choice using a multinomial logit estimation. Section 5 analyzes the impact of
the security structure on the short- and long-term stock price performance of the issuing
companies. Section 6 discusses the impact of the investor composition on the stock price
performance. Section 7 confirms our event-study results using calendar-time portfolios


5
  Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999) analyze the characteristics of hedge funds relative to other
investors, which enable them to follow more sophisticated trading strategies.


                                                                                                       6
controlling for common variation in risk levels and risk premia (Ferson and Schadt, 1996) and
for the impact of equity issuances on the fundamentals of firms following (Eckbo, Masulis, and
Norli, 2000). In Section 8, we show that the accounting performance of companies issuing PIPEs
is generally consistent with the stock price performance. Section 9 studies the short interest of
companies issuing PIPEs and Section 10 provides a brief conclusion.


2. PIPE Securities
        The specific characteristics of each PIPE transaction are negotiated between the investors
and the issuing companies. Thus, there are numerous different security structures of PIPE
securities. We distinguish between two basic security structures: Traditional and structured
PIPEs. We describe in Appendix A additional details of these securities.


2.1. Traditional PIPEs
        Traditional PIPEs include private placements of common stock, fixed convertible
preferred stock, and fixed convertible debt. In a common stock PIPE a fixed number of shares is
issued and sold at a predetermined discount or premium to the market price.6 The future value of
the investor’s position increases proportionally with the stock price. Investors in common stock
PIPEs are exposed to future stock price declines because they cannot immediately dispose of
their shares due to lock-up periods. However, they can hedge their risk by simultaneously taking
out short positions in the underlying stocks. In this case, investors can capture the discount while
minimizing the risk exposure.
        Fixed convertibles yield a current return through interest or dividend payments and can
be converted into a fixed number of shares of the company’s common stock at a predetermined
conversion ratio. If the future stock price is above the conversion price, then the value of a
convertible security is proportional to the value of the common stock; otherwise, the PIPE
security is not converted into common stock. This inherent protection against decreases in equity
prices can partially mitigate some of the concerns for investors regarding asymmetric
information. Many hedge funds follow convertible arbitrage strategies by purchasing a fixed



6
 Discounts are suggested to reflect compensation to investors for expected monitoring services and advice (Wruck,
1989), illiquidity (Silber, 1991), information production (Hertzel and Smith, 1993), and entrenchment (Barclay,
Holderness, andSheehan, 2003).


                                                                                                               7
convertible security and simultaneously dynamically hedging the risk exposure. In this case, they
can take advantage of the effective discount provided by the convertible security.


2.2. Structured PIPEs
       Structured PIPEs are issues of equity, where the investor can convert the PIPE security
into a variable number of common stocks during the conversion period (e.g., floating or reset
convertible debt or preferred stock PIPE). A basic structured PIPE is a variable convertible,
where the conversion price is based on market prices of the common stock during a fixed time
period following the issuance. This feature protects the investor if the price of the common stock
decreases after the PIPE deal is closed, since the investor will receive a larger number of shares
following a decreasing stock price. For example, a basic variable convertible states that the
convertible security can be redeemed for common stock with a fixed value V on the conversion
date. Thus, if the stock price during the future conversion period7 is p, then the company would
issue V/p shares to the owner of the floating convertible. The implication of this security is that
decreasing stock prices will result in greater dilution of existing shareholders. Variable
convertibles often include caps and floors that limit the possible range of conversion prices.
       This variable security is essentially “adverse-selection-proof” equity (Stein, 1992),
because all parties in the transaction can agree that this security has a fixed value of V on the
conversion date – assuming the firm does not declare bankruptcy before the maturity date of the
security. These re-pricing rights are effectively very similar to an embedded short position,
which immunizes the investors from changes in the price of the underlying stock after the PIPE
issuance.
       One disadvantage of a floating convertible is that this security might be subject to market
manipulation, particularly for stocks that are not very liquidly traded. For example, by short
selling the underlying equity shares during the conversion period, PIPE investors might be able
to temporarily depress stock prices, resulting in a more favorable conversion ratio. In such an
instance, variable PIPE investors would receive a larger number of common stocks through the
convertible security and this excessive dilution would permanently reduce the stock value for the
original stockholders, as discussed by Hillion and Vermaelen (2004).




                                                                                                 8
3. Data and Summary Statistics
         This section describes the data sources and summarizes the main characteristics of our
data set.


3.1. Data Sources
         Our data set on PIPE transactions was provided by Sagient Research in San Diego,
California. They collect data on all registered and publicly announced private placements since
1995. The data includes detailed information on the specific characteristics of PIPE transactions
and their investors. All the information from Sagient Research comes directly from SEC filings
and public announcements made by the companies.8 Our final dataset includes 5,260 PIPE
transactions.


3.2. Characteristics of PIPE Transactions
         The PIPEs market has increased substantially between 1995 and 2002. The composition
of the deals has changed considerably over time. Between 1995 and 1998, structured PIPEs
accounted for 53.0 percent of the PIPE transactions and for 36.9 percent of the capital raised.
Between 1999 and 2002, structured PIPEs accounted for just 24.4 percent of the PIPE
transactions and for just 10.3 percent of the total proceeds. The decrease in the number of
structured PIPEs continued in 2003 and early 2004. This fast rise and the subsequent decline in
the proportion of structured PIPEs is one example of a failed financial innovation. On the other
hand, traditional PIPEs remained an important source of funding for companies during the weak
equity market between 2000 and 2002.
         Panel A of Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the PIPE securities issued between
1995 and 2002. These PIPE deals raised a total of $76.7 billion. Traditional PIPEs account for
the highest proceeds raised through PIPE transactions. The 3,592 traditional PIPEs raised $65.0

7
  The conversion period can be as short as one day or as long as the lifetime of the security. The conversion period is
typically between one and four weeks. Prices calculated as an average during the conversion period are then used to
determine the number of new shares to be issued upon conversion of the variable security.
8
  We exclude Regulation S and 144-A placements. Regulation S placements are purchased by foreign institutional
investors and have become less prevalent because of changes to SEC regulations. 144-A placements are issued by
larger and more mature companies and are not considered PIPEs due to different regulatory treatments. Our
qualitative results are not affected if we include the Reg S and the 144-A transactions. We exclude 95 Reg S
placements and 469 144-A placements.


                                                                                                                     9
billion and the 1,668 structured deals raised $11.8 billion. The PIPE transactions increase the
funds available for companies substantially: The average ratio of the proceeds of a PIPE and the
market capitalization of the company exceeds 20 percent. The number of investors per deal
ranges between one and 84, with most PIPE transactions having only one investor. Many
companies are involved in multiple PIPE transactions over our sample period. 1,560 companies
issue exactly one PIPE, whereas 1,134 companies issue more than one PIPE.
       Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the composition of the investors in PIPE securities. The
investors can be identified for more than 80 percent of the capital raised in our sample. Each
investor is classified in one of 11 different groups. Hedge funds are the largest investor class,
accounting for 24.57 percent of the total investments in PIPE securities by identified investors.
Corporations, mutual funds and institutional advisors, venture capital, and private equity funds
are also important investors in this market.
       The investor composition differs dramatically between the two basic security structures.
Hedge funds account for 15.63 percent of the investment in traditional PIPEs and for 71.72
percent of the investment in structured PIPEs with known investor classifications. The other
investors belong to various groups of institutional investors.
       Sagient Research categorizes the companies issuing PIPEs into 11 industries listed in
Panel C. Most companies issuing PIPEs are in high-tech industries, such as communications,
healthcare, consumer cyclicals, and technology.


3.3. Merge with CRSP, Compustat, SDC Databases, I/B/E/S, and Short Interest Data
       To obtain accounting and stock price measures of companies issuing PIPEs, we match
our PIPE data set with the CRSP/Compustat databases using the ticker symbols and the names of
the issuing companies. We can match almost all PIPE companies that are traded on the NYSE,
NASDAQ, and AMEX to CRSP. However, we are usually not able to match companies that are
traded Over-the-Counter (Bulletin Board). Of the 5,260 PIPE transactions, 914 companies cannot
be found in CRSP. These un-matched transactions raise less than 5 percent of the total proceeds
of PIPE transactions. We are able to match most of the companies in our sample to the
Compustat database.
       We also identify public equity and public debt issuances between 1990 and 2003 using
the SDC database and merge this dataset with our data. We further identify whether companies


                                                                                              10
which went public within five years of the PIPE issuance are venture-backed or not. We also
obtain the number of analysts making EPS forecasts for PIPE companies three months prior to
the PIPE issuance according to I/B/E/S. Finally, we obtain data on the monthly volume-weighted
short positions of stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ directly from the respective
stock exchanges. We match these short-interest data with our sample of PIPE companies.


4. Security and Investor Choice
           Companies issuing PIPEs select simultaneously the investors and the specific security
structure. In this section, we summarize the characteristics of companies issuing PIPEs and we
study the security and investor choice using a multinomial logistic regression.


4.1. Characteristics of PIPE Companies
           PIPE issuers tend to be young, small, growth companies in high-technology sectors.
Table 2 summarizes characteristics of firms issuing PIPEs. Panel A reports several stock market
measures prior to the issuance of the PIPE transactions.
           Companies issuing PIPEs tend to be relatively young small companies.9 The majority of
companies were listed less than five years prior to the issuance of a PIPE transaction. Companies
issuing traditional PIPEs are slightly older than companies issuing structured PIPEs. We test for
the differences in the characteristics of structured and traditional PIPEs using a t-test for the
means assuming unequal variances and using a non-parametric Fisher test for the medians.
Companies issuing PIPEs have, in general, significantly lower market capitalization than
companies traded on the three major U.S. exchanges. The average company has a market
capitalization of $183.7 million. Companies issuing structured PIPEs tend to be significantly
smaller than companies issuing traditional PIPEs.
           We find a substantial cross-sectional difference in the stock price performance in the year
prior to the PIPE issuance. The median stock price decreases by 17.8 percent, while the mean
stock price increases by 30.0 percent, indicating that a relatively small number of PIPE
companies appreciate dramatically in the year prior to the issuance. The returns of PIPE
companies tend to be considerably more volatile than the returns of companies listed on major
U.S. exchanges. While companies traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ have a median

9
    For each company we determine the age relative to the fist listing in the CRSP database.


                                                                                                   11
annualized standard deviation of daily returns of 48 percent between 1995 and 2002, PIPE
companies have a median volatility of 68 percent in the year prior to the PIPE issue. The
volatility does not differ much between the two security structures. However, companies issuing
structured PIPEs have significantly higher annual turnovers and higher short interest positions
compared to other PIPE companies.
         Only 31.6 percent of PIPE issuing companies have analyst coverage, and the mean
number of analysts per PIPE firm is 1.1. Companies issuing structured PIPEs have significantly
less analyst coverage than companies issuing traditional PIPEs. Since the number of analysts
following a security is often used as a proxy for asymmetric information,10 this difference
confirms our view that companies issuing structured PIPEs are potentially more subject to
informational asymmetries.
         Brav and Gompers (1997) show that venture capital backing adds value even after the
initial public offering: Venture-backed companies substantially outperform non-venture-backed
firms in the public aftermarket. In our sample, 27.9 percent of the PIPE companies that went
public during the five years prior to the PIPE issuance are venture-backed. Companies that issue
structured PIPEs are significantly less likely to be venture-backed than companies that issue
traditional PIPEs, indicating that venture backing also has an impact on the opportunities to raise
funds.
         Panel B reports several accounting measures during the fiscal year prior to the issuance of
the PIPE transactions.11 Companies issuing PIPEs differ substantially from companies in
Compustat. Companies in our sample experience very poor operating performance during the
fiscal year prior to the issuance of the PIPEs. The return on equity for the median company
issuing a PIPE is -62.7 percent. On the other hand, the median company in Compustat has a
return on equity of 7.8 percent during the same period.12 We obtain similar results using returns


10
   See Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1995), Aboody and Lev (2000) and Wu (2004). Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina
(2002) show that the dispersion of the earnings forecasts by analysts is a measure of asymmetric information. We
also find that companies issuing structured PIPEs have a significantly higher dispersion of earnings forecasts than
companies issuing traditional PIPEs. However, we do not use this alternative proxy of asymmetric information,
since this dispersion information is often not available for our sample of PIPE companies because 79.6 percent of
PIPE companies have no or only one analyst following their earnings.
11
   We give the exact definitions of the accounting variables in Appendix D. All the accounting measures are
winsorized at the 1-percent level to eliminate the impact of extreme outliers.
12
   PIPE issuing companies tend to be substantially younger than the median company in Compustat, and younger
companies tend to have lower profitability. If we match our companies by industry, age, and size, then we can still
observe that PIPE issuing companies have considerably worse profitability. For example, the median return on


                                                                                                                12
on assets. Though 71.0 percent of companies in Compustat have positive returns on assets, only
15.1 percent of companies issuing PIPEs have positive returns on assets. The profitability of the
median company issuing structured PIPEs is worse than the profitability of the median company
issuing traditional PIPEs.
        The median company issuing a PIPE has assets valued at $26.1 million, while the median
company in Compustat has assets valued at $146 million. The book-to-market ratio of the
median PIPE company (22.4 percent) is substantially lower than the book-to-market ratio of the
median company in Compustat (52.0 percent). PIPE companies also have lower market leverage
than the median company in Compustat. Companies issuing structured PIPEs tend to have fewer
total assets, lower book-to-market ratios, and lower leverage than the median company issuing
traditional PIPEs.
        Companies issuing PIPEs make substantial capital expenditure and research and
development investments despite their poor operating performance. We do not find that
companies issuing structured PIPEs have significantly different capital expenditure and research
and development investments. These companies need to raise external funds to maintain their
investment levels. The dismal operating performance may pose difficulties in raising capital
through public debt markets and secondary equity offerings. According to SDC, just 0.20 percent
of PIPE companies issue public debt and 3.2 percent of PIPE companies make secondary equity
offerings in the year of PIPE transactions. This supports our earlier contention that firms that
issue PIPEs are limited in their abilities to raise financing in the more conventional public debt
and equity markets.


4.2. Multinomial Logit Estimation
        To better understand the security and investor choice, we estimate a multinomial logit
model, which is also known as a polytomous logistic regression. This estimation method allows
us to explore the determinants of the security and investor structure for PIPE issuances. We sort
all PIPE transactions with known investors into four groups based on the two security structures
(traditional and structured PIPEs) interacted with the two investor groups (hedge fund and non-
hedge fund investor). A PIPE is classified as having a hedge fund investor if hedge funds


equity of matched companies is 2.7 percent, which is economically and statistically significantly different from the
median return on equity of PIPE companies of -62.7 percent.


                                                                                                                 13
account for more than 50 percent of the proceeds in a particular PIPE. PIPE transactions where
the investor identity is unknown for more than 50 percent of the proceeds are not considered.13
The first group (traditional PIPE and non-hedge investor) is the largest and accounts for 47.8
percent of the observations, while the third group (structured PIPE and non-hedge investor) is the
smallest and accounts for 8.1 percent of the observations. Thus, we have multiple possible
outcomes y = {1, 2, 3, 4}. The numerical values of the dependent variable in a multinomial logit
estimation are arbitrary since the outcomes are “unordered.”
         The vector of independent variables, X, includes several characteristics of the companies
issuing PIPEs, year- and industry-fixed effects. All these explanatory variables are taken prior to
the closing of the PIPE transaction. The accounting variables are taken at the end of the fiscal
year prior to the PIPE issuance.
         In the multinomial logit model, we estimate the coefficient vectors β 1, β 2, β 3, and β 4,
corresponding to the four outcome categories:

                                          i
                                   e Xβ
                  Pr( y = i ) =                 for i ∈ {1,2,3,4} .                                                (1)
                                  4
                                         Xβ j
                                  ∑e
                                  j =1

         To ensure that the model is identified, we use traditional PIPEs with non-hedge fund
investors (y = 1) as the comparison group by setting the vector β 1 to zero. For example, the
relative probability of issuing a traditional PIPE from hedge fund investors (y = 2) compared to
issuing a traditional PIPE from non-hedge fund investors (y = 1) is as follows:

                   Pr( y = 2)
                              = e Xβ .
                                    2
                                                                                                                   (2)
                   Pr( y = 1)
         Table 3 summarizes the results for the maximum-likelihood multinomial logit
estimations. The first column reports the coefficient vector β 2 and compares the companies that
issue traditional PIPEs to hedge funds relative to the companies that issue traditional PIPEs to
non-hedge fund investors. The second and the third columns report the coefficient estimates β 3
and β 4, respectively.


13
  Our results are not affected significantly if we use different cutoff levels for hedge fund investors or if we either
include the unknown investors to the hedge fund group or to the non-hedge fund group.


                                                                                                                    14
       We observe that smaller companies are relatively more likely to raise capital through
structured PIPEs and hedge funds rather than through traditional PIPEs and other investors,
because the coefficient on the logarithm of the market value is significantly negative for group 4.
The coefficients on the book-to-market ratio are negative for all three groups. This indicates that
companies with higher book-to-market ratios (value companies) tend to be more likely to raise
capital through traditional PIPEs from non-hedge fund investors, while lower book-to-market
ratios (growth companies) tend to raise capital either through structured PIPEs or from hedge
fund investors. We also observe that companies with less extensive analyst coverage are
relatively more likely to obtain financing from hedge funds. An important predictor of the
security structure and the investor composition is the indicator variable of whether the company
has been venture-capital funded. We find that venture-funded companies are substantially less
likely to issue structured PIPEs. Brav and Gompers (1997) argue that venture-backed firms
might be less subject to asymmetric information. Thus, companies where asymmetric
information is potentially more important (i.e., smaller companies with relatively smaller book
values and companies with less analyst coverage) are relatively more likely to issue variable
convertibles and to obtain financing from hedge funds.
       The multinomial logit results suggest that companies receiving funding from hedge funds
tend to have significantly higher trading volumes and slightly higher short interest six months
prior to the PIPE issuance. Although the coefficients on the trading volume are statistically
significant at the 1 percent level, the coefficients on the short interest are usually not significant
at conventional significance levels. Hedge funds are interested in trading liquid securities and
they choose to invest in companies with high volumes, which can be short-sold easily. These
results cast some doubt on the hypothesis that hedge fund investors systematically seek
companies whose prices can be more easily manipulated, since companies with low trading
volume and with a non-existent short-selling market might be more susceptible to market
manipulation.




                                                                                                   15
5. The Impact of Security Structure on the Performance of Issuing Companies
       This section studies the short- and long-term stock performance of companies that issue
PIPEs. The stock return analysis estimates the returns that original shareholders of common
stocks would have experienced had they held their stocks for several years post-issuance. The
return of these original investors will, in general, be different from the return of the new
investors who purchase the PIPEs. Unfortunately, we cannot compute the returns of the investors
in these transactions for several reasons: First, PIPEs are usually sold at significant discounts and
often include warrants and repricing rights. We do not have sufficiently detailed information to
price these various security components and to determine the effective purchase prices for the
investors. Second, we do not know when the investors exercise their conversion rights and
liquidate their positions. Thus, we cannot compute holding period returns for the different
investors. Third, we do not observe whether the investors hold other positions in the issuing firm.
Many investors, especially hedge funds, often acquire short positions in the common stocks of
the issuing companies to hedge their risk exposure. Thus, hedged institutional investors might
not be affected significantly if the companies they invest in experience poor long-term returns.


5.1. Estimation Methodology
       In this section, we estimate the performance of the common stocks of companies issuing
PIPEs. We follow Barber and Lyon (1997) and benchmark performance by using a single control
firm for each PIPE firm. We analyze the performance of the stock price during a four-year
window around the closing of the PIPE transaction. We match each company in our sample to a
comparable company according to its industry, market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and
momentum characteristics in the previous month, as described in more detail in Appendix B.
       Subsequently, we compute daily buy-and-hold returns for all companies during a 1,000
trading day window around the closing date of the PIPE transaction. This window corresponds to
roughly two years before and two years after the closing of the transaction. Abnormal returns are
defined as the difference between the buy-and-hold return of the PIPE company and the buy-and-
hold return of the matched company.




                                                                                                   16
5.2. Short-Term Stock Price Performance
        The performance of stock prices of PIPE companies for different time windows is
summarized in Table 4. Companies issuing PIPEs experience a relatively strong positive return
during a 10-day event window around the close of the PIPE transaction (first row labeled [-4, 5]).
The average abnormal return of companies issuing PIPEs amounts to 3.87 percent during a 10-
day event window around the close.14 This average return is highly statistically significant.15
This result is in contrast to the negative average abnormal return during a short-term window
surrounding the announcement of a public offering of seasoned equity.16 The appreciation is
concentrated around the day of the PIPE close, since most deals are publicly announced on the
transaction day after the close of the stock market. The average company issuing a PIPE
appreciates by 0.10 percent on the day before the close, by 0.70 percent on the day of the close,
and by 1.30 percent on the day after the close.
        We find a significant difference in the short-term returns of companies that issue
traditional PIPEs and structured PIPEs. Stocks of companies issuing traditional PIPEs have a
statistically significant average abnormal return of 5.49 percent. On the other hand, stocks of
companies issuing variable PIPEs have an average abnormal return of 0.40 percent, which is not
significantly different from zero.


5.3. Long-Term Stock Price Performance
        Figure 1 depicts the average abnormal returns for the companies issuing the three basic
security structures during the two years before and after the closing. The returns are normalized
to zero on the closing day. Similarly to Hertzel et al. (2002), we find a negative relation between
short- and long-term returns for traditional PIPEs. Though PIPE issuing companies experience,
on average, a positive short-term announcement performance, they experience a negative long-
term performance. However, we find the stock price performance differs dramatically between
the two security structures. Companies issuing traditional PIPEs experience mean abnormal
returns of -10.9 percent during the subsequent 500 days. On the other hand, the stock prices of
firms issuing structured PIPEs start declining on the first day after the issuance day and decrease,

14
   This result is similar to Wruck (1989), Fields and Mais (1991), Hertzel and Smith (1993), Varma and Szewczyk
(1993), Hertzel et al. (2002), and Wu (2004).
15
   The statistical significance levels are computed using the standard t-tests.




                                                                                                            17
on average, by 36.1 percent relative to matched firms. The results for the structured PIPEs are
similar to the ones reported by Hillion and Vermaelen (2004), who study floating convertible
PIPEs issued between January 1995 and August 1998.17
        Table 4 divides the long-term performance of the stock returns after the PIPE issuance
into three different time periods, (i.e., [6, 100], [6, 250], and [6, 500]).18 We observe that
companies issuing PIPEs have negative abnormal returns during the three intervals after the
closing of the deal, which are economically and statistically significant. The abnormal returns are
particularly poor for companies issuing structured PIPEs. A similar long-term underperformance
is also found for initial public offerings19 and for seasoned equity offerings.20 Companies issuing
structured PIPEs experience a substantial deterioration of their stock valuations over the two
years considered here. These abnormal returns are economically and statistically highly
significant. On the other hand, the underperformance of companies issuing traditional PIPEs is
less pronounced, particularly during the first year following the PIPE issuance. Appendix C
shows that the statistical inference is not affected much if we estimate the standard errors using
bootstrap-simulations instead.
        One surprising result remains the slow stock price adjustment after the PIPE issuance.
We would anticipate a market correction to occur at the time of the announcement of the security
structure and the investor composition. One explanation for our results could be a slow release of
information of the security structure and the investor composition. However, PIPEs are regulated
by the SEC, and firms must submit the required forms to the SEC within 15 calendar days. This
indicates that market prices do not adjust sufficiently rapidly to the announcement of structured
PIPEs and that investors could pursue profitable trading strategies by short-selling securities after
the announcement of a structured PIPE.

16
   See, for example: Smith (1986), Asquith and Mullins (1986), Masulis and Korwar (1986), Mikkelson and Partch
(1986), Shyam-Sunder (1991), and Cornett and Tehranian (1994).
17
   A relatively large number of companies issue multiple PIPEs over our sample period. Thus, the returns of these
companies are weighted more heavily. However, our results are not affected significantly if we only look at the first
PIPE deal by each company. Moreover, our results do not change qualitatively if we exclude companies with stock
prices below $1 on the closing day of the transaction or if we exclude companies with market capitalizations below
$10 million. See Ball, Kothari, and Shanken (1995) for a discussion of potential problems caused by low-price
stocks.
18
   The abnormal returns between trading days [6, 500] after the PIPE issues include only a portion of the abnormal
returns for PIPE issuances in 2002, because we only have available stock return data until December 2003. The
results do not change qualitatively if we only analyze the PIPE deals issued between 1995 and 2001, which have
complete return series.
19
   See, for example, Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995).



                                                                                                                  18
5.4. Distribution of Long-Term Returns
           We plot in Figure 2 the cumulative probabilities of the abnormal returns during the 250
trading days following the closing of the PIPE deals to investigate whether the averages of the
long-term stock price performance are driven by outliers. The cumulative probability function of
the abnormal stock returns of traditional PIPE companies lies almost everywhere to the right of
the one of structured PIPE companies. The median abnormal stock return is -9.24 percent for
traditional and -22.4 percent for structured PIPE companies. In our sample, 56.4 percent of the
companies issuing traditional PIPEs experience negative abnormal returns and 66 percent of the
companies issuing structured PIPEs experience negative abnormal returns in the following year.
We can reject the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests that the two distributions are identical.


5.5. Different Benchmark Portfolios
           Table 5 summarizes the short- and the long-term results using six different benchmark
portfolios. The first benchmark is the appropriate book-to-market benchmark portfolio according
to Fama and French (1992).21 The benchmark portfolios, which are constructed at the end of
each June, are the intersections of two portfolios formed on size and three portfolios formed on
the ratio of book equity to market equity. The second benchmark uses a comparable firm
matched by industry and size. We match each PIPE company to a company in the same industry
and with the closest market capitalization. The third benchmark uses a comparable firm matched
by industry, size, and book-to-market, as described in Appendix B. The fourth benchmark is
identical to our base case from Table 5 and matches according to industry, size, book-to-market,
and momentum.
           The fifth benchmark matches companies also by age to control for return patterns that are
age-dependent. In particular, companies that recently did an IPO tend to under-perform their
benchmarks as shown previously by Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995). By
controlling for age, we eliminate any poor performance that is driven by the IPO
underperformance or by any other factors that are age specific. The sixth benchmark computes
the relative performance of PIPE companies with companies issuing secondary equity offerings,

20
     See, for example, Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995) and Loughran and Ritter (1995, 1997).
21
     The data are obtained from Kenneth French’s Web site:



                                                                                                 19
since it also has been shown that companies issuing SEOs tend to under-perform their
benchmarks as discussed by Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995) and Loughran and Ritter (1995,
1997). In a first step, we find for each PIPE and SEO company a comparable company according
to industry, size, book-to-market, and momentum and compute the abnormal returns. In a second
step, we average the abnormal returns of PIPE and SEO companies and take the difference in the
average abnormal returns. This “difference in difference” approach measures whether companies
raising equity privately experience different returns from companies raising equity publicly.
Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000) argue that a decrease in expected returns of issuing companies
might be due to a decrease in the risk exposure which results from a decrease in the leverage of
the issuing companies relative to the comparable firms. The difference-in-difference estimate can
control for this effect if the risk exposures of companies issuing equity privately and publicly are
similarly affected.
        Our main conclusions remain generally unaffected using the different benchmarks. We
find very strong evidence that companies issuing traditional PIPEs experience positive
announcement effects during a short-term event window and that structured PIPEs perform
poorly in the long run. The long-term under-performance is negative in all cases for the
companies issuing traditional PIPEs. However, we only obtain a marginal statistical significance
using the difference-in-difference approach, which compares the abnormal returns of companies
issuing equity privately and publicly.


6. The Impact of Investor Classes on the Performance of Issuing Companies
        The composition of investors differs substantially between the different PIPE structures.
Though structured PIPEs are purchased primarily by hedge funds, traditional PIPEs are
purchased by various institutional investors. Table 6 summarizes the average abnormal returns of
the underlying stocks of companies that issue PIPEs by their main investor classes. We
categorize the PIPE transactions depending on whether a specific investor class accounts for
more than 50 percent of the total proceeds. Panel A summarizes the short-term abnormal returns
and Panel B summarizes the long-term abnormal returns during the two years following the close
of the PIPE deal.



http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/six_portfolios.html.


                                                                                                 20
6.1. Short-Term Returns
       Booth and Smith (1986) propose that a third party can certify the value of securities
issued by a firm with an otherwise uncertain value. If certain classes of investors are able to
certify PIPE issuing firms, then we would expect different patterns in short-term gains. We
observe in Panel A that companies that receive investments from hedge funds perform
considerably worse than companies that receive investments from other investors during the 10-
day event window. Companies associated with hedge funds appreciate by only 1.42 percent
during the 10-day event window, while companies associated with other investors appreciate on
average by 5.66 percent. The short-term abnormal returns are particularly large for PIPE
transactions where corporations or venture capital and private equity funds are the majority
investors. The average 10-day abnormal returns equal 9.38 percent for the transactions where
corporations are the major investors and 8.51 percent for the transactions where venture capital
or private equity funds are the major investors. This indicates that the investor identity may have
an important certification role in the short run.


6.2. Long-Term Returns
       Panel B of Table 6 summarizes the long-term abnormal returns during the two years
following the PIPE transaction. The long-term abnormal returns tend to be lower for companies
that obtain financing from hedge fund investors. This result is driven by two factors: First, hedge
funds are more likely to invest in structured PIPEs, which are issued by companies for which we
have already demonstrated significant post-issuance underperformance as compared to firms
which issue traditional PIPEs. Second, companies issuing traditional PIPEs to hedge funds
perform worse than companies that issue traditional PIPEs to other investors. However, we find
that hedge funds do not have a significantly different impact on long-term stock price
performance for companies issuing structured PIPEs.
       The poor performance of PIPE companies issuing traditional PIPEs cannot be explained
by market manipulation, because investors in traditional PIPEs do not have any opportunity to
increase the value of their position through short-selling pressure during the conversion period.
Instead, we argue that hedge funds are investors of last resort for troubled firms. At the time of
the closing of the PIPE, the market may not have been fully aware of the troubled state of the
issuing firm. Subsequently, as the market becomes informed prices decrease. Hedge funds are


                                                                                                21
ideally suited to be investors of last resort since they have few restrictions in establishing short
positions to hedge any possible downside risk associated with investing in troubled firms.


6.3. Determinants of Stock Price Performance: Regression Evidence
       This section analyzes the determinants of the performance of PIPE stocks using a
regression framework. We analyze whether our results on the impact of security structure and
investor composition are robust if we include additional control variables in a multi-variate
regression specification. The dependent variable is the excess buy-and-hold return of a PIPE
issuing company relative to one of the six Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolios:

       XRi,t+∆ = β0 + β1 SPi + β2 TPi HFi + β3 SPi HFi + γ Xi + ei,t+∆.                           (4)

       The excess return above the corresponding Fama-French portfolio during the event
window ∆ is denoted by XRi,t+∆. The indicator variables TPi and SPi equal one if the security
structure of transaction i is a traditional or a structured PIPE, respectively. The indicator variable
HFi equals one if hedge funds account for more than 50 percent of the total proceeds of the
transaction. The observations where the identities of the majority of the investors are unknown
are excluded. Xi is a vector of additional accounting variables, year, and sector controls. The
coefficient β1 measures the marginal impact of issuances of structured relative to traditional
PIPEs. The coefficients β2 and β3 indicate whether deals with hedge fund investors perform
differently from deals with other investor classes for traditional and structured PIPEs,
respectively.
       We estimate two specifications using different time horizons: The first specification
estimates equity performance controlling for the security structure and the investor composition.
The second specification includes additional lagged accounting variables as controls. The
number of observations is smaller in the second specification since we are unable to match all
companies with valid stock return data to Compustat. All accounting variables are winsorized at
the 1 percent level to eliminate the impact of extreme outliers. The standard errors are robust and
corrected for clustering of observations by the same company.
       Table 7 summarizes the regression results. The regressions also include additional year
and industry fixed effects, which are not reported. The first column summarizes the results over
the 10-day event window using the first specification. We find that companies issuing structured


                                                                                                   22
PIPEs perform substantially worse during the 10 days around the PIPE issuance than companies
issuing traditional PIPEs. Moreover, the results indicate that companies receiving funding from
hedge funds perform worse than companies receiving funding from other investor classes,
although the coefficient on the interaction term for structured PIPEs and hedge fund investors is
not statistically significant.
        The second column adds control variables for the characteristics of the issuing company.
These additional control variables do not significantly affect the estimated impact of the security
structure and the investor composition on the short-term returns.
        The remaining columns summarize the regression results using the long-term excess
returns over two different time periods ([6, 250], and [6, 500]) as the dependent variables. The
indicator variable for structured PIPEs enters significantly and confirms the previous results.
Moreover, companies that issue traditional PIPEs and receive funding from hedge funds tend to
underperform companies that receive funding from other investor classes. These results are
highly statistically significant. On the other hand, companies that issue structured PIPEs and
receive funding from hedge funds do not perform significantly different from companies that
receive funding for structured PIPEs from other investor classes.
        These results are not affected substantially if we control for additional variables.
Companies with larger market capitalization experience larger underperformance than smaller
companies. An important determinant of stock price performance is the indicator variable for
whether a company recently received venture capital funding. Brav and Gompers (1997) show
that venture capital backing adds value even after the initial public offering: venture-backed
companies substantially outperform non-venture-backed firms in the public aftermarket. We
confirm this result using PIPE companies. Companies that are venture-backed outperform
companies that are not venture-backed by a substantial margin.
        By controlling for the investor composition, security structure, and accounting
characteristics, we are able to partially resolve the puzzle originally raised by Hertzel et al.
(2002) of the contradiction between short-term gains of a private placements followed by long-
term losses. We find that negative returns (short- and long-term) are primarily associated with
companies issuing structured PIPEs and companies with hedge fund investors, companies which
experience less pronounced short-term appreciations.




                                                                                                23
7. Calendar Time Portfolios
         In this section, we compute calendar-time abnormal returns of companies that issue
PIPEs. Fama (1998) and Mitchell and Stafford (2000) argue that the event study methodology
does not appropriately take into account cross-sectional dependencies in returns. To address this
issue, we estimate abnormal returns based on the calendar-time portfolio approach by Mitchell
and Stafford (2000).


7.1. Calendar Time Portfolios: Methodology
         In a first step, we form a buy-and-hold portfolio of all the common stocks of companies
that issue PIPEs during the past 500 trading days between 1996 and 2002.22 In a second step, we
compute the abnormal returns using various factor models. The equally weighted portfolio
invests $1 in each PIPE issuing company the day after the close of the PIPE transaction. The
portfolio holds each position for 500 days.
         Due to the low liquidity in some of the companies issuing PIPEs, daily closing prices
often are stale. Therefore, we analyze the weekly instead of daily returns for the calendar time
portfolios. In addition, we include lagged factor returns to control for the staleness of equity
prices.23 We compute abnormal returns using different factor models. The basic factor model has
the following specification:
                                   K              K
           Ri, t − R F , t = α i + ∑ β ik Ftk + ∑ γ ik Ftk−1 + ei, t ,                                            (3)
                                  k =1           k =1

         The dependent variable is the return on portfolio i on day t, Ri,t, minus the risk-free rate,

RF,t. The k-th risk factor shock at time t is denoted by Ftk and the contemporaneous and lagged

factor loadings are given by β ik and γ ik . The abnormal performance of the portfolio is measured
by αi. The first model simply computes the average excess return relative to the market return.

The second model estimates the abnormal return using the one-factor CAPM. The third model

follows Fama and French (1993) and includes a market, a size, and a book-to-market factor. The




22
   The results are consistent if we only include companies which issued PIPEs in the last 100 or 250 trading days.
23
   We obtain similar results if we use daily returns and if we do not include the lagged factor returns. Actually, the
standard errors tend to be lower with daily returns because of the larger sample size.


                                                                                                                   24
fourth model adds a momentum factor following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and Carhart

(1997).24
        Ferson and Schadt (1996) argue that unconditional measures of abnormal performance
might be unreliable, because common variation in risk levels and risk premia will be confounded
with average performance. They argue that a managed portfolio strategy that can be replicated
using readily available public information should not be judged as having superior performance
and advocate a model based on conditional performance, which uses predetermined instruments
to capture the time-varying factor loadings. Our specification includes interaction terms between
the Carhart factor returns and various demeaned macro-economic variables:
                                 K ⎛            J                ⎞       K ⎛            J                ⎞
         Ri, t − R F , t = α i + ∑ ⎜ β ik ,0 + ∑ β ik , j z tj−1 ⎟ Ftk + ∑ ⎜ γ ik ,0 + ∑ γ ik , j z tj−1 ⎟ Ftk−1 + ei, t , (4)
                                     ⎜
                                k =1 ⎝         j =1
                                                                 ⎟           ⎜
                                                                        k =1 ⎝         j =1
                                                                                                         ⎟
                                                                 ⎠                                       ⎠
                 j
        where z t −1 is the demeaned value of the lagged macro-economic variable j. Consistent

with Ferson and Schadt (1996), we consider the following five variables: the one-month
Treasury bill yield, the dividend yield of the CRSP value-weighted index, the Treasury yield
spread (10-year minus 1-year Treasury bond yields), the quality spread in the corporate bond
market (AAA minus BAA corporate bond yields), and an indicator variable for January.25 Our
specification uses the four Carhart factors. However, we obtain similar results if we use a one- or
a three-factor model.
        Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000) show that equity issuances lower the leverage of
companies and increase the liquidity of the stocks of the issuing companies. They argue that this
affects the exposure of companies to unexpected inflation and default risks, thus decreasing their
stock’s expected returns relative to matched firms. We also estimate their factor model that
includes six macro factors: the value-weighted market index, the return spread between Treasury
bonds with 10-year and 1-year maturities, the return spread between 90- and 30-day Treasury
bills, the seasonally adjusted percent change in real per capita consumption of nondurable goods,


24
    The daily factor returns for the three-factor model are obtained from Kenneth French’s Web site:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library. The daily momentum return is constructed
following the description on French’s Web site.
25
   The Treasury and corporate bond yields are obtained from the Web site of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System: http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/. The dividend yield and the Treasury bill yields are
obtained from CRSP.


                                                                                                                          25
the difference in the monthly yield change on BAA and AAA-rated corporate bonds, and
unexpected inflation.26


7.2. Calendar Time Portfolios: Results
        Table 8 summarizes the annualized abnormal returns for various portfolios of PIPE
issuing companies, according to the security structure and the investor composition. The first
row shows that a portfolio including all the stocks that issued PIPEs during the previous year has
an average annualized excess return above the market of -18.49 percent per year. The calendar
time portfolios confirm our previous results that companies issuing structured PIPEs and
companies raising capital from hedge fund investors perform poorly. For example, portfolios
including all companies that issue structured PIPEs during the previous two years experience
abnormal returns between -31.08 and -39.98 percent using the different models. These abnormal
returns are economically and statistically highly significant.
        We also find the abnormal returns of the portfolios of companies selling equity to hedge
funds are more negative than the portfolios of companies selling equity to other known investor
classes for both security structures.
        Companies issuing traditional PIPEs to non-hedge investors always have negative
abnormal returns. However, the alphas are never significantly different from zero at conventional
significance levels. Generally, the annualized abnormal returns are not very sensitive to the
different factor models and tend to be larger if we have a longer portfolio inclusion window.
        The results using calendar-time portfolios confirm the results using the event-study
methodology. Thus, our results are not driven primarily by common variation in risk levels and
risk premia or by changes of the fundamentals of the companies which result from equity
issuances.




26
  We regress the daily portfolio returns on the original raw factor series, as reported in Panel D from Table 9 of
Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2000). The Treasury and corporate bond yields are obtained from the Web site of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/. The Treasury bill
yields are obtained from CRSP. Per capita non-durable consumption is obtained from the NIPA accounts of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (http://www.bea.doc.gov), and the consumer price inflation is obtained from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://www.bls.gov/cpi/). The estimation of expected inflation follows Eckbo, Masulis,
and Norli (2000) by running a regression of real T-bill returns on a constant and 12 of its lagged values.


                                                                                                               26
8. Accounting Performance
       This section studies whether the long-term stock price performance of PIPE issuing
companies is generally consistent with the accounting performance. In particular, we analyze
whether there is some association between security structure and investor composition with the
long-term accounting performance.


8.1. Event Study of Accounting Variables
       Table 9 reports three accounting variables: the return on assets, the book-to-market ratio,
and the capital and research and development expenditures relative to the total assets for
companies issuing PIPEs during a four-year window around the PIPE issuance. We find that
companies issuing PIPEs continue to perform relatively poorly. While the ROA of companies
issuing PIPEs to non-hedge funds improves from -36.3 to -26.2 percent, the ROA of companies
issuing PIPEs to hedge funds actually worsens from -39.7 to -42.9 percent in the second fiscal
year following the PIPE issue. Companies that issue structured PIPEs continue to perform
significantly worse than companies that issue traditional PIPEs during the two fiscal years
following the PIPE issue.
       Panel B shows that PIPE companies resemble value companies more after the PIPE
transactions, as compared to before, reflecting primarily a deterioration of market valuations.
Panel C indicates that the median PIPE company reduces its capital, research, and development
expenditures in the years after the close of the PIPE, suggesting that the capital raised through
PIPE transactions does not allow companies to permanently maintain or increase their real
investment activities. These persistently poor accounting results support our earlier assertion that
PIPE investors do not actively monitor their companies, as discussed by Barclay, Holderness,
and Sheehan (2003) and Wu (2004).


8.2. Regression Evidence
       Table 10 summarizes the determinants of the accounting performance after the issuance
of PIPE securities. The dependent variable is the return of assets during the first fiscal year after
the PIPE issuance (column 1) and during the second fiscal year after the PIPE issuance (column
2). The dependent variable is winsorized at the 1 percent level to eliminate the effect of a small
number of outliers. The return on assets is regressed on the PIPE structure and the interaction


                                                                                                  27
effects between traditional and structured PIPEs and hedge fund investors. In addition, we
include the accounting variables discussed previously as well as year and sector fixed effects.
The accounting variables also include the return on assets during the fiscal year prior to the PIPE
issuance as a control variable.27
           The results indicate that companies issuing structured PIPEs tend to experience worse
operating performance than traditional PIPEs after the PIPE issuance, although the results are not
highly statistically significant. We must interpret these results with caution since these
regressions only use the surviving companies; accounting data are unavailable for companies that
are delisted from major exchanges. In our sample, companies that issue structured PIPEs are
considerably more likely to be delisted than companies that issue traditional PIPEs. For example,
in the two years following the PIPE issuance, 35.8 percent of structured and 26.6 percent of
traditional PIPEs are delisted. The vast majority of these delistings occur because the stocks are
delisted by NASDAQ, NYSE, or AMEX for not satisfying the listing requirements. Thus,
companies that issue structured PIPEs are more likely to be delisted; and if they continue to be
listed, then they continue to have worse operating performance.28
           There is also some evidence that companies that are associated with hedge fund investors
experience worse operating performance. In addition, companies receiving funding from hedge
funds are also more likely to be delisted within two years of the PIPE issuance. For example, in
the two years following the PIPE issuance, 34.6 percent of companies receiving funding from
hedge funds and 25.6 percent of companies receiving funding from other known investors are
delisted.
           The additional control variables are able to explain a relatively large fraction of the
variation in the return in assets. The lagged return on assets is particularly important because it is
highly auto-correlated. Moreover, larger firms, growth firms, and firms with positive stock price
momentum tend to experience superior long-term operating performance.


9. Short Interest of PIPE Issuing Companies
           Our results indicate that the structure and identity of the investor matters for the short and
long-term stock price and accounting performance of companies issuing PIPEs. Companies

27
     Chou, Gombola, and Liu (2004) do not find significant earnings management for private placements of equity.




                                                                                                                   28
issuing structured PIPEs and companies obtaining financing from hedge funds tend to perform
significantly worse than comparable companies. The interesting question to be considered is the
causal link between structure, investor, and performance.
        Hillion and Vermaelen (2004) suggest that a structured PIPE might be a faulty contract
due to the incentives for investors to manipulate the price downward to receive a higher
percentage of the firm upon conversion. Our finding of a negative association between structured
PIPEs purchased by hedge funds and long-term performance is consistent with their hypothesis.
We also find that while the number of traditional PIPE issuances increases in our sample, the
number of structured PIPEs decreases – a fact that could be explained as firms learning and
subsequently avoiding issuing these flawed securities.
        To better understand the cause of this negative long-term performance by firms that issue
convertible PIPEs we explore the short interest market. We compute the average ratio between
securities shorted and the total number of securities outstanding for firms surrounding the PIPE
transaction date. We repeat this procedure for a matched firm (with matching based on industry,
size, book-to-market, and momentum) and report the difference as “abnormal” shorting.
        Figure 3 reports the abnormal short interest of companies issuing traditional and
structured PIPEs for hedge and non-hedge investors. We find that traditional PIPE companies
that obtain financing from hedge funds have higher initial levels and larger increases in the short
interest around PIPE issuances. This result is consistent with the observation that some hedge
funds eliminate their risk exposure after investments in PIPE securities by taking short positions
in the underlying stocks.29 We also find that the short interest decreases gradually within the first
two years after the PIPE issuances. This result is consistent with hedge funds closing out their
short positions as the lock-up periods expire and disposing of their original PIPE purchase.
        For structured PIPEs, we find that the short interest increases for transactions done by
both hedge and non-hedge fund investors. We do not find a statistically significant difference
between the short interest changes for hedge and non-hedge investors. Moreover, we do not find
a significant difference in the changes in short interest for companies issuing traditional and
structured PIPEs to hedge funds. If the short selling is motivated by the ability to manipulate the

28
   This survivorship bias does not affect our stock return performance results to a similar degree since we included
also delisted companies in our analysis.




                                                                                                                 29
underlying security to receive a more favorable conversion ratio, we should expect to see a
substantially larger increase in short interest in companies obtaining hedge fund investments
through structured PIPEs. Actually, the increase in short interest is less pronounced for
companies issuing structured PIPEs to hedge funds than for companies issuing traditional PIPEs
to hedge funds.30
         Though short sales are specified in the original faulty contract hypothesis of Hillion and
Vermaelen (2004), shorting is but one of several ways hedge funds could manipulate the
underlying equity and we can not rule out all possible methods of manipulating stock prices.
However, we find that hedge funds tend to invest in firms with higher pre-issuance trading
volume and short interest (see Table 3). Hedge funds are technical investors interested in trading
liquid securities and they choose to invest in companies with high trading volumes and that can
be short-sold easily. These results cast doubt on the hypothesis that hedge fund investors
systematically seek companies whose prices can be more easily manipulated, since companies
with low trading volume and with a non-existent short-selling market might be more susceptible
to market manipulation.


10. Conclusions
         This paper discusses the short- and long-term performance of companies issuing equity
privately. We show that, on average, these companies under-perform comparable firms in the
two years following the closing of the PIPE transactions. We find that both the structure of the
PIPE and the investor composition in the PIPE matter in understanding why firms issue the
security and the subsequent performance of the issuing firm. Poor post-issuance performance is
associated with structured PIPEs, where investors obtain significant repricing rights, and with
hedge fund investors.
         We find that firms in our sample have significant need for external capital because of
poor operating performance and large capital, research, and development expenses. There is also
evidence indicating these firms have limited financing options complicated by high degrees of

29
   The increase in short interest is considerably more pronounced for issuances of common stock PIPEs than for
issuances of fixed convertibles, since fixed convertibles partially protect against price declines in the stock of the
underlying company.
30
   The increase in the short interest for structured PIPEs either could result from the desire of investors to hedge
their exposure to the company or from other unrelated investors that perceive the announcement of a structured PIPE




                                                                                                                   30
asymmetric information. These results support our earlier assertion that firms are motivated to
issue PIPEs to minimize the asymmetric information costs associated with issuing external
finance.
        We find little to no abnormal performance in firms issuing traditional PIPEs sold to non-
hedge fund investors. However, we find significant abnormal performance if the equity security
is bought by a hedge fund. We also report that companies issuing traditional PIPEs bought by
hedge funds tend to have more negative accounting characteristics in the year preceding issuance
and that these characteristics are weakly associated with negative long-run returns. These results
are consistent with the hypothesis that hedge funds act as investors of last resort, playing an
important role in the market for young, high-risk firms with substantial asymmetric information
and large capital needs. However, we do not find direct evidence that the dismal performance of
companies obtaining financing through structured PIPEs is caused by market manipulation.




as negative news. Investors in structured PIPEs still might want to take a short position in the underlying stock
because the variable conversion ratio does not provide protection in the case of default.


                                                                                                              31
Appendix A: Security Structure


A.1. Common Stock PIPEs
       The most basic PIPE security is a common stock placement, where a fixed number of
shares are issued and sold at a predetermined discount or premium to the market price. Common
stock PIPEs sometimes include warrants that let the investor purchase additional shares at a
predetermined price during a specific time period.


A.2. Common Stock PIPEs – Shelf Sale
       A small number of PIPEs are shelf sales of common stocks, which are sales of a
company’s common stock from an existing shelf registration statement. The registration allows
the company to sell the securities over a period of time.


A.3. Fixed Convertible PIPEs
       Fixed convertible PIPEs are either specified as convertible preferred stock or convertible
debt. Preferred stock represents equity ownership that is ranked higher than common stock in
case of bankruptcy or liquidation. Convertible debt is a loan obligation of the company that ranks
higher than any equity securities. Fixed convertibles yield a current return through interest or
dividend payments and can be converted by the investors into a fixed number of shares of the
company’s common stock at a predetermined ratio. The implied fixed conversion price is usually
above the current market price. Investors in fixed convertibles exchange their securities for
common stocks if the stock price is sufficiently high on the conversion date.


A.4. Floating Convertible PIPEs
       Floating convertibles have a variable conversion price that is based on future market
prices of the common stock after the issuance but before the time of conversion. This feature
protects the investor if the price of the common stock changes after the PIPE deal is closed,
because the investor will receive increasing numbers of shares if stock prices decrease. Floating
convertible PIPEs are either specified as convertible preferred stock or convertible debt. Floating
convertibles often include caps and floors which limit the possible range of conversion prices.




                                                                                                  32
A.5. Reset Convertible PIPEs
        Reset convertibles have a fixed conversion price that is subject to a number of resets at
specific times following the closing date. At the time of each of the resets, the fixed conversion
price is adjusted as a percentage of the current market price and then remains fixed at this new
price until the next reset date.


A.6. Common Stock Reset PIPEs
        A small number of common stock private placements are classified as common stock
resets. These deals include repricing rights, which allow the investor to receive additional shares
of common stocks if the market price decreases after the closing date. The repricing rights clause
functions very similarly to a floating convertible in that the number of issuable shares can change
every day. Additionally, there may be a limit on the number of shares which are issued pursuant
to the repricing rights.


A.7. Structured Equity Line PIPEs
        A structured equity line is an agreement that requires the investor to purchase a
predetermined value of the company’s common stock over a certain period of time. The price of
the stock is usually determined as an average of the closing price during a pre-specified period in
the future minus a fixed discount.


A.8. Performance by Detailed Security Structure
        In Table 11, we subdivide the PIPEs according to more detailed specifications of the
securities issued and compute the abnormal returns. Panel A shows that common stock PIPEs are
the dominant security in the traditional PIPEs market. Fixed convertible preferred stock and
fixed convertible debt also account for a significant share of transactions. Panel B lists six
different security structures that are included as structured PIPEs.
        The short- and long-term performance of the underlying common stocks after the PIPE
issuance for the detailed security structures does not differ significantly within the two basic
security structures. The companies issuing any of the six different variable convertible structures
perform very poorly relative to their matched companies and relative to companies that issue
common stock or fixed convertible PIPEs.


                                                                                                33
Appendix B: Estimation Methodology
        This section explains the methodology used to perform the event study in Section 4. First,
we download at the end of each calendar year from CRSP the SIC codes and the market
capitalizations of all the common stocks that are not closed-end funds, ADRs, REITs, and that
are headquartered in the U.S. We merge this data set with the corresponding book-to-market
ratios from Compustat. For companies with fiscal year-ends before October, we use the book
value at the end of the current fiscal year and for companies with fiscal year-ends after
September, we use the book values at the end of the previous fiscal year. Thus, the book values
at the end of each calendar year are lagged by at least three months to allow some time delay for
the publication of the accounting values after the end of the fiscal year.
        Second, we match companies according to their industry classification, size, book-to-
market ratio, and momentum. We classify all the companies into 48 industries according to the
SIC codes, as described in Fama and French (1997).31 We rank the companies in each of these 48
industries by their market capitalization, their book-to-market ratio, and their return during the
previous 12 months. At the end of each month, we match each company to another company in
the same industry that did not issue a PIPE in the previous two years such that the sum of the
absolute deviations of the size, the book-to-market, and the momentum rankings is smallest. If
either the size, book-to-market ratio, or momentum returns are missing, then we match the
company to another company in the same industry group with missing size, book-to-market
ratio, or momentum returns. The distribution of the characteristics for the PIPE and the
comparable companies is very close.32
        When we match firms by industry, age, size, book-to-market ratio, and momentum, we
first choose all the companies in one of the same of 10 industries, according to the industry
grouping in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2004). Subsequently, we select companies that fall
in the same age range: 0-6 months; 7-12 months; 13-24 months; 25-36 months; 37-60 months;
60-120 months; 121-240 months; and above 241 months. To select a unique matching firm from

31
   The industry classification can be obtained from Kenneth French’s Web site:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.
32
   For example, companies issuing PIPEs have a median size of $64.7 million, a median book-to-market ratio of
0.20, and median past-year returns of -15.0 percent. Companies matched according to industry, size, book-to-market
ratio, and momentum have a median size of $62.2 million, a median book-to-market ratio of 0.24, and median past-
year returns of -15.4 percent. The companies also match well with respect to other relevant characteristics that were
not matched. For example, the median age of a PIPE company is 4.6 years, while the median age of the matched
company is 5.2 years. 84.3 percent of PIPE companies and 78.4 percent of matched companies trade on NASDAQ.


                                                                                                                  34
these companies in the same industry and in the same age range, we rank them according to size,
book-to-market, and momentum, as described in the Appendix.
        Third, we compute the daily buy-and-hold returns for all companies in our sample during
a 1,000-trading-day window around the closing date of the PIPE transaction. If the returns for a
company that issues a PIPE are not available in CRSP, we set the returns equal to the returns of
the matched company. If the returns of the comparable company are not available, then we set
the returns equal to the value-weighted index. This avoids the introduction of a delisting bias,
because companies that are delisted perform, on average, poorly before delisting.33 If the holding
period returns for a matched company are not available in CRSP, then we replace this company
with the company that had the next-closest match at the end of the calendar year prior to the
closing date of the PIPE.
        Fourth, we compare these average returns for different PIPE deals over various sample
periods. The abnormal return is defined as the difference between the buy-and-hold return of the
PIPE company and the buy-and-hold return of the matched company.


Appendix C: Bootstrap Simulations

        To check the robustness of our significance levels, we run bootstrap simulations using the
pseudo-portfolio approach from Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999).34 For each PIPE firm, we
randomly select with replacement on the event day a firm that is in the same size and book-to-
market portfolio.
        All domestic ordinary common stocks are first sorted into deciles according to the market
capitalization of companies listed on the NYSE. Subsequently, we divide up the smallest decile
into quintiles. Thus, we obtain 14 size portfolios. Each size portfolio is further divided into
quintile portfolios according to the book-to-market ratios. Companies that have missing book-to-
market values in Compustat are matched to companies with missing book-to-market values. The
portfolios are formed at the end of each month.
        If a company issues multiple PIPEs during our sample period, we match all these
observations to the same replacement firm to take into account possible clustering by firms.

33
   A relatively large number of our PIPE companies are delisted during the two years after the closing of the PIPE.
For example, 8.5 percent of the companies delist within the first year after the PIPE security is issued.
34
   Similar methods were developed by Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and
Vermaelen (1995), and Lee (1997), among others.


                                                                                                                35
Subsequently, we estimate the abnormal performance of the randomly selected firms as was done
for the original sample. We repeat this process 1,000 times and derive 1,000 mean abnormal
return observations. These observations are used to approximate the empirical distribution of
mean long-run abnormal returns.
         We generally obtain the same levels of statistical significance as using conventional t-
tests. For example, the simulated short-term abnormal return during a 10-day trading window
using all PIPE issuances has a standard deviation of 0.44 percent compared to the 0.53 percent
listed in the first column of Table 4. Moreover, none of the 1,000 simulations result in abnormal
returns above 3.87 percent, indicating that our results are highly statistically significant using the
bootstrap simulations.
         We also obtain similar significance levels for the long-term returns for the two security
types: The standard deviations of the two-year abnormal returns are 4.16 percent for traditional
and 6.86 percent for structured PIPEs, which are very similar to the standard errors reported in
Table 4. We find that none of the bootstrap simulations give a lower long-term abnormal return
than -13.03 percent for traditional PIPE companies. Moreover, none of the simulations are even
close to the dismal performance of variable convertible PIPEs of -38.83 percent during the two
years following the PIPE transaction. The worst of 1,000 simulations gives an abnormal return of
-24.42 percent. This indicates that the poor performance of companies issuing PIPEs, in general,
and companies issuing structured PIPEs, in particular, is very unlikely to be driven by chance
alone.


Appendix D: Compustat Data Definitions
         The Compustat data items to calculate the ratios, total assets (item 6), market-adjusted
leverage (book debt (total liabilities (item 181) + preferred stock liquidating value (item 10, if
unavailable, preferred stock redemption value (item 56)) – deferred taxes (item 35) – convertible
debt (item 79))/(book debt + market capitalization)), book to market (book equity (item
60)/(common shares used to calculate EPS (item 54) * fiscal year close price (item 199))), return
on equity (income before extraordinary items (item 237)/book equity (item 60)), operating profit
(operating income before depreciation (item 13)), capital expenditures & research and
development/total assets (capital expenditures (item 128) + research and development expense
(item 46)/total assets (item 6)).


                                                                                                   36
References

Aboody, David and Baruch Lev (2000): “Information Asymmetry, R&D and Insider Gains.”
      Journal of Finance 55, 2747-2766.
Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally and David Ravenscraft (1999): “The Performance of Hedge
      Funds: Risk, Return and Incentives.” Journal of Finance 54, 833-874.
Asquith, Paul and David W. Mullins (1986): “Equity Issues and Offering Dilution.” Journal of
       Financial Economics 15, 61-89.
Ball, Ray, S. P. Kothari, and Jay Shanken (1995): “Problems in Measuring Portfolio
       Performance: An Application to Contrarian Investment Strategies.” Journal of Financial
       Economics 38, 79-107.
Barber, Brad M. and John D. Lyon (1997): “Detecting Long-Run Abnormal Stock Returns: The
       Empirical Power and Specification of Test Statistics.” Journal of Financial Economics
       43, 341-372.
Barclay, Michael J., Clifford G. Holderness, and Dennis P. Sheehan (2003): “Private Placements
       and Managerial Entrenchment.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Booth, James R. and Richard L. Smith (1986): “Capital Raising, Underwriting and the
      Certification Hypothesis.” Journal of Financial Economics 15, 261-281.
Brav, Alon and Paul A. Gompers (1997): “Myth or Reality? The Long-Run Underperformance
       of Initial Public Offerings: Evidence from Venture and Nonventure Capital-Backed
       Companies.” Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Brennan, Michael J. and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam (1995): “Investment Analysis and Price
      Formation in Securities Markets” Journal of Financial Economics 38, 361-381.
Brock, William, Josef Lakonishok, and Blake LeBaron (1992): “Simple Technical Trading Rules
       and the Stochastic Properties of Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 47, 1731–1764.
Carhart, Mark M (1997): “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Finance 52,
       57-82.
Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Paolo Fulghieri (1999): “A Theory of the Going-Public Decision.”
     Review of Financial Studies 12, 249-279.
Chou, De-Wai, Michael Gombola, and Feng-Ying Liu (2004): “Earnings Management and the
      Underperformance of Private Placements of Equity.” Working Paper, Drexel University.
Cornett, Marcia M. and Hassan Tehranian (1994): “An Examination of Voluntary versus
       Involuntary Security Issuances by Commercial Banks.” Journal of Financial Economics
       35, 99-122.
Diether, Karl, Christopher Malloy, and Anna Scherbina (2002): “Differences of Opinion and the
       Cross-Section of Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
Eckbo, B. Espen, Ronald W. Masulis, and Oyvind Norli (2000): “Seasoned Public Offerings:
      Resolution of the ‘New Issues Puzzle’.” Journal of Financial Economics 56, 251-291.


                                                                                           37
Fama, Eugene (1998): “Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns, and Behavioral Finance.”
      Journal of Financial Economics 49, 283-306.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
      Returns.” Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French (1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Return on Bonds
      and Stocks.” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-53.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French (1997): “Industry Costs of Equity.” Journal of Financial
      Economics 43, 153-193.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Rudi W. Schadt (1996): “Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in
       Changing Economic Conditions.” Journal of Finance 51, 425-461.
Fields, L. Paige and Eric L. Mais (1991): “The Valuation Effect of Private Placements of
        Corporate Debt.” Journal of Finance 46, 1925-1932.
Gomes, Armando and Gordon Phillips (2004): “Why Do Public Firms Issue Private and Public
      Equity, Convertibles and Debt?” University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Habib, Michel A. and D. Bruce Johnsen (2000): “The Private Placement of Debt and Outside
       Equity as an Information Revelation Mechanism.” Review of Financial Studies 13, 1017-
       1055.
Hertzel, Michael and Richard L. Smith (1993): “Market Discounts and Shareholder Gains for
       Placing Equity Privately.” Journal of Finance 48, 459-485.
Hertzel, Michael, Michael Lemmon, James S. Linck, and Lynn Rees (2002): “Long-run
       Performance Following Private Placements of Equity.” Journal of Finance 59, 2595-
       2617.
Hillion, Pierre and Theo Vermaelen (2004): “Death Spiral Convertibles.” Journal of Financial
        Economics 71, 381-415.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen (1995): “Market Underreaction to
       Open Market Share Repurchases.” Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman (1993): “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
       Losers: Implication for Stock Market Efficiency.” Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng (2004): “On the Industry Concentration of
      Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds.” Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Krishnamurthy, Srinivasan, Paul Spindt, Venkat Subramaniam, and Tracie Woidtke (2004):
       “Does Investor Identity Matter in Equity Issues? Evidence from Private Placements.”
       Forthcoming: Journal of Financial Intermediation
Lee, Inmoo (1997): “Do Firms Knowingly Sell Overvalued Equity?” Journal of Finance 52,
       1439-1466.
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter (1995): “The New Issues Puzzle.” Journal of Finance 50, 23-
      51.


                                                                                          38
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter (1997): “The Operating Performance of Firms Conducting
      Seasoned Equity Offerings.” Journal of Finance 52, 1823-1850.
Lyon, John D., Brad M. Barber, and Chih-Ling Tsai (1999): “Improved Methods for Tests of
       Long-Run Abnormal Returns.” Journal of Finance 54, 165-201.
Masulis, Ronald W. and Ashok N. Korwar (1986): “Seasoned Equity Offerings: An Empirical
       Investigation.” Journal of Financial Economics 15, 91-118.
Mikkelson, Wayne and Megan Partch (1986): “Valuation Effects of Security Offerings and the
      Issuance Process.” Journal of Financial Economics 15, 31-60.
Mitchell, Mark L. and Erik Stafford (2000): “Managerial Decisions and Long-Run Stock Price
       Performance.” Journal of Business 73, 287-320.
Myers, Stewart C (1984): “The Capital Structure Puzzle.” Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984): “Corporate Financing and Investment
      Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have.” Journal of
      Financial Economics 13, 187-221.
Ritter, Jay (1991): “The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings.” Journal of Finance
        46, 3-27.
Shyam-Sunder, Lakshmi (1991): “The Stock Price Effect of Risky versus Safe Debt.” Journal of
      Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26, 549-558.
Silber, William L. (1991): “Discounts on Restricted Stock: The Impact of Illiquidity on Stock
        Prices.” Financial Analysts Journal 47, 60-64.
Smith, Clifford W. (1986): “Investment Banking and the Capital Acquisition Process.” Journal
       of Financial Economics 15, 3-29.
Stein, Jeremy (1992): “Convertible Bonds as ‘Backdoor’ Equity Financing.” Journal of
       Financial Economics 32, 3-22.
Spiess, D. Katherine and John Affleck-Graves (1995): “Underperformance in Long-Run Stock
        Returns Following Seasoned Equity Offerings.” Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243-
        267.
Varma, Raj and Samuel H. Szewczyk (1993): “The Private Placement of Bank Equity.” Journal
      of Banking and Finance 17, 1111-1131.
Wruck, Karen H. (1989): “Equity Ownership Concentration and Firm Value. Evidence from
      Private Equity Financings.” Journal of Financial Economics 23, 3-28.
Wu, Yi Lin (2004): “The Choice of Equity-Selling Mechanisms.” Journal of Financial
     Economics 74, 93-119.




                                                                                           39
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table summarizes the characteristics of PIPE transactions.

Panel A: Characteristics of PIPE Transactions
                                                                     All       Traditional   Structured
                                                                   PIPEs         PIPEs         PIPEs
Number of Transactions                                              5,260         3,592        1,668
Total Capital Raised (in Millions)                                 76,743        64,985        11,758
Mean Capital Raised (in Millions)                                  14.66         18.19           7.05
Median Capital Raised (in Millions)                                  4.50          5.00          3.30
Mean Market Value (in Millions)                                   183.72        218.09        109.71
Median Market Value (in Millions)                                  50.09         53.05          43.74
Mean Capital Raised to Market Value (in Percent)                   20.87         22.80          16.69
Median Capital Raised to Market Value (in Percent)                   9.91        10.77           8.51
Mean Number of Investors per Deal                                    4.45          5.02          3.22
Median Number of Investors per Deal                                  1             2             1

Panel B: Proportion of Capital Raised by Various Investor Classes (in Percent)
                                                               All             Traditional   Structured
                                                              PIPEs              PIPEs         PIPEs
Hedge Funds                                                   24.57              15.63          71.72
Corporations                                                  17.23              19.58           4.85
Mutual Funds and Institutional Advisors                       16.94              19.67           2.55
Venture Capital                                               11.76              12.92           5.63
Buyout Firm and Private Equity                                11.51              13.56           0.69
Various Individual Investors                                   6.18               6.49           4.53
Brokers and Dealers                                            6.15               6.12           6.32
Banks                                                          2.19               2.11           2.64
Insurance Companies                                            2.01               2.25           0.80
Pension Funds                                                  0.90               1.06           0.09
Charitable, Educational, and Family Trusts                     0.55               0.62           0.18

Panel C: Proportion of Capital Raised by Industry Composition (in Percent)
                                                              All              Traditional   Structured
                                                            PIPEs                PIPEs         PIPEs
Communications                                              37.16                37.47          35.46
Healthcare                                                  20.20                19.86          22.13
Consumer Cyclical                                             9.79               10.46           6.03
Technology                                                    8.60                7.40          15.27
Industrial                                                    7.31                7.23           7.77
Financial                                                     7.19                7.92           3.09
Energy                                                        3.33                3.46           2.65
Consumer Noncyclicals                                         2.83                2.39           5.27
Utilities                                                     2.31                2.57           0.86
Basic Materials                                               1.18                1.18           1.21
Diversified                                                   0.09                0.06           0.27




                                                                                                          40
Table 2: Characteristics of PIPE Companies
Panel A summarizes stock market measures of PIPE companies. Panel B compares the accounting ratios of PIPE
companies using Compustat data. All reported accounting numbers are sampled from the preceding fiscal year-end
report and are winsorized at the 1-percent level. We test for the differences between the characteristics of traditional
and structured PIPEs using a standard t-test with for the means assuming unequal standard deviations and a non-
parametric Fisher test for the medians. The significance levels are denoted by ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ and indicate
whether the results are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.

Panel A: Stock Market Measures
                                                                      All       Traditional    Structured   Difference
                                                                     PIPEs        PIPEs          PIPEs
Age (Years Since Listing on Major Stock               Mean            6.9         7.1             6.6       -0.5**
Exchange)                                             Median          4.8         4.8             4.3       -0.5***
Market Capitalization                                 Mean          183.7       218.1          109.7      -108.4***
(in Millions)                                         Median         50.1        53.1            43.7        9.4***
Stock Returns in Year Before Close                    Mean           30.0        29.0            31.9       -2.9
(in Percent)                                          Median        -17.8       -15.4           -21.7       -6.3*
Annualized Standard Deviation of Stock                Mean           76.9        76.1            78.8        2.7
Returns in Year Before Close (in Percent)             Median         67.7        68.7            67.2       -1.5
Annualized Trading Volume By Total Shares             Mean          230.1       203.8          289.0        85.2***
Six Months Before Close (in Percent)                  Median        122.2       106.8          163.3        56.5***
Short Positions By Total Shares Six Months            Mean            2.2         2.1             2.5        0.4***
Before Close (in Percent)                             Median          0.6         0.5             0.8        0.3***
Number of Analysts                                    Mean            1.1         1.3             0.7       -0.6***

Companies With Analyst Coverage (in Percent)         Proportion      31.6        35.5           23.2         -12.3***

Venture Capital-Backed for Companies with            Proportion      27.9        32.2           19.0         -13.2***
IPOs in Prior Five Years (in Percent)

Panel B: Accounting Measures
                                                                      All       Traditional    Structured    Difference
                                                                     PIPEs         PIPEs         PIPEs
Return on Equity                                      Mean         -208.0       -199.2        -228.6         -29.4
(in Percent)                                          Median        -62.7        -58.7          -76.0        -17.3***
Return on Assets                                      Mean          -64.1        -62.8          -67.1         -4.3
(in Percent)                                          Median        -36.9        -35.0          -42.5         -7.5***
Proportion of Firms with Positive                                    15.1         17.1           10.4         -6.6***
Return on Assets (in Percent)
Total Assets                                          Mean          175.4       212.7           87.7        -125.1***
(in Million $)                                        Median         26.1        29.0           20.3          -8.7***
Book-to-Market Ratio                                  Mean           42.3        47.3           30.4         -16.9***
(in Percent)                                          Median         22.4        24.3           18.3          -6.0***
Capital Expenditures and R&D Divided by               Mean           32.0        32.3           31.1          -1.2
Total Assets (in Percent)                             Median         21.0        21.2           20.7          -0.5
Market-Adjusted Leverage                              Mean           25.8        27.7           21.4          -6.3***
(in Percent)                                          Median         16.7        17.5           14.0          -3.5***




                                                                                                                     41
Table 3: Determinants of Security Structure and Investor Compositions: Multinomial Logit Estimation
This table summarizes the estimates of a maximum-likelihood multinomial logit estimation. The dependent variable
corresponds to the four combinations between security structure and investor composition: (1) traditional PIPEs and
non-hedge fund investors; (2) traditional PIPEs and hedge fund investors; (3) structured PIPEs and non-hedge fund
investors; and (4) structured PIPEs and hedge fund investors. The first group is taken as the comparison group. The
multinomial logit estimation includes year- and sector-fixed effects that are not reported. The standard errors are
robust, corrected for clustering of observations by the same company and are summarized in parentheses. The
significance levels are denoted by ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ and indicate whether the results are statistically different from
zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.
Explanatory Variables           Traditional PIPE and      Structured PIPE and       Structured PIPE and
                                Hedge Investors           Non-Hedge Investors       Hedge Investors
                                Compared to               Compared to               Compared to
                                Traditional PIPE and      Traditional PIPE and      Traditional PIPE and
                                Non-Hedge Investors       Non-Hedge Investors       Non-Hedge Investors
Log of Market Value at                    0.005                    -0.085                     -0.199***
Close                                    (0.062)                   (0.094)                    (0.068)
Book-to-Market Ratio at                  -0.331***                 -0.420*                    -0.196
Fiscal Year Prior to Close               (0.124)                   (0.247)                    (0.150)
Excess Return During Two                  0.000                    -0.088                     -0.024
Years Prior to Close                     (0.019)                   (0.061)                    (0.036)
Log of Trading Volume                     0.246***                  0.139*                     0.422***
Six Months Prior to Close                (0.053)                   (0.073)                    (0.059)
Short Interest Six Months                 1.302                     2.500                      2.985*
Prior to Close                           (1.524)                   (2.057)                    (1.692)
Venture Capital Funded                   -0.216                    -0.612***                  -0.507***
During Prior Five Years                  (0.151)                   (0.214)                    (0.154)
Return of Assets at Fiscal                0.051                    -0.108                     -0.022
Year Prior to Close                      (0.091)                   (0.114)                    (0.093)
Market Leverage at Fiscal                -0.093                    -0.195                     -0.249*
Year Prior to Close                      (0.138)                   (0.168)                    (0.133)
Number of Analysts                       -0.080***                 -0.036                     -0.093***
                                         (0.026)                   (0.046)                    (0.028)
Pseudo R-Squared                          0.1145

Number of Observations              2,419
Table 4: Abnormal Returns to Common Stocks of Companies that Issue PIPEs
This table summarizes the mean abnormal returns of the common stocks of companies issuing PIPEs. The
benchmark returns are companies matched in the month prior to the PIPE deal according to industry, size, book-to-
market ratio, and momentum. The returns are expressed in percent. The standard errors for the means are reported in
parentheses. The significance levels are denoted by ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ and indicate whether the results are
statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.

Trading Days                    All                 Traditional            Structured              Difference
Around Closing                 PIPEs                  PIPEs                  PIPEs
Number of                      3,783                  2,579                  1,204
PIPE Transactions
[-4, 5]                         3.87***                5.49***                0.40                  -5.09***
                               (0.53)                 (0.65)                 (0.92)                 (1.13)

[6, 100]                       -6.50***               -2.82                -14.37***               -11.55***
                               (1.49)                 (1.82)                (2.57)                  (3.15)

[6, 250]                      -11.30***               -4.73*               -25.35***               -20.62***
                               (2.41)                 (2.81)                (4.56)                  (5.36)

[6, 500]                      -21.25***              -13.03***             -38.83***               -25.79***
                               (3.43)                 (4.32)                (5.45)                  (6.96)
Table 5: Abnormal Returns of PIPE Companies Using Different Benchmarks
This table summarizes the mean abnormal returns of the common stocks of companies issuing PIPEs by the major
investors in the PIPE securities using various benchmarks. The standard errors for the means are reported in
parentheses. The mean returns are expressed in percent. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote estimates that are statistically
different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.

Panel A: Short-Term Abnormal Returns [-4, 5]
Benchmark                                              All          Traditional       Structured       Difference
                                                     PIPEs            PIPEs             PIPEs
Fama-French Size and Book-to-Market                  4.18***          6.09***          0.06            -6.03***
Portfolios                                          (0.46)           (0.57)           (0.78)           (0.96)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry and Size           3.57***          5.29***         -0.10            -5.39***
                                                    (0.53)           (0.65)           (0.88)           (1.10)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size, and         3.65***          5.71***         -0.75            -6.46***
Book-to-Market                                      (0.53)           (0.65)           (0.91)           (1.12)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size,             3.87***          5.49***          0.40            -5.09***
Book-to-Market, and Momentum                        (0.53)           (0.65)           (0.92)           (1.13)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Age,              4.14***          5.77***          0.58            -5.19***
Size, Book-to-Market, and Momentum                  (0.54)           (0.67)           (0.91)           (1.13)

Difference between PIPEs and SEOs using              5.01***          6.63***          1.54            -5.09***
Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size,            (0.61)           (0.72)           (0.96)           (1.13)
Book-to-Market, and Momentum

Panel B: Post-Close Abnormal Returns [6,500]
Benchmark                                              All          Traditional       Structured       Difference
                                                     PIPEs            PIPEs             PIPEs
Fama-French Size and Book-to-Market                -17.65***         -8.69**         -36.86***        -28.17***
Portfolios                                          (2.43)           (3.14)           (3.56)           (4.74)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry and Size         -35.78***        -25.43***        -57.94***        -32.51***
                                                    (3.50)           (4.14)           (6.44)           (7.66)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size, and       -22.79***        -13.91***        -41.82***        -27.91***
Book-to-Market                                      (3.31)           (3.93)           (6.14)           (7.25)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size,           -21.25***        -13.04***        -38.83***        -25.79***
Book-to-Market, and Momentum                        (3.44)           (4.33)           (5.45)           (6.96)

Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Age,            -23.58***        -17.56***        -35.52***        -17.96**
Size, Book-to-Market, and Momentum                  (3.79)           (4.74)           (6.14)           (7.76)

Difference between PIPEs and SEOs using            -16.86***         -8.65*          -34.45***        -25.79***
Comparable Firm Match by Industry, Size,            (4.46)           (5.18)           (6.15)           (6.96)
Book-to-Market, and Momentum




                                                                                                                  44
Table 6: Abnormal Returns of Companies issuing PIPEs by Investor Type
This table summarizes the mean abnormal returns of the common stocks of companies issuing PIPEs by the major
investors in the PIPE securities. The standard errors for the means are reported in parentheses. The mean returns are
expressed in percent. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1
percent confidence levels.

Panel A: Short-Term Abnormal Returns [-4, 5]
                         All PIPEs                     Traditional              Structured               Difference
                                                         PIPEs                    PIPEs
Hedge Funds                      1.42                     3.73***                 -0.43                   -4.17**
                                (0.91)                   (1.22)                   (1.30)                  (1.78)

Non-Hedge Fund                   5.66***                  6.23***                   2.44                  -3.80*
Investors                       (0.85)                   (0.95)                    (1.83)                 (2.06)

Corporations                     9.38***                 10.16***                  -0.33                -10.49*
                                (1.93)                   (2.03)                    (5.45)                (5.82)

Mutual Funds                     2.74                     3.10*                    -2.18                  -5.28
                                (1.79)                   (1.88)                    (5.50)                 (5.81)

Venture Capital and              8.51***                 10.80***                   0.70                -10.10**
Private Equity Funds            (2.72)                   (3.40)                    (2.84)                (4.43)

Other Known                      4.44***                  4.55***                   3.88                  -0.67
Investors                       (1.07)                   (1.18)                    (2.61)                 (2.86)


Panel B: Post-Close Abnormal Returns [6,500]
                          All PIPEs                    Traditional              Structured               Difference
                                                         PIPEs                    PIPEs
Hedge Funds                    -30.38***                -17.88***                -40.38***              -22.50**
                                (4.72)                   (5.85)                   (7.06)                 (9.18)

Non-Hedge Fund                 -14.26**                  -8.89                   -44.34***              -35.45***
Investors                       (5.80)                   (6.42)                  (13.01)                (14.51)

Corporations                    -8.37                    -9.64                     7.46                  17.10
                                (9.82)                  (10.44)                  (23.81)                (26.00)

Mutual Funds                     8.67                    12.79                   -48.21                 -61.00*
                               (11.05)                  (11.57)                  (33.32)                (35.27)

Venture Capital and            -19.84                    -6.45                   -65.44**               -58.99*
Private Equity Funds           (13.10)                  (14.27)                  (30.73)                (33.88)

Other Known                    -18.99**                 -14.85                   -38.67**               -23.82
Investors                       (9.01)                  (10.42)                  (15.29)                (18.50)




                                                                                                                       45
Table 7: Determinants of Short- and Long-Term Stock Performance
This table summarizes the results of regressing the excess returns during several time periods around and after the
close of the PIPE transaction on the characteristics of the PIPE. The excess returns are computed by subtracting the
appropriate return of the six Fama-French size/book-to-market portfolios from the return of the individual stocks.
All regressions include indicator variables for the years of the close of the deal and the industry sectors. The
standard errors are robust, corrected for clustering of observations by the same company and are summarized in
parentheses. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
confidence levels.
                                   Short-Term                      Medium-Term                      Long-Term
                                  Excess Return                    Excess Return                  Excess Return
                               (in Percent, [-4, 5])           (in Percent, [6, 250])         (in Percent, [6, 500])
Structured PIPE            -5.12***         -5.01**      -19.23***        -17.25**        -28.69***       -29.45***
                           (1.80)           (2.03)         (7.06)           (7.87)        (10.23)         (11.21)

Traditional PIPE           -4.30***        -4.12***      -15.48***       -15.94***       -22.12***       -21.28***
and Hedge Fund             (1.34)          (1.35)         (5.59)          (5.96)          (7.23)          (8.26)
Investor
Structured PIPE            -2.98           -3.43           -5.27          -6.91           -9.03           -6.60
and Hedge Fund             (2.03)          (2.26)          (7.21)         (8.30)          (9.49)         (10.71)
Investor
Log of Market Value                        -0.63                          -6.47**                         -9.86***
at Close                                   (0.60)                         (2.53)                          (3.19)

Book-to-Market Ratio in                     2.73**                         3.53                           -0.70
Year Prior to Close                        (1.25)                         (4.56)                          (6.45)

Excess Return in Year                      -0.74**                        -1.58                           -3.76***
Prior to Close                             (0.30)                         (1.10)                          (1.19)

Log of Trading                              0.21                           2.72                            1.35
Volume Six Months                          (0.50)                         (2.41)                          (2.40)
Prior to Close
Short Interest Six                        -23.16                         -76.54                          -97.06
Months Prior to Close                     (14.82)                        (51.60)                         (71.66)
Venture Capital                             0.90                          14.22*                         20.28**
Funded During Prior                        (1.29)                         (7.38)                          (9.20)
Five Years
Return of Assets at                        -1.81                           4.95                            1.03
Fiscal Year                                (1.33)                         (3.84)                          (6.05)
Prior to Close
Market Leverage at                          0.68                          18.13**                        25.57**
Fiscal Year                                (1.15)                         (7.35)                         (10.39)
Prior to Close
Number of Analysts                          0.08                           1.43*                           5.49***
                                           (0.21)                         (0.82)                          (1.20)

Number of                     2,876           2,419           2,876           2,419           2,483           2,060
Observations

R-Squared                   2.86            4.28            7.38           9.51            6.64            9.64
(in Percent)




                                                                                                                      46
Table 8: Returns of Calendar Time Portfolios of Companies That Issue PIPEs
This table summarizes the abnormal returns of a portfolio that includes all the stocks of companies which closed a PIPE deal during the last 500 trading days.
The abnormal returns are expressed in percent and are annualized. The standard errors are summarized in parentheses. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote abnormal
returns that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence levels.

Annualized                             All PIPEs                                  Traditional PIPEs                              Structured PIPEs
Abnormal                    All        Non-Hedge        Hedge            All        Non-Hedge         Hedge             All        Non-Hedge       Hedge
Performance              Investors      Investors      Investors      Investors      Investors      Investors        Investors      Investors     Investors
Excess Return            -18.49*        -11.83         -32.37***       -8.54           -7.24        -16.50           -35.41***       -24.49*      -42.03***
Above Market             (10.42)          (9.97)       (11.62)        (10.36)        (10.05)        (12.45)          (11.78)         (12.59)      (12.16)

CAPM Alpha               -21.75**       -14.86         -35.85***      -11.41           -9.90         -19.77*         -39.98***      -28.69**       -45.99***
                          (9.77)         (9.39)        (10.91)         (9.73)          (9.49)        (11.77)         (11.02)        (12.04)        (11.47)

3-Factor Fama-           -16.81***      -10.52*        -29.78***        -6.98          -5.71         -13.99*         -33.79***      -24.81**       -39.99***
French Alpha              (6.15)         (5.91)         (7.19)          (6.24)         (6.15)         (8.22)          (7.97)        (10.00)         (8.58)

4-Factor                 -16.51***      -11.22*        -27.54***        -7.57          -6.71         -14.44*         -31.08***      -22.64**       -36.05***
Carhart Alpha             (6.29)         (6.02)         (7.35)          (6.37)         (5.87)         (8.42)          (8.16)        (10.23)         (8.74)

4-Factor Ferson-         -19.27***      -13.23**       -29.61***        -9.92          -8.84         -16.53*         -34.62***      -24.91**       -37.07***
Schadt Alpha              (6.08)         (5.87)         (7.15)          (6.26)         (6.10)         (8.51)          (7.93)        (10.61)         (8.59)

6-Factor Eckbo-          -21.33**       -14.51         -35.43***      -11.02           -9.56         -19.41*         -39.48***      -28.39**       -45.51***
Masulis-Norli Alpha       (9.59)         (9.27)        (10.76)         (9.61)          (9.40)        (11.72)         (10.76)        (11.84)        (11.28)
Table 9: Accounting Performance of Companies that Issue PIPEs
This table summarizes the accounting performance during four years surrounding the PIPE transaction. The table
summarizes the medians of the Return on Assets, the Book-to-Market ratio, and the Capital and R&D Expenditures
relative to Total Assets.
Panel A: Median Return on Assets (in Percent)
Time Period                       All PIPEs                Traditional PIPEs               Structured PIPEs
                          Non-Hedge        Hedge      Non-Hedge         Hedge        Non-Hedge          Hedge
                           Investors     Investors     Investors       Investors      Investors        Investors
Fiscal Year                -36.3           -39.7          -35.0          -38.8         -44.8             -50.4
Prior to PIPE Close
Fiscal Year                -33.1           -45.2          -32.2          -41.2         -41.7             -54.0
of PIPE Close
One Fiscal Year after      -27.9           -47.4          -25.7          -37.9         -46.0             -50.3
PIPE Close
Two Fiscal Years after     -26.2           -42.9          -23.1          -32.5         -42.9             -48.4
PIPE Close

Panel B: Median Book to Market Ratio (in Percent)
Time Period                    All PIPEs                   Traditional PIPEs              Structured PIPEs
                       Non-Hedge        Hedge          Non-Hedge        Hedge        Non-Hedge         Hedge
                        Investors     Investors         Investors      Investors      Investors       Investors
Fiscal Year              23.5            19.6              24.7          21.0           16.7             18.4
Prior to PIPE Close
Fiscal Year              25.6            21.5              26.6          23.5          20.2             19.7
of PIPE Close
One Fiscal Year after    27.3            22.0              28.5          25.1          15.3             19.4
PIPE Close
Two Fiscal Years after   26.5            21.6              27.9          25.8          16.5             19.2
PIPE Close

Panel C: Median Capital and R&D Expenditures Relative to Total Assets (in Percent)
Time Period                    All PIPEs              Traditional PIPEs              Structured PIPEs
                       Non-Hedge        Hedge    Non-Hedge         Hedge        Non-Hedge         Hedge
                        Investors     Investors   Investors       Investors      Investors       Investors
Fiscal Year              20.6            23.7         21.2           25.1          20.6             21.7
Prior to PIPE Close
Fiscal Year              18.2            20.9         17.7           20.7          21.6             20.4
of PIPE Close
One Fiscal Year after    17.2            18.9         16.2           18.7          18.9             19.9
PIPE Close
Two Fiscal Years after   16.8            18.7         15.8           17.7          19.2             19.0
PIPE Close
Table 10: Determinants of Accounting Performance
This table summarizes the determinants of the accounting performance of companies issuing PIPEs during two time
periods after the close of the PIPE transaction. We report the ordinary least squares regression of the return on assets
at three different time periods on past characteristics of companies. The return on assets is winsorized at the 1
percent level. All regressions include indicator variables for the years of the close of the deal and the industry
sectors. The standard errors are robust, corrected for clustering of observations by the same company and are
summarized in parentheses. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent confidence levels.
 Dependent Variable                                              Return on Assets (in Percent):
                                           During the First Fiscal Year after During the Second Fiscal Year after the
                                                  the PIPE Issuance                           PIPE Issuance
Structured PIPE                                     -25.14*                                    -15.59
                                                    (14.90)                                    (11.73)

Traditional PIPE and                                -21.36**                                    1.81
Hedge Fund Investor                                  (9.04)                                    (7.13)

Structured PIPE and                                 -12.71                                     -8.58
Hedge Fund Investor                                 (17.30)                                   (14.24)

Log of Market Value at Close                          3.68                                      3.74
                                                     (4.93)                                    (3.36)

Book-to-Market Ratio at Fiscal Year                   7.04                                     11.72**
Prior to Close                                       (7.48)                                    (5.39)

Excess Return During Year Prior to                    5.44***                                   0.52
Close                                                (1.71)                                    (1.53)

Log of Trading Volume Six Months                     -1.30                                     -4.70
Prior to Close                                       (3.63)                                    (3.26)

Short Interest Six Months Prior to                  -11.26                                     41.68
Close                                              (121.66)                                  (100.25)

Venture Capital Funded During                         2.93                                     -3.48
Prior Five Years                                     (7.86)                                    (9.17)

Return of Assets at Fiscal Year Prior                53.97***                                  55.93***
to Close                                            (11.33)                                    (8.90)

Market Leverage at Fiscal Year                       31.39***                                  21.96*
Prior to Close                                       (9.12)                                   (11.93)

Number of Analysts                                    4.42***                                   3.04***
                                                     (1.23)                                    (1.01)

Number of Observations                                  2,012                                    1,515


R-Squared (in Percent)                               14.04                                     15.85
Table 11: Abnormal Returns of Companies Issuing PIPEs by Detailed Security Type
This table summarizes the mean abnormal returns of the common stocks of companies issuing PIPEs by the detailed
security type. The mean returns are expressed in percent. The standard errors for the means are reported in
parentheses. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
confidence levels.

Panel A: Traditional PIPEs
Security                              Number of PIPEs           Short-Term Abnormal                Post-Close
                                                                       Return                    Abnormal Return
                                                                        [-4, 5]                     [6, 500]
Common Stock                               1,604                      6.54***                      -12.11**
                                                                     (0.75)                         (6.15)

Fixed Convertible Preferred                  510                      6.73***                        -13.17*
Stock                                                                (1.94)                           (7.47)

Fixed Convertible Debt                       344                      0.28                           -13.62
                                                                     (1.69)                           (9.71)

Common Stock –                              121                       1.18                           -23.18**
Shelf Sale                                                           (2.36)                          (10.91)


Panel B: Structured PIPEs
Security                              Number of PIPEs           Short-Term Abnormal                Post-Close
                                                                       Return                    Abnormal Return
                                                                        [-4, 5]                     [6, 500]
Floating Convertible Preferred               536                      0.42                         -42.51***
Stock                                                                (1.41)                         (9.27)

Floating Convertible Debt                    277                      4.03**                         -36.55**
                                                                     (1.83)                          (10.22)

Structured Equity Lines                      172                     -1.26                           -29.00**
                                                                     (2.26)                          (11.39)

Common Stock –                                84                      0.69                           -41.10**
Reset                                                                (2.88)                          (16.92)

Reset Convertible Preferred                   80                     -4.01                           -35.86**
Stock                                                                (3.10)                          (16.57)

Reset Convertible Debt                        47                     -8.41                           -47.16
                                                                     (6.47)                          (33.55)




                                                                                                                      50
Figure 1: Performance of Companies Issuing PIPEs by Security Type
The Figure depicts the average abnormal buy-and-hold return of companies that issue PIPEs.

                                               0.1




                                                0
          Mean Abnormal Buy−and−Hold Return




                                              −0.1


                                                             Traditional
                                                               PIPEs

                                              −0.2




                                              −0.3
                                                                                                            Structured
                                                                                                              PIPEs



                                              −0.4
                                               −500   −400     −300        −200     −100        0       100       200    300   400   500
                                                                                  Trading Days Around the Close




                                                                                                                                           51
Figure 2: Distribution of Performance of Companies Issuing PIPEs by Security Type
This figure depicts the cumulative probabilities of the average abnormal buy-and-hold returns of companies that
issue PIPEs. The buy-and-hold returns are computed over the 250 trading days following the close of the PIPE.

                                     1


                                    0.9


                                    0.8


                                    0.7
                                                    Structured
                                                      PIPEs
           Cumulative Probability




                                    0.6


                                    0.5
                                                                                     Traditional
                                                                                       PIPEs
                                    0.4


                                    0.3


                                    0.2


                                    0.1


                                     0
                                     −2   −1.5   −1        −0.5        0          0.5           1   1.5   2
                                                   Abnormal Buy−and−Hold Return During First Year




                                                                                                              52
Figure 3: Short Interest for Companies Issuing PIPEs
We depict the difference in the short interest of companies issuing PIPEs compared to matched companies.
Companies are matched according to industry, size, book-to-market ratio, and momentum. Short interest is defined
as the proportion of shares sold short relative to shares outstanding.

                                              Traditional PIPE                                                       Structured PIPE
                                0.02                                                                0.02




                                                                                                                           Hedge
                               0.015                Hedge                                           0.015
                                                                                                                           Funds
                                                    Funds
     Abnormal Short Interest




                                                                          Abnormal Short Interest
                                0.01                                                                0.01




                                                                                                                             Other
                               0.005                                                                0.005                  Investors
                                                    Other
                                                  Investors




                                 0                                                                   0
                                  −0.5   0      0.5      1      1.5   2                                  −0.5   0      0.5       1       1.5   2
                                             Years Around Close                                                     Years Around Close




                                                                                                                                                   53
