LABOR INCOME DYNAMICS AT BUSINESS-CYCLE FREQUENCIES:
IMPLICATIONS FOR PORTFOLIO CHOICE
Anthony W. Lynch
Sinan Tan
Working Paper 11010

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR INCOME DYNAMICS AT BUSINESS-CYCLE FREQUENCIES:
IMPLICATIONS FOR PORTFOLIO CHOICE
Anthony W. Lynch
Sinan Tan
Working Paper 11010
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11010
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004

The authors would like to thank Ned Elton, Marti Gruber, Joel Hasbrouck, Lasse Pedersen, Matt Richardson,
Jessica Wachter and participants in the Monday NYU Finance Seminar and the NYU Macro-finance Reading
Group for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are of course the authors’ responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Anthony W. Lynch and Sinan Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Labor Income Dynamics at Business-Cycle Frequencies: Implications for Portfolio Choice
Anthony W. Lynch and Sinan Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 11010
December 2004
JEL No. G11, G12
ABSTRACT
A large recent literature has focused on multiperiod portfolio choice with labor income, and while
the models are elaborate along several dimensions, they all assume that the joint distribution of
shocks to labor income and asset returns is i.i.d.. Calibrating this joint distribution to U.S. data, these
papers obtain three results not found empirically for U.S. households: young agents choose a higher
stock allocation than old agents; young agents choose a higher stock allocation when poor than when
rich; and, young agents always hold some stock. This paper asks whether allowing the conditional
joint distribution to depend on the business cycle can allow the model to generate equity holdings
that better match those of U.S. households, while keeping the unconditional distribution the same
as in the data. Calibrating the business-cycle variation in the first two moments of labor income
growth to U.S. data leads to large reductions in stock holdings by young agents with low wealthincome ratios. The reductions are so large that young, poor agents now hold less stock than both
young, rich agents and old agents, and also hold no stock a large fraction of the time. Our results
suggest that the predictability of labor-income growth at a business-cycle frequency plays an
important role in a young agent's decision-making about her portfolio's stock holding.
Anthony W. Lynch
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Sreet
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
alynch@stern.nyu.edu

Sinan Tan
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Sreet
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
stan@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

A large recent literature has focused on multiperiod portfolio choice with labor income, and while
the models are elaborate along several dimensions, they all assume that the joint distribution of
shocks to labor income and asset returns is i.i.d..1 Calibrating this joint distribution to U.S. data,
these papers obtain three results not found empirically for U.S. households: young agents choose a
higher stock allocation than old agents; young agents choose a higher stock allocation when poor
than when rich; and, young agents always hold some stock.2,3 This paper asks whether allowing the
conditional joint distribution to depend on the business cycle can allow the model to generate equity
holdings that better match those of U.S. households, while keeping the unconditional distribution
the same as in the data. Calibrating the business-cycle variation in the first two moments of labor
income growth to U.S. data leads to large reductions in stock holdings by young agents with low
wealth-income ratios. The reductions are so large that young, poor agents now hold less stock than
both young, rich agents and old agents, and also hold no stock a large fraction of the time. Our
results suggest that the predictability of labor-income growth at a business-cycle frequency plays
an important role in a young agent’s decision-making about her portfolio’s stock holding.
Enriching labor-income dynamics along this dimension can be motivated by recent evidence that
the first and second moments labor income growth are predictable at business-cycle frequencies.
In a recent paper, Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004) using household-level labor-earnings data
from PSID, estimate that standard deviation of shocks to permanent log labor income increases
by around 75% as the macroeconomy moves from peak to trough. Further, economic intuition
strongly suggests that labor income growth may be higher in good times than in bad. We esimate
the magnitude of this effect by taking the changes in log aggregate labor income and covarying this
series with the lagged value of the 12-month dividend yield on the value weighted NYSE index.
When the aggregate labor income measure is either monthly earnings for the retail sales industry
or the total private sector (both from the Bureau of Labor Statistics tables), the point estimate
of this covariance is negative and strongly significant. If one subscribes to the view that dividend
yield is counter-cyclical, this point estimate implies that the change in log aggregate labor income is
1

See Zeldes (1989), Heaton and Lucas (1997), Davis and Willen (2000a), Viceira (2001), Cocco, Gomes and
Maenhout (2002), and Gomes and Michaelides (2003).
2
These findings are robust to the presence of reasonable transactions costs in the stock market (see Heaton and
Lucas, 1997) but possibly not habit formation preferences. Polkovnichenko (2003) finds that additive habit formation
preferences can induce lower stock holdings as the agent’s wealth-income ratio declines.
3
The empirical papers that report contradictory stock holding patterns by U.S. households include Friend and
Blume (1975), Poterba (1993), Bertaut (1994), Blume and Zeldes (1994), Heaton and Lucas (1999) and VissingJorgensen (2002).

pro-cyclical, which is consistent with intuition. Moreover, if one assumes that log individual labor
income growth consists of an aggregate component, log aggregate labor income growth, plus an
idiosyncratic component uncorrelated with the business cycle, then this covariance point estimate
is also a point estimate of the covariance of log individual labor income growth with lagged dividend
yield. Calibrating the volatility of permanent labor income growth to individual data, the resulting
correlations with lagged dividend yield are around -2% or -3%. While the magnitude seems small,
the effect on portfolio allocations could be large, much in the same way that return predictability
regressions with low R-squareds can still induce large hedging demands for stock.
Both the pro-cyclical behavior of mean labor income growth (state-dependent mean channel)and
the counter-cyclical behavior of labor-income volatility (state-dependent volatility channel) can generate negative hedging demands for stocks and therefore more realistic stock holding implications.
The intuition is as follows. Merton (1973) shows that for CRRA investors with risk aversion greater
than 1, positive correlation between return and future investment opportunities leads to reductions
in stock holdings by young investors. Empirically, realized stock return is low when the economy
enters a recession. But in recessions expected income growth is low and volatility of income growth
is high. So a low stock return this period means low expected income growth and high volatility
of income growth in the next period and future periods. Thus, stock returns and future “labor
income” opportunities are positively correlated. Therefore business-cycle variation in the first two
moments of income growth causes reductions in stock holdings by young investors. Moreover, these
reductions are more pronounced for poor young investors, for whom future labor income is more
important.4
A third channel by which labor income reduces an agent’s allocation to stock has also been
discussed in the literature.5 Positive conditional correlation between today’s realized return and
today’s labor growth innovation can also reduce equity holdings (the return correlation channel).
This is a diversification-like channel and is available even when stock return and labor income growth
are i.i.d. processes. Consequently, it is a channel that is quite distinct from the other two we are
considering. Moreover, the contemporaneous correlation between returns and labor income growth
4

Note that these negative hedging demands can be regarded as the flipside of the effect of mean stock return
predictability on portfolio allocation. Since expected stock returns are positively related to dividend yield (see, for
example, Fama and French, 1988 and 1989), the negative correlation between today’s dividend yield innovation and
today’s return shock also means that today’s stock returns are high when expected future stock returns are low,
which induces a positive hedging demand for stock. This is one of the key results from the recent literature exploring
portfolio choices by a multiperiod agent in the persence of return predictability: see, for example, Campbell and
Viceira (1998), Barberis (2000) and Balduzzi and Lynch (1999).
5
See Davis and Willen (2000b), Michaelides (2003).

2

appears to be small in the data. Davis and Willen (2000b) use individual level Current Population
Survey data and consider the correlations between S&P 500 returns and labor income shocks of
synthetic individuals defined in terms of sex, birth cohort and educational attaintment. They find
that these correlations are very close to zero or negative for all but the most educated group.
Fama and Schwert (1977) report near zero correlations between the value weighted portfolio of
NYSE stocks and measures of aggregate labor income. Botazzi et at. (1996) provide corroborating
international evidence. This small unconditional correlation is an important stylized fact that likely
restricts the ability of the return correlation channel to reduce equity holdings.
Our goal is to quantify the effects of these three labor-income channels on portfolio allocations
by young investors. To do so, we formulate a dynamic life-cycle portfolio choice problem and
calibrate the stock return and labor income processes to U.S. data. Simple VAR dynamics are used
to incorporate all three mechanisms, with dividend yield, a counter-cyclical business-cycle variable,
being used as the predictor for both labor-income growth and stock return. The VAR process for
labor-income growth is initially assumed time-invariant over the agent’s 20-year horizon. The statedependent mean and return correlation channels are incorporated by calibrating the covariance of
labor income growth with stock return and lagged dividend yield respectively to that for aggregate
monthly wages in the retail trade industry. When the second moment is allowed to be predictable,
the ratio of the recession to boom innovation volatility for permanent labor income growth is
matched to 1.75, the value reported in Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004). At the same time,
the unconditional volatility of permanent labor income growth itself is always matched to the 15%
per annum reported in Gakidis (1997) based on PSID data for professionals and managers not
self-employed under age 45.
Our results, for a power utility agent with risk aversion of 6, indicate that presence of the the
two business-cycle channels (the state-dependent mean and volatility channels) leads to significant
reductions in the young poor agent’s demand for stocks. Even in the presence of the return
predictability that causes young agent’s to increase stock holdings, the presence of the first two
channels calibrated to data causes the agent’s stock allocation to drop from near the boundary of
100% to an average allocation of less than 37% for a young agent’s whose financial wealth is less than
30 times her monthly wage. The magnitude of the reduction is only increased by considering smaller
wealth-income ratios. Adding the return-correlation channel has only a negligible incremental effect
on allocations, consistent with the idea that the small empirical correlation between labor income
growth and stock returns might hamper this channel’s ability to affect stock allocations. However,

3

both predictability channels are important. When financial wealth is 30 times the young agent’s
monthly labor income, the average stock allocation increases by an allocation of 29% when the
mean channel is switched off and by an allocation of 39% when the volatility channel is switched
off. Even so, it is the volatility channel’s presence that causes the relation between average stock
allocation and wealth-income ratio to flip from the negative relation in the theoretical literature to
a positive one as in the data.
To examine stock allocations as a function of age, we conduct simulations that fix the agent’s
wealth-income ratio in her first month. With the ratio fixed at 1 so that financial wealth equals
monthly labor income, the average stock allocation is a negative function of age when all three
channels are switched off. Switching on the two business-cycle channels causes the function to
become positive, consistent with the data. Turning to the non-participation results, all three
channels switched off leads to participation in the stock market virtually all the time, irrespective
of age or wealth-income ratio. Switching on the two business-cycle channels results in substantial
non-participation by agents in their first month and the non-participation steadily declines as the
agent gets older. For example, an agent with a wealth-income ratio of 1 in the first month decides
not to participate in the stock market 70% of the time in the first month; and after ten years, this
probability has declined to a fraction that is still above 20%.
Adding a 10% temporary shock to per annum labor income growth, which translates to a 24.5%
temporary shock to monthly growth, has virtually no effect on the agent’s allocations. Thus, it
appears that temporary shocks to labor income growth do not materially affect allocations, at least
shocks of the magnitude documented for U.S. individuals.
The impact of an unemployment state on portfolio allocations is another question of interest.
Carroll (1992) uses PSID data and finds that the probability of a near-zero income realization
for a year is 0.05%. We incorporate this by allowing a 0.05% chance each month of being in
an unemployment state that pays only 10% of permanent labor income. This parameter choice
implies that the average fraction of a year that the agent is unemployed in 0.05%, which is also
implied by the Carroll number. Somewhat surprisingly, the results are qualitatively similar to
those without an unemployment state. Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) examine the effect of
an unemployment state in a model with annual decision-making and they present simulation results
that are suggestive, but not conclusive, that an 0.05% probability of being unemployed in any given
year has a large effect on stock allocations, particularly early in life. But their model allows for a
hump-shaped labor-income profile over the agent’s life and perhaps more importantly, implies some

4

degree of persistence in the unemployment state at a monthly frequency. To incorporate persistence
into the unemployment state, we also consider a Markov regime switching model, with two states,
employment and unemployment. By allowing the transaction matrix to be age-dependent, we are
able to exactly replicate the transition dynamics used by Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout and assumed
by Carroll. Making the unemployment state persistent lowers average stock allocations irrespective
of which subset of channels is switched on, but the incremental effect of the channels on stock
allocations largely remains the same.
The magnitude of the covariance with lagged dividend yield is lower for growth in total private
sector earnings than for growth in retail trade earnings. Consequently, it is worthwhile checking
whether the state-dependent mean channel continues to have a large effect when this series is used
to calibrate the covariance. We find that the combined effect of the two business-cycle channels
on average stock allocations in the first month is reduced but never by an amount greater than
12%, with the largest reduction occurring when the young agent’s wealth is 30 times her monthly
labor income. But at this wealth-income ratio, switching off the state-dependent mean channel still
increases the young agent’s stock allocation by an amount of 20% (as opposed to an amount of
29% for retail trade) while switching off the state-dependent volatility increases the allocation by
an amount of 35%, which is quite close to the 39% reported for retail trade.
An agent’s labor income profile is typically hump-shaped and she enjoys a period of retirement.
We use a 3rd order polynomial to approximate the hump shaped life-cycle earnings profile, taking
the parameter point estimates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhaut (2002) for college graduates. The
agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to receiving
93.8% of her retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout
(2002) for college graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100, and death probabilities
are taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS.
Introducing business cycle variation in the first two moments of permanent labor income growth
causes the young poor lifecycle agent to reduce stock holdings even more aggressively than the
young agent in the twenty-year flat profile case. For a young agent whose wealth is less than 30
times her monthly income, the average reduction is always more than 67% in the lifecycle case as
opposed to only 52% in the twenty-year flat profile case. All the qualitative conclusions from the
twenty-year flat profile case carry over to the more realistic lifecycle setting. The presence of the
two business cycle channels causes the relation between stock allocation and wealth-income ratio
to become positive for young agents and the relation between stock allocation and age to become

5

positive for poor, young agents. The former result is again driven by the state-dependent volatility
channel while both channels are important for the latter finding. The two business-cycle channels
induce substantial non-participation in a setting where there would be almost none with all three
channels switched off. When the two business-cycle channels are present, a 22-year old agent with
no financial wealth decides not to participate in the stock market over 70% of the time in her first
year, a substantial fraction of the time in the rest of her 20s and early 30s, and always some fraction
of the time through until retirement. The hump-shape is having some effect since replacing it with
a flat profile with the same monthly mean as in the twenty-year case causes the average reduction
for a young agent whose wealth is less than 30 times her monthly income to never exceed 61%.
However, eliminating the lump sum payout upon retirement has almost no impact on the stock
holding by the young agent, though it materially decreases the agent’s stock allocation in the years
just prior to retirement.
Two recent papers have considered the return correlation channel as a way to generate more
reasonable equity holdings. Davis and Willen (2000a) consider a multiperiod CARA agent who
has access to returns and labor income growth, and show that sizeable positive contemporaneous
correlation between stock returns and labor income innovations induces the agent to hold considerably less stock than in the zero correlation case. A closely related paper, Michaelides (2003), allows
stock returns to be predictable but keeps labor income growth i.i.d.. He briefly discusses how the
positive correlation between the conditional shock to stock return and labor income can lead to
negative hedging demands for stocks. While his labor income process is not state dependent, his
permanent income innovation is allowed to be conditionally correlated with the innovation to the
predictive business cycle variable and to returns. He discusses large negative hedging demands for
the case of positive correlation between returns and the permanent labor income innovation, but
he does not provide any supporting results.
The three channels we consider are also likely to affect the portfolio allocations of agent’s who
receive proprietary income rather than wage income. Heaton and Lucas (2000a) document a similar
puzzle for individuals receiving proprietary income: the standard model produces stock holdings
that are too high. The state-dependent mean and return correlation channels are incorporated
by calibrating the covariance of labor income growth with stock return and lagged dividend yield
respectively to that for aggregate monthly non-farm proprietary income from NIPA. When the
second moment is allowed to be predictable, the ratio of the recession to boom innovation volatility
for permanent labor income growth is, in the absence of a data estimate based on proprietary

6

income, again matched to the Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004) value of 1.75. At the same
time, the unconditional volatility of permanent proprietary income growth itself is always matched
to the 25% per annum used by Heaton and Lucas (2000b) based on annual Tax Model data. There is
no temporary shock. The resulting 25% implied for per annum proprietary income growth volatility
seems reasonable since Heaton and Lucas report median volatilities of 29% and 19% per annum
respectively for proprietary and labor income, while our wage-earner calibration with temporary
shocks implies a per annum volatility of 18%. We find that business cycle variation in the first two
moments of permanent proprietary income growth causes the young agent to drastically reduce her
stock position. For young agents with wealth less than 30 times monthly income, the reduction in
holding is always at least 60%. Adding the return correlation channel has a negligible incremental
effect, never more than 3%, despite the larger covariance with return than the two labor income
series.
Section 2 presents our formulation of the problem and describes the three channels through
which we allow labor income to affect the stock holdings of young agents. while section 3 describes
how the return and labor income processes are calibrated to the data. Section 4 discusses our
results and section 5 concludes.

2
2.1

Formulation and Solution of the Problem
Processes

Following Carroll (1996) and (1997), labor income is specified to have both permanent and temporary components:
P
yt+1 = yt+1
+ ²t+1 ,

(1)

P
gt+1 ≡ yt+1
− ytP = ḡ + bg dt + ut+1 ,

(2)

where yt is log labor income received at t, ytP is log permanent income at t, ²t+1 is log temporary
labor income at t, dt ≡ ln(1 + Dt ), and ²t and ut+1 are uncorrelated i.i.d. processes. D is the mean
reverting predictor to proxy for the business cycle, which we take to be the 12-month dividend
yield on the value-weighted NYSE index. ²t and ut+1 contain no information about future returns
(Rt+1 , Rt+2 , . . .) or about future D values (Dt+1 , Dt+2 , . . . ). We also specify a VAR for the log
market return and dividend yield for which lagged didvidend yield is the only predictor:
rt+1 = ar + br dt + et+1 ,

(3)

dt+1 = ad + bd dt + wt+1 ,

(4)

7

where rt+1 ≡ ln(Rt+1 ) is the log market return, ar and ad are intercepts, br and bd are coefficients
and [w e v ] is a vector of mean-zero, multivariate normal disturbances, with unconditional covariance matrix Σ, whose conditional covariance matrix might possibility depend on the state. Let σkj
be the unconditional covariance of k with j where k, j can be u, e or w. Similarly, let σk be the
unconditional standard deviation of k where k can be u, e or w.

2.2

Problem and Solution Technique

With labor income, the law of motion for the investor’s wealth, W , is given by
i
h
Wt+1 = (Wt + Yt − ct ) αt (Rt+1 − Rtf ) + Rtf
for t = 1, . . . , T − 1,

(5)

where Yt is labor income received at time-t. At the terminal data T , CT = WT + YT so the investor
does receive labor income at the terminal date.
The law of motion for the investors wealth, W , can be rewritten as
h
i
Γt+1 = (Γt − κ̂t + exp{²t }) exp{−gt+1 } αt (Rt+1 − Rtf ) + Rtf
for t = 1, . . . , T − 1.
where κ̂t ≡

ct
YtP

(6)

. Eq.(6) is also the evolution equation for the state variable Γt .

We consider the optimal portfolio problem of a investor with a finite life of T periods and utility
over intermediate consumption. Preferences are time separable and exhibit constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA):

"
E

T
X
t=1

#
1−γ
c
|D1 , ,
δt t
1−γ

(7)

where γ is the relative-risk-aversion coefficient, δ is the time-discount parameter and Γt is the ratio
of financial wealth at t to lagged permanent labor income. Note that the expected lifetime utility
depends on the state of the economy at time 1. Given this specification of the agent’s problem with
labor income, the value function at t is homogenous in YtP and has an additional state variable:
the ratio of financial wealth at t to lagged permanent labor income Γt . Given our parametric
assumptions, the Bellman equation faced by the investor is given by
(
"
κ̂1−γ
(YtP )1−γ
a(Γt , Dt , t)(YtP )1−γ
t
=E
max
1−γ
1−γ
κ̂(Γt ,Dt ,²t ,t),α(Γt ,Dt ,²t ,t)
¾
¸
1−γ
P
£
¤
(Yt )
1−γ
+δ
E a(Γt+1 , Dt+1 , t + 1)(exp{gt+1 }) |Γt , Dt , gt , ²t |Γt , Dt , ,
1−γ
for t = 1, . . . , T − 1,
8

(8)

where αt ≡ α(Γt , Dt , ²t , t) and κ̂t ≡ κ̂(Γt , Dt , ²t , t). This recursion is solved by backward iteration
starting with t = T − 1 and a(Γ, D, T ) = Γ1−γ
T .
We also consider a version of the problem in which the agent retires at some time S and
thereafter receives no labor income through until the terminal date. Instead the agent receives a
lump sum payout at time-S which is some multiple of permanent labor income at time-S. So at
the retirement date, the wealth evolution equation is:
h
i
WS+1 = (WS + YSP (ηS + exp{²S } − cS ) αS (RS+1 − RSf ) + RSf

(9)

The Bellman equation (8) also applies to this problem for t = 1, ..., S −1 and it is solved by iterating
back from t = S − 1 with a(Γ, D, S) = aˆ(D, T − S + 1)Γ1−γ , where aˆ(t)W 1−γ is the value function
S

t

for the T-S period allocation problem with no labor income. To allow the agent’s income process
to be age-dependent, we sometimes allow the µg to be age-dependant. We also incorporate survival
probabilities, with δ t in (7) replaced by p1,t δ t and δ in (8) replaced by pt,t+1 δ, where pτ,t is the
probability that the agent is still being alive at time-t given that she is alive at time-τ .
The holdings of both the risky and the riskless assets are always constrained to be non-negative.
Compared to the standard portfolio choice problem, the presence of an additional state variable,
the wealth to lagged permanent income ratio, considerably complicates the methodology needed
to obtain accurate solutions in a manageable time-frame. Building on the numerical approach in
Gourinchas and Parker (2002), we develop a new numerical methodology that allows the number
of grid points to vary across ranges of the wealth-income ratio and chooses the number for each
range to ensure that the resulting numerical errors in the policy functions are within prespecified
bounds. The appendix contains a detailed description of the methodology employed.

2.3

The Three Channels and Their Marginal Impact on Allocations

The paper focuses on three channels through which labor income can affect the stock holdings
of young agents and it is easy to describe them in the context of the VAR framework presented
above in equations (2) to (4). The state-dependent mean channel (SDM) requires expected g in
this and future periods to depend on current d in such a way that it is higher in expansions than
in recessions. Since d is countercyclical, this is equivalent to bg < 0. This channel is switched off
by setting bg = 0. The state-dependent volatility channel (SDV) requires the conditional volatility
of g this period to depend on current d so that it’s higher in recessions than expansions. Following
Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004), we parameterize this by allowing the conditional volatility
of g to take two values, depending on the current d value. In particular, since d is countercyclical,
9

we allow σ[ut+1 |dt ≤ d∗ ] < σ[ut+1 |dt > d∗ ] for d∗ the highest d value for which the economy is
still in an expansion. This channel is switched off by setting σ[ut+1 |dt ] = σu for all dt . The return
correlation channel (CWR) requires a positive conditional covariance between r and g which means
σue > 0. Setting σue = 0 switches off this channel.
It is easy to see that all pairwise combinations of these three channels switched on and off are
implementable, resulting in 8 specifications: 1) All Effects: SDM, SDV, CWR; 2) SDM, SDV, no
CWR; 3) SDM, no SDV, CWR; 4) no SDM, SDV, CWR; 5) no SDM, no SDV, CWR; 6) no SDM,
SDV, no CWR; 7) no SDM, no SDV, CWR; 8) None: no SDM, no SDV, no CWR. Each of the three
channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels is/are present. Thus,
for each channel, there are 4 comparisons that generate 4 measures of that channel’s incremental
effect on stock holdings. The 4 comparisons hold all else constant, including return predictability,
so that any change in stock holdings can only be due to the effect of the channel in question.

3

Calibration

We use the one-month Treasury-bill rate to obtain a proxy for the risk-free rate, we use the 12month dividend yield on the value-weighted NYSE index as a proxy for the predictive variable D.
Aggregate labor income data is used to obtain point estimates of some moments of interest. Wage
earnings data is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics website. We ues either Retail Trade which is
series CEU4200000004 or Total Private which is series CEU0500000004. Proprietory income data
is from Department of Commerce, Burea of Economic Analysis website. We use the Non Farm
Proprietor’s income series in NIPA table 2.6. All data is measured at a monthly frequency. The
Retail Trade income data starts from January 1972, Total Private income data from January 1964,
and Proprietary income data from January 1959. Return on the market and dividend yield start
from January 1927. All data series end in December 2003. Income and return data are disinflated
using a CPI measure, series CPIAUCNS, available from U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Per capita income values are generated by dividing all income series with a population
measure, series POP, available from U.S. Department of Commerce: Census Bureau.
We estimate the VAR for the market return and dividend yield in (3) and (4). The data VAR
for return and dividend yield is estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS) and discretized using
a variation of Tauchen and Hussey’s (1991) Gaussian quadrature method; the variation is designed
to ensure that d is the only state variable (see Balduzzi and Lynch (2000) for details). However,
following and extending Lynch (2000), this study implements the discretization in a manner that
10

produces exact matches for important moments for portfolio choice; in particular, we match the
correlation between the innovations to return and dividend yield and the volatility of the innovation
to return in each state to the unconditional volatility of the innovation and correlation between the
innovations in the data. We choose 19 quadrature points for the dividend yield and 3 points for the
stock-return innovations since Balduzzi and Lynch (1999) find that the resulting approximation is
able to capture important dimensions of the return predictability in the data. Data point estimates
and quadrature parameters are reported in Panel A of Table 1. The only parameter that the
quadrature cannot match is the persistence parameter for dividend yield: the quadrature value is
a little lower than the point estimate in the data. Stock return and dividend yield dynamics are
always kept as in data and the same regardless of the subset of the three channels switched on.
Turning to the labor income process, the volatilities for log labor income are set to the baseline
values in Viceira (1997, 2001) who describes these values as consistent with those obtained by
Gakidis (1997) based on PSID data for professionals and managers not self-employed under age
45.6 Viceira’s baseline value for the standard deviation of the change in log permanent labor
income is 15% per year and for the standard deviation of the log temporary shock is 10% per
year. To get the monthly values, we utilize a loglinear approximation to the relate these monthly
parameters to their annual counterparts while explicitly recognizing the predictive dynamics at
monthly frequency. Or to assess the accuracy of the usual rules-of-thumb that get used to go from
√
annual to monthly data, we just divide annual standard deviations by 12. As in Viceira, the
multiplicative temporary shock exp{ ²t } has a mean of 1.
For the flat income profile cases, the mean growth of permanent labor income is also the baseline
value in Viceira, 3% per annum. This translates into a monthly growth rate of 0.15%. The agent’s
horizon is twenty years and she dies at the terminal date. For the age-dependent profile cases,
we use a 3rd order polynomial to approximate the hump shaped life-cycle earnings profile as in
Campbell and Cocco (2002). We use as parameters for the polynomial the point estimates in Cocco,
Gomes and Maenhaut (2002) for college graduates. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at
65, receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent income
until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent
dies with probability 1 at age 100, and death probabilities are taken from the U.S. Life Tables,
2001, provided by the NCHS.
6
A number of papers (see, for example, Chamberlain and Hirano, 1997 and Carroll and Samwick, 1995) have
estimated labor income parameters and a range of values are reported across these studies. However, the Gakidis
values seem to lie within this range, which makes them reasonable to use.

11

We also calibrate the three channels through which labor income affects portfolio allocations
by young agents. Monthly aggregate labor income data is used to compute covariances between
permanent labor income growth and lagged dividend yield and contemporaneous market return
corresponding to the state-dependent mean and return correlation channels respectively. It is
reasonable to use aggregate data to estimate covariance if the idiosyncratic component of individual
labor income growth is uncorrelated with these two series. Aggregate labor income data is from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics website. Retail Trade is series CEU4200000004. Total Private is series
CEU0500000004. Proprietor’s income data is from Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis website. The series is the Non Farm Proprietor’s income in NIPA table 2.6. In the base
case using Retail Trade data, we calibrate the SDM channel by matching bg = σgd−1 to the point
estimate for Retail Trade income growth covaried with lagged dividend yield. Given a per annum
volatility for g of 15%, the bg value of -0.1613% implies ρgd−1 = −3.066% in the model, and a
monthly volatility for g of 5.26%. When the SDM channel is switched off, bg is set equal to zero
and σu is adjusted to keep σg equal to 5.26%. To calibrate the CWR channel, the correlation of the
return and permanent income growth shocks ρue is chosen so that σgr matches the point estimate
of covariance of aggregate Retail Trade wage income growth with stock return of 0.0901%2 . The sochosen ρue value is 0.48%. Whenever the CWR channel is present, ρue conditional on the dividend
yield state, is matched to this value, state by state. But when this channel is switched off, ρue is
set to zero, state by state.
Turning to the state-dependent volatility channel, Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004) find
that the conditional volatility of permanent labor income growth is 1.75 higher in recessions than
expansions, using NBER business-cycle cutoff to define the two. To incorporate this heteroscedasticity without increasing the state space, we need a way to define the two periods as function of the
dividend yield state. Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron’s business cycle specification implies a 68%
probability of expansion and 32% probability of recession. We bifucate dividend yield variable to
obtain recession and expansions states with the cutoff value chosen to match these unconditional
probabilities. Interestingly, we obtain similar transition matrices to Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron
for the two state transition probability matrix a yearly frequency. In particular, the probability of
remaining in the expansion state is found to be 76% in the data and 82% in our calibration, values
which are quite close to each other. There is more of a disparity for the probability of remaining
in an expansion but 63% in the data and 50% for our calibration are still quite close. Further, we
find that the Spearman correlation between our recession variable and NBER recessions is 64.4%.

12

In summary, our procedure for creating recession and expansion states has produced a two-state
Markov chain which replicates key features of the expansion and recession states that Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron found in the data. When the SDV channel is switched on, the conditional
volatility of g in recession states is allowed to be 1.75 times its value in expansion states; otherwise
the ratio is 1.
We also allow for the possibility of an unemployment state. As a first pass, we allow the occurrence of the unemployment state to be an i.i.d. event by incorporating a 0.5% probability of being
unemployed in a given month independent across months. By matching the expected duration of
unemployment in a given year, this specification is consistent with Carroll’s(1992) finding that half
a percent of annual income realizations can be classified as near-zero using individual data. Using
Carroll’s definition of a near-zero income realization, we assume that the agent receives 10% of
her permanent income in an unemployment month. To incorporate persistence into the unemployment state, we also consider a Markov regime switching model, with two states, employment and
unemployment. By allowing the transaction matrix to be age-dependent, we are able to exactly
replicate the transition dynamics assumed by Carroll: that is, that the agent is either employed or
unemployed in each year of her life.
We also calibrate proprietary income since Heaton and Lucas (2000a) document a similar puzzle
for individuals receiving proprietary income: the standard model produces stock holdings that
are too high. The state-dependent mean and return correlation channels are incorporated by
calibrating the covariance of labor income growth with stock return and lagged dividend yield
respectively to that for aggregate monthly non-farm proprietary income from NIPA. When the
second moment is allowed to be predictable, the ratio of the recession to boom innovation volatility
for permanent labor income growth is, in the absence of a data estimate based on proprietary
income, again matched to the Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004) value of 1.75. At the same
time, the unconditional volatility of permanent proprietary income growth itself is always matched
to the 25% per annum used by Heaton and Lucas (2000b) based on annual Tax Model data. There is
no temporary shock. The resulting 25% implied for per annum proprietary income growth volatility
seems reasonable since Heaton and Lucas report median volatilities of 29% and 19% per annum
respectively for proprietary and labor income, while our wage-earner calibration with temporary
shocks implies a per annum volatility of 18%.
Three aggregate labor income series are calibrated, as described above. And for each one,
parameter values are reported in Panel B of Table 1 for the 8 associated quadrature approximations,

13

each specification a possible combination of the three channels switched on and off. Panel B shows
that for each set of 8 specifications, the mean and volatility of log monthly permanent labor
income growth is kept constant across the 8 specifications. While the bg value in the data for the
Retail Trade series implies a correlation between g and lagged dividend yield of around -3%, the
implied correlation for Total Private is still around -1.9% and only drops to -1.5% for the aggregate
proprietary income series. Though the t-statistics are not reported, the bg estimates for the two
labor income series are highly significant, using Newey-West covariances with either 3 or 12 lags.
However, for the proprietary income series, the point estimate is again significant irrespective of
the number of lags used, but only marginally so using 12 lags. The covariance with return point
estimate implies a ρue value of 0.48% for the Retail Trade series and -0.43% for Total Private which
are both small. However, the implied ρue value for proprietary income is a much larger 1.21% which
suggests that the CWR channel may have a larger effect in the proprietary income calibration than
in the wage income calibrations. The negative sign for Total Private means that this channel is
likely to increase stock holdings rather than decrease them.

4

Results

This section reports policy functions for the various problems described above. Simulation results
are also reported.

4.1

Twenty-year Flat-profile Labor Income Case

Table 2 reports asset allocation and incremental effect results for the twenty-year flat profile labor
income case. The agent has CRRA preferences with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first
month of her 20 year horizon, and results are reported for a range of wealth to permanent income
ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based
on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income
σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the
assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail
Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor
income. The agent has access to the market portfolio and to a riskless bond. Panel A reports
average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports
the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the three channels SDM, CWR or
SDV. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels
14

are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding
reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is
detailed in section 3 above. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using
all states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock
holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.
Panel A shows that the simultaneous presence of all three channels leads to large reductions
in average holdings for young agent’s with low wealth-income ratios. At zero wealth, the average
holding drops from 97.5% to 20.3% but even at a wealth-income ratio of 30, the drop is still
substantial, from 90.5% to 37%. Almost all the reduction is due to the business cycle variation
in the first two moments of permanent labor income growth. Panel B shows that the incremental
effect of switching on the return correlation channel when the SDM and SDV channels are also
on is never more than 1%. In contrast, the reduction in stock holding is much smaller if either
the SDM or SDV channels are switched off, suggesting that both are contributing to the reduced
stock holding by young, low wealth-income agents. Panel B shows that for a young agent with a
wealth to monthly income ratio of 30, the average stock allocation increases by an allocation of
29% when the mean channel is switched off and by an allocation of 39% when the volatility channel
is switched off.
Figure 1 plots stock holdings for first-period agents for a range of wealth to permanent income
ratios from 0 to 500. Subfigure 1.a reports average stock holdings for the combinations of channels
indicated in the legend. Subfigures b, c and d report the reductions in stock holdings induced
by SDM, CWR and SDV channels, respectively. Subfigure 1.a shows that in the absence of all
three channels, there is a negative realtion between average stock allocation and wealth-income
ratio. Switching on the CWR or the SDM channel does not change the direction of this relation.
However, when the SDV channel is switched on the relation becomes positive, which is the direction
reported in the data. So while both the SDM and SDV channels have a considerable effect on the
young agent’s stock holdings, it is the SDV channel that changes the direction of the relation
between stock holding and wealth-income ratio.
The incremental impacts reported in Panel C for states not at the boundaries are much larger
than the incremental impacts reported in Panel B for all states. At low wealth income ratios, the
agent’s stock allocation is either 0% or 100% in almost every state. Even when just non-binding
states are considered, the reductions due to the CWR channel are still less than 5% for wealth
income ratios greater than 10.

15

Table 3 reports reports similar asset allocation results to those in Table 2, except the agent is
in her last month of her 20 year horizon, not her first. Interestingly, Panel A shows that switching
on the three channels has virtually no effect on allocations and the incremental effects reported
in Panels B and C are virtually zero as well. This results indicate that the large effects on stock
holdings reported in Table 2 caused by the state-dependent mean and volatility of permanent labor
income growth are coming from the long horizon of the young agent. This is not surprising since
the intuition that we present in the introduction for the reduced holdings very much relies on the
young agent being able to rebalance many times before the terminal date.
The intuition for the reduction in stock holdings is as follows. With risk aversion greater than
1, positive correlation between stock return and future opportunity sets reduces the stock holding
of a young agent relative to that of a myopic agent. Stock returns are low when the economy enters
a recession (i.e dividend yield is high), so both lower mean labor income growth in bad states and
higher volatility in bad states reduces the stock holding of a young agent. This mechanism is the
flipside of the one by which return predictability affects the stock holdings of young agents with risk
aversion greater than 1. There, young agents hold more stock than myopic agents because of the
negative correlation between stock return and future opportunity sets induced by the predictability.
The importance of horizon is confirmed by subfigures 3.a and 4.a which plot an agent’s average
stock allocations as a function of age, fixing the wealth to permanent income ratio at 1 and 100
respectively for her entire lifetime. These subfigures show that the average stock allocation is the
same in the agent’s last month of life irrespective of whether all, one business-cycle or none of the
three channels are switched on. Rolling back though time from the terminal date when wealthincome is fixed at 1 each month (subfigure 3.a), we see that the average stock holdings weakly
decreasing with age when none of the channels are switched on, but with at least the SDV or SDM
channels switched on, the average stock allocation weakly increases for at least the first 16 years
of life. In contrast, subfigure 6.a shows that when the wealth income ratio is increased to 100
and labor income is less important relative to financial wealth, the average stock allocation now
decreases with age, irrespective of how many channels are switched on.
Another question of interest is how stock allocations vary over an agent’s life. To address this
question, subfigures 2.b and 2.b report analogous allocations to subfigures 2.a and 2.a but for agents
with initial wealth to permanent income ratios of 1 and 100 respectively rather those values every
period. Results are obtained via simulation and 500000 paths are simulated for each case of the 8
cases under consideration, and average allocations at each age are recorded. Initial dividend yield

16

states are drawn from their unconditional distribution. These subfigures show that with all effects
switched off, stock holding is counterfactually declining in age for an initial wealth-income ratio
of 1 or 100. However, once the two business-cycle channels are switched on, the relation becomes
positive. Moreover, subfigure 2.b shows that when the wealth-income ratio is 1, the SDV channel
alone is enough to obtain the positive relation but SDM alone is not. In contrast subfigure 3.b
shows that the two business-cycle effects are equally important with neither alone enough to make
the relation positive.
The agent’s average allocation as a function of age holding her wealth-income ratio fixed each
period (subfigures 2.a and 2.b) differs from the function obtained when the agent’s initial wealthincome ratio is fixed (subfigures 2.b and 3.b) because her wealth income ratio varies over her life
when she follows the optimal strategy. Subfigures 2.c and 3.c plots how the average wealth to
permanent income ratio evolves over the agent’s twenty year horizon, assuming its initial value
is fixed at 1 and 100 respectively. The results are obtained from the simulations performed to
generate subigures 2.b and 3.b. Interestingly, for an initial wealth-income ratio of 1 (subfigure 2.c),
the agent’s wealth to permanent income ratio exhibits a hump shape over her life, hitting its peak
around an age of 10. The function is largely unaffected by whether the 3 channels are on or off.
Intuition suggests that as the initial wealth to permanent income ratio is increased, the positive
sloped portion of the hump would become less steep and the results for an initial ratio of 100 in
subfigure 3.c confirm this.
Table 4 reports analogous results to those in Table 2 except that the agent’s labor income
process includes a 10% temporary shock to per annum labor income growth; this translates into
a 24.5% temporary shock to monthly growth. The allocations and incremental effects reported in
Table 4 look virtually identical to those in Table 2. Thus, it appears that temporary shocks to labor
income growth do not materially affect allocations, at least shocks of the magnitude documented
for U.S. individuals.
The impact of an unemployment state on portfolio allocations is considered in Tables 5 and 6.
The reported results in Table 5 are analogous to those in Table 2 again, except there is a 0.05%
chance each month of the agent being in an unemployment state that pays only 10% of permanent
labor income. Somewhat surprisingly, the results are qualitatively similar to those without an
unemployment state in Table 2. Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) examine the effect of an
unemployment state in a model with annual decision-making and they present simulation results
that are suggestive, but not conclusive, that an 0.05% probability of being unemployed in any given

17

year has a large effect on stock allocations, particularly early in life. But their model allows for
a hump-shaped labor-income profile over the agent’s life and perhaps more importantly, implies
some degree of persistence in the unemployment state at a monthly frequency. Table 6 reports
the allocation results obtained when we use a Markov regime switching model, with two states,
employment and unemployment, which allows us to exactly replicate the transition dynamics used
by Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout and assumed by Carroll, by allowing the transaction matrix to be
age-dependent. Table 6 shows that making the unemployment stay persistent lowers average stock
allocations irrespective of which subset of channels is switched on, consistent with the results in
Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout. However, the incremental effect of the channels on stock allocations
largely remains the same as reported for a transitory unemployment state in Table 5 or for the case
of no unemployment state at all in Table 2.
It is worth checking whether the large incremental effects reported above are specific to the
aggregate labor income series Retail Trade. Table 7 examines this by reporting analogous results
to those in Table 2 but for a labor income process calibrated to Total Private aggregate labor
income data. The magnitude of the covariance with lagged dividend yield is lower for growth
in Total Private sector earnings than for growth in Retail Trade earnings. Consequently, it is
worthwhile checking whether the state-dependent mean channel continues to have a large effect
when this series is used to calibrate the covariance. Panel A shows that the combined effect of the
three channels on average stock allocations can be as low as 43% for a young agent whose wealth is
no more than 30 times her monthly labor income. In contrast, when labor income is calibrated to
Retail Trade, the reduction is never less than 52%. But focussing on the young agent with a wealth
to permanent income ratio of 30, switching off the state-dependent mean channel still increases
her stock allocation by an amount of 20% (as opposed to an amount of 29% for retail trade) while
switching off the state-dependent volatility increases her allocation by an amount of 35%, which
is quite close to the 39% reported for retail trade. Thus, the important of the two business-cycle
predicability channels appears to be robust to choice of aggregate labor income series used in the
calibration.
Table 8 reports reports state-by-state asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient
of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent
income ratios from 0 to ∞. Hence, Table 8 has the state-by-state results from which the Table 2
results are obtained. Panel A reports stock allocations state-by-state and illustrates how when the
wealth to permanent income ratio is low, the agent’s stock holding is at the boundary in almost all

18

dividend yield states. This table also provides information about non-participation while figure 4
plots the probability of non-participation in the first month as a function of the agent’s first-month
wealth-income ratio. With all three channels switched off, non-participation is a zero-probability
event in the first month, irrespective of the agent’s wealth-income ratio. With both business-cycle
channels switched on, the probability of non-participation becomes as high as 70% for low wealthincome ratios but is less than 5% for all wealth-income ratios greater than 120. With only SDV
channel switched on, the probability of non-participation is still over 40% when the wealth income
ratio is zero, while the SDM channel alone has very little effect on the level of non-participation
relative to the case with all channels switched off.
We are also interested in non-participation as a function of age. Subfigures 2.d and 3.d provide
results on this point plotting the probability of non-participation as a function of age for an agent
whose initial wealth income ratio is 1 and 100, respectively. The two subfigures indicate that
all three channels switched off leads to participation in the stock market virtually all the time,
irrespective of age or initial wealth-income ratio. An examination of subfigure 2.d indicates that
switching on the two business-cycle channels results in substantial non-participation by agents in
their first month and that the non-participation steadily declines as the agent gets older. According
to the figure, an agent with an initial wealth-income ratio of 1 decides not to participate in the
stock market 70% of the time in the first month; and after ten years, this probability has declined
to a fraction that is still above 20%. In contrast figure 3.d shows that when the agent’s initial
wealth-income ratio is 100, non-participation never occurs more than 10% of the time, even with
all three channels switched on. The implication is that the business-cycle variation in the first 2
moments of permanent labor income growth can cause young, poor agents not to participate in
the stock market a large fraction of the time. This result can be contrasted with the virtual 100%
participation rate obtained for agent’s irrespective of age or wealth-income ratio when all three
channels switched off.

4.2

Specification versus Rule-of-thumb Monthly Volatility

It turns out the rule-of-thumb way of computing monthly volatility from annual volatility understates true volatility. For the Retail Trade calibration and a 15% per annum volatility, the monthly
volatility is 5.26% when using the labor-income specification but only 4.33% when scaling the 15%
by the square-root of 12. Table 9 reports the same asset allocation and incremental effect results as
in Table 2 for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year

19

horizon, except that the income process is calibrated to the rule-of-thumb volatility rather than
specification-based volatility. Panel A show that the reductions in average stock allocations from
switching on the three channels are smaller than those reported in Table 2 using the specificationbased volatility number. While the effect of switching off the CWR channel remains small, the
incremental effect of the SDM channel on stock holdings is larger than in the case with the higher
monthly volatility of permanent income growth. The overall reduction in average stock holdings
because of the three channels is smaller because the incremental effect of the SDV channel on stock
holdings is attenuated by the smaller volatility.

4.3

Lifecycle Effects: Age-dependent Profile, Retirement and Death Probabilities

Table 10 reports asset allocation and incremental effect results for the lifecycle case. As in Table 2,
the agent has CRRA preferences with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20
year horizon, and results are reported for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to
∞. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to
receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and
Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100, with death
probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic
monthly growth rate of permanent income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the
polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002).
The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from
its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics
of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income
(series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income. The
agent has access to the market portfolio and to a riskless bond. The format of the table is similar
to Table 2. Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are
present. Panel B and C reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the
channels. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel
C does the same using only non binding states.
Table 10 shows that introducing business cycle variation in the first two moments of permanent
labor income growth causes the young poor lifecycle agent to reduce stock holdings even more
aggressively than the young agent in the twenty-year flat profile case. For a young agent whose
wealth is less than 30 times her monthly income, the average reduction is always more than 67%
20

in the lifecycle case as opposed to only 52% in the twenty-year flat profile case.
Figures 5 through 7 pertain to the lifecycle case with the age-dependent income profile and
lump-sum payout on retirement. Figure 5 plots stock holdings for young agents for a range of
wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to 500. The four subfigures contain plots analogous
to those in the four subfigures in figure 1. Subfigure 5.a reports average stock holdings for the
combinations of channels indicated in the legend. Subfigures b, c and d report the reductions
in stock holdings induced by SDM, CWR and SDV channels, respectively. Subfigure 6.a plots
an agent’s average stock allocations as a function of age, fixing her wealth to permanent income
ratio at 0 for her entire lifetime while subfigures 6.b, 6.c and 6.d plot the average fraction in
stock, the average wealth-income ratio and the probability of non-participation as a function of
age for an agent whose initial wealth income ratio is 0. Finally, figure 7 plots the probability of
non-participation in the first month as a function of the agent’s first-month wealth-income ratio.
All the qualitative conclusions from the twenty-year flat profile case carry over to the more
realistic lifecycle setting. The presence of the two business cycle channels causes the relation
between stock allocation and wealth-income ratio to become positive for young agents (subfigure
5.a) and the relation between stock allocation and age to become positive for poor, young agents
(subfigure 6.b). The former result is again driven by the state-dependent volatility channel while
both channels are important for the latter finding. Again, the two business-cycle channels induce
substantial non-participation in a setting where there would be almost none with all three channels
switched off. Figure 7 shows that when the two business-cycle channels are present, a 22-year old
agent with no financial wealth decides not to participate in the stock market over 80% of the time
in her first year, a substantial fraction of the time in the rest of her 20s and early 30s, and always
some fraction of the time through until retirement. Interestingly, the agent’s long retirement period
causes her wealth income ratio to be a convex, increasing function of age (subfigure 6.c) despite the
lump-sum payout received at retirement. This functional form stand in sharp contrast to the hump
shape reported for the twenty-year flat-profile no-retirement agent when her initial wealth-income
ratio is 1.
Table 11 reports analogous results as Table 10 for the lifecycle agent facing a flat income growth
profile with the same monthly mean as in the twenty-year case rather than the hump-shaped one.
It appears the hump shape is having some effect on the young agent, since the average reduction for
a young agent whose wealth is less than 30 times her monthly income never exceeds 61% in Table
11 (as compared to reductions greater than 67% when the profile is hump-shaped). Figure 8 plots

21

average stock allocations as a function of age for the lifecycle agent with no financial wealth initially
and who faces the same flat income growth profile. Comparing the average allocation curves to
those in subfigure 2.b for the lifecycle agent who faces the hump-shaped profile, we see the curves
are similar, suggesting the somewhat surprising result that the agent’s average stock allocation as
a function of age is not much affected by whether her income growth profile is flat or hump-shaped.
Table 12 reports analogous results as Table 10 for the lifecycle agent, except no lump sum
payout is received at retirement. The reported results show that eliminating the lump sum payout
upon retirement has almost no impact on the stock holding by the young agent. However, figure 9
plots average stock allocations as a function of age for the lifecycle agent with no financial wealth
initially and who does not receive a lump sum payment upon retirement. The allocation curves in
figure 9, when compared to those in subfigure 2.b for the lifecycle agent who receives a lump sum
on retirement, show that removing the lump sum payout materially decreases the agent’s stock
allocation in the years just prior to retirement. This result is not surprising since the lump sum
payment means that the agent’s total financial wealth is increasing relative to her portfolio value
as retirement approaches. So in the presence of the lump sum payout, maintaining a given fraction
of total financial wealth in stock requires putting a larger fraction of portfolio value in stock as
retirement approaches.

4.4

Twenty-year Flat-profile Proprietary Income Case

As we discussed above, the three channels we consider are also likely to affect the portfolio allocations of agent’s who receive proprietary income rather than wage income. Table 13 reports asset
allocation and incremental effect results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for
the first month of her 20 year horizon, as in Table 2, except that the income process is calibrated
to proprietary income rather than labor income. Panel A shows that the simultaneous presence
of the three channels drastically reduces average stock allocations. For young agents with wealth
less than 30 times monthly income, the reduction in holding is always at least 60%. Switching off
the return correlation channel has a negligible incremental effect, never more than 3%, despite the
larger covariance with return than the two labor income series. Our results suggest that businesscycle variation in the first two moments of proprietary income growth might be able to explain, at
least partially, why the standard model produces stock holdings that are too high once proprietary
income is introduced.

22

5

Conclusion

This paper asks whether allowing the conditional joint distribution of labor income to depend on
the business cycle can allow the model to generate equity holdings that better match those of U.S.
households, while keeping the unconditional distribution the same as in the data. Calibrating the
business-cycle variation in the first two moments of labor income growth to U.S. data leads to large
reductions in stock holdings by young agents with low wealth-income ratios. The reductions are
so large that young, poor agents now hold less stock than both young, rich agents and old agents,
and also hold no stock a large fraction of the time. Our results suggest that the predictability
of labor-income growth at a business-cycle frequency plays an important role in a young agent’s
decision-making about her portfolio’s stock holding.
In future work, we plan to endogenize the agent’s labor supply decision. Doing so may ameliorate
the effects of this business cycle variation in labor income growth on the stock allocations of young,
poor agents since agents can reduce hours worked when labor opportunities are poor. On the flip
side, they can increase hours worked when labor opportunities are good, which would exacerbate the
effects. We conjecture that the effects on the stock allocations of poor, young agents are still likely
to be large, much in the same way that hedging demands induced by stock return predictability
are large despite the fact that the agent’s can choose how much to invest in stock.

23

Appendix
This appendix sketches the numerical procedures associated with solving dynamic savings and
portfolio choice problem with predictable returns in the presence of labor income.
There are two key elements to the implementation. The first is to endogenize the discrete state
representation of the value function to bound error propagation at each iteration. The second is
to resort to extrapolation only when the problem on hand is economically sufficiently close (in a
sense to be made clear below) to a problem for which the functional form for the value function is
known.
The concern giving rise to above is that the wealth to permanent labor income (wealth-income,
henceforth) ratio state is unbounded on the non-negative side of the real line. To represent the value
function on this dimension, this range is partitioned into three disjoint, non-degenerate intervals
on which the value function of unknown form is approximated as a three-part structure. At each
iteration, the lower intermediate boundary point is chosen to be the smallest value of wealth-income
ratio such that an agent without the labor income for all periods to terminal date requires no more
than 10% extra wealth to be equally happy as an otherwise identical agent with the labor income
at that wealth-income ratio. The upper intermediate boundary point is chosen to satisfy the same
definition at 1%. Over the lower-end interval, the value function is approximated as a piecewise
linear form or piecewise shape-preserving monotone cubic hermite interpolant of Fritsch and Carlson
(1980) for the wealth-income ratio state and as a piecewise linear form for the inherited allocation
state. Over the higher-end interval, the value function is taken to be that of the otherwise identical
problem without the labor income. Over the middle interval, the value function is approximated
as a function of the form, V (W ) = a × (W − b)c + d, where a, b, c, d are constants in R, to match
the function and the first derivative values at the upper and the lower intermediate boundary
points. Further, at any given iteration and at any given grid node of the discretized state space,
the objective function has to be jointly solved for consumption and portfolio policies subject to the
short sales constraints on the T-bill and the stock. A recursive golden section algorithm is used to
optimize the consumption policy, defined as the fraction of last period’s permanent labor income
consumed, accurate to the fourth decimal digit and the portfolio policy, defined as the fraction of
wealth invested in the risky asset, accurate to the third decimal digit.
We suggest a dynamic gridding algorithm to bound errors on policy functions at each iteration.
This algorithm takes the value function representation for the previous iteration as given, computes
the intermediate boundary points for the iteration at hand and continues to add points in the

24

lower-end interval in a particular way until policies at no point on a representative grid for the
next iteration differ by more than prespecified magnitudes across increasingly denser grids for the
iteration on hand.
The steps of this algorithm in detail are:
1) take value function representation for the previous iteration, Vt+1 ( . ), as given
2) initialize a set of grid nodes, Xt = {Γt,1 , Γt,2 , Γt,3 , . . . , Γt,n }, in increasing order, where Γt,1 = 0,
Γt,n = LPt,10% , n is a constant, and LPt,10% is the lower intermediate boundary point for iteration
t with the defining parameter set to 10%
3) define Yt = {(Γt,1 + Γt,2 )/2, (Γt,2 + Γt,3 )/2, . . . , (Γt,n−1 + Γt,n )/2}, in increasing order
4) evaluate Vt (Xt ) using the value function representation, Vt+1 ( . )
5) evaluate Vt (Yt ) using the value function representation, Vt+1 ( . )
6) evaluate the lower intermediate point, LPt−1,10% for iteration t − 1 using Vt as represented
S
by Xt
Yt
7) define At−1 = {(i − 1) × (LPt−1,%10 )/q}q+1
i=1 , where q ≥ 2 is a constant.
8) evaluate Vt−1 (At−1 ) using Vt as represented by Xt
9) evaluate Vt−1 (At−1 ) using Vt as represented by Xt

S

Yt

10) define Zt−1 ⊆ At−1 = {x ∈ At−1 | and policy functions at x using representations in steps
8) and 9) differ more than prespecified magnitudes}
S
11) if Zt−1 = ∅, accept Xt Yt as sufficient representation for Vt , exit subroutine.
12) compute the range of wealth-income, Γt , range the system can possibly assume by starting
at any point in Z under any realization of the return and the labor income shocks and under any
allowed policy. This range is generically of the form [0 ht ], for some ht > 0.
S
13) update Xt as Xt Yt , in increasing order,
14) update Yt as {(Xt,1 + Xt,2 )/2, (Xt,2 + Xt,3 )/2, . . . , (Xt,k−1 + Xt,k )/2; where k is the smallest
positive integer satisfying Xt,k >= min(ht , LPt ).
15) return to step 4) and repeat.
Step 10) ensures that the maximal absolute scaled deviation in consumption policy (defined
as the fraction of last period’s permanent component of labor income consumed), |(κ̂coarse −
κ̂dense )/κ̂dense | is bounded from above by 10−3 and the maximal absolute deviation in portfolio
policy (defined as the fraction of wealth invested in the risky asset), |αcoarse − αdense |, is bounded
from above by 10−2 . q and n are set to 50. The initialization in step 2) is designed to take advantage
of the previous iteration’s (Vt+2 ) representation.

25

This algorithm, given the choice of the interpolant produces a set of grid nodes which then, can
represent the value function at hand sufficiently well before one goes on to the next iteration.
This procedure implies that the joint state for the base case specification with predictable
returns and when All effects are present (SDM, SDV and CWR) is on average (over the 20-year
horizon), represented with approximately 19 × 450 = 8550 grid nodes.
To ensure that results are robust to the parameters of the solution algorithm, we change the
defining parameter for the lower boundary point from 10% to 9%, 8%, 7%, and 6% for the base case
specification when all effects are present (SDM, SDV and CWR). The maximal |(κ̂10% − κ̂x% )/κ̂x% |,
for an equally spaced 100-node grid on [0 LPt,10% ] is less than 10−3 for all t = 1, . . . , 240 and x
= 6,7,8,9. Similarly, the maximal |α10% − αx% | is less than 10−2 . Fixing the defining parameter
for the lower boundary point at 10%, we change the precision on the consumption policy, κ̂, from
10−4 to 10−5 and 10−6 . We again note that the maximal absolute scaled consumption policies is
less than than 10−3 across 20-year horizon.

26

References
Balduzzi, P., Lynch A., 1999. Transaction costs and predictability: some utility cost calculations.
Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47-78.
Barberis N., 2000. Investing for the long run when returns are predictable. Journal of Finance 55,
225-64.
Botazzi, L., Pesenti, P., Wincoop, E., 1996. Wages, profits and the international portfolio puzzle.
European Economic Review 40, 219-254.
Carroll, C., 1992. Buffer-stock theory of saving: Some macroeconomic evidence. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 61-156.
Carroll, C., 1996. Buffer-stock saving: Some theory, Working paper, Johns Hopkins University.
Carroll, C., 1997. Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 1-55.
Carroll, C., Samwick, A., 1997. The nature of precautionary wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 41-71.
Cocco, J., Gomes, F., Maenhaut, P., 2002. Consumption and portfolio choice over the life cycle.
Working paper, London Business School.
Constantinides, G., 1990. Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle. Journal of
Political Economy 98, 519-543.
Campbell, J., 1987. Stock returns and the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics 18,
373-399.
Campbell, J., 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. A Variance decomposition for
stock returns. The Economic Journal 101, 157-179.
Campbell, J., Shiller, R., 1988a. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and
discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-227.

27

Campbell, J., Shiller, R., 1988b. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends. Journal of Finance
43, 661-676.
Campbell, J., Viceira, L., 1999. Consumption and portfolio decisions when expected returns are
time varying. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433-495.
Chamberlain, G., Hirano, K., 1997. Predictive distributions based on longitudinal earnings data.
Working paper, Harvard University.
Cocco, J, Gomes, F., Maenhout, P., 2002. Consumption and portfolio choice over the life-cycle.
forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Davis, S., Willen, P., 2000a. Occupation-level income shocks and asset returns: their covariance
and implications for portfolio choice. Unpublished working paper. University of Chicago.
Davis ,S., Willen P., 2000b. Using financial assets to hedge labor income risks: estimating the
benefits. Unpublished working paper. University of Chicago.
Deaton, A., 1991. Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Econometrica 59, 1221-48.
Fama, E., French, K., 1988. Dividend yileds and expected stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics 22, 3-27.
Fama, E., French, K., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, E., Schwert, W., 1977. Human capital and capital market equilibrium. Journal of Financial
Economics 4, 95-125.
Fritsch, F. N., Carlson, R. E., 1980. Monotone piecewise cubic interpolation. SIAM Journal of
Numerical Analysis 17, 238-246.
Gakidis, H., 1997. Earnings uncertainty and life-cycle portfolio choice. Working paper, MIT.
Gourinchas, P., Parker,J., 2002. Consumption over the Life Cycle. Econometrica 70, 47-89.
Heaton, J., Lucas, D., 1997. Market frictions, savings behavior and portfolio choice. Macroeconomic
Dynamics 1, 76-101.
28

Keim, D., Stambaugh, R., 1986. Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets. Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001. Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A cross-sectional test when risk
premia are time varying. Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238-1287.
Lynch A. W., 2000. Portfolio choice and equity characteristics: characterizing the hedging demands
induced by return predictability. Journal of Financial Economics 62, 67-130.
Lynch, A. W., Tan, S., 2004. Explaining the magnitude of liquidity premia: the roles of return
predictability, wealth shocks and state-dependent transactions costs. Unpublished working paper.
New York University.
Michaelides, A., 2003. Portfolio choice, liquidity constraints and stock market mean reversion.
Polkovnichenko, V., 2003. ife cycle consumption and portfolio choice with additive habit formation
preferences and uninsurable labor income risk.
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C., Yaron, A. 2004. Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor-market risk.
Journal of Political Economy 112, 695-717.
Tauchen, G., Hussey, R., 1991. Quadrature-based methods for obtaining approximate solutions to
nonlinear asset pricing models. Econometrica 59, 317-96.
Viceira. L., 1997. Optimal portfolio choice for long-horizon investors with non-tradable labor
income. Working paper, Harvard University.
Viceira, L., 2001. Optimal portfolio choice for long-horizon investors with non-tradable labor
income. Journal of Finance 56, 433-470.
Zeldes, S., 1989. Optimal consumption with stochastic income: deviations form certainty equivalence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 275-298.

29

Table 1. CALIBRATION. The table reports calibration and data values for the parameters of the VAR specification introduced in section 2.1 of the
text:
rt+1 = ar + br dt + et+1 ,
dt+1 = ad + bd dt + wt+1 ,
P
gt+1 ≡ yt+1
− ytP = ḡ + bg dt + ut+1 .

The dependent variables are logarithmic return on the Market Portfolio, r, logarithmic growth rate of permanent income, g and 12-month
dividend yield and the independent variable is the lagged dividend yield. µ refers to unconditional mean. σ with one (two) subscript letter(s) refer to
unconditional standard deviation (covariance). σu|exp , (σu|rec ) refers to the conditional volatility of the permanent income growth shock in expansion
(recession) states. ρ refers to unconditional covariance. −1 used as a subscript implies the lagged value for a variable. ² is the transitory shock to
income. The Market portfolio is the value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks obtained from Kenneth French’s website.
Dividend yield is the 12-month dividend yield on the NYSE index. Aggregate labor income data is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics website.
Retail Trade is series CEU4200000004. Total Private is series CEU0500000004. Proprietor’s income data is from Department of Commerce, Burea
of Economic Analysis website. The series is the Non Farm Proprietor’s income in NIPA table 2.6. Individual labor income moments are taken from
Gakidis (1997) based on PSID data for professionals and managers not self-employed under age 45 and for Non Farm Proprietor’s income from Heaton
and Lucas (2000). All data is measured at a monthly frequency. We use Retail Trade income data starting from January 1972, Total Private income
data from January 1964, Proprietor’s income data from January 1959. Return on the market and dividend yield start from January 1927. All data
series end in January 2004. Income and return data are disinflated using a CPI measure, series CPIAUCNS, available from U.S. Department of Labor:
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Per capita income values are generated by dividing all income series with a population measure, series POP, available from
U.S. Department of Commerce: Census Bureau. Panel A reports VAR coefficients, means and covariances for r and d using OLS regression to obtain
the data values. Panel B reports means and volatilities for labor income together with correlation and covariances with r and d. SDM, CWR and SDV
stand for state dependent mean , covariance with return and state dependent volatility channels respectively, for permanent income growth as described
in section 2.1 of the text. A + (−) sign means that the channel at the start of the row is present (not present) for the case in consideration. Given the
data values for aggregate or individual income in the last two columns, the calibration procedure generates the values in the first eight columns, one for
each case considered. To determine the transitory and permanent income volatility values at monthly frequencies, we utilize a loglinear approximation,
relating these parameter values to their annual counterparts, while explicitly accounting for the predictable dynamics of the permanent income growth.
Details of this approximation is available from the authors.

i

µi

σr
ρrd

r 0.535
5.5
d
0
-12.6%

σrd
σd

Panel A: Return and Dividend Yield
σe
σew Av. Cond. σe Av. Cond. σew
bi
ρew
σw Av. Cond. ρew Av. Cond. σw

-0.7
0.3
1.000 0.979

r 0.535
5.5
-1.0
d
0
-19.9% 1.000

0.3
0.962

Data
e
5.5
-1.0
w -89.9% 0.202
Quadrature
e
5.5
-1.3
w -89.5% 0.272

5.5
-89.9%

-1.3
0.271

SDM
CWR
SDV

+
+
+

Table 1 cont.
Panel B: Labor Income
+
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
−
+

−
+
−

−
−
+

Calibrated (same as Quadrature)

−
−
−
Ag. Indiv.

µg
Annual σg
σg
bg
ρgd−1
σgr
ρgr
ρeu
σeu = Av. Cond σeu
Av. Cond. ρeu
σu|exp
σu|rec
σwu = Av. Cond σwu
Annual σ²
σ²

0.153
15
5.260
-0.161
-3.07%
0.090
0.31%
0.48%
0.1396
0.50%
4.063
7.110
0
10
24.5

Retail Trade
0.153 0.153
15
15
5.260 5.260
0
0
0
0
1.397 1.397
0.48% 0.48%
0.48% 0.48%
0.1397 0.1397
0.50% 0.48%
4.065 5.260
7.113 5.260
0
0
10
10
24.5
24.5

0.153
15
5.260
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4.065
7.113
0
10
24.5

0.153
0.153
15
15
5.260
0 -0.161
0
0
0.901
0
0
0
0
5.260
5.260
0
10
10
24.5

µg
Annual σg
σg
bg
ρgd−1
σgr
ρgr
ρeu
σeu = Av. Cond. σeu
Av. Cond. ρeu
σu|exp
σu|rec
σwu = Av. Cond σwu

Total Private
0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153
15
15
15
15
15
15
5.281 5.281 5.281 5.281 5.281 5.281
-0.102 -0.102 -0.102 -0.102
0
0
-1.93% -1.93% -1.93% -1.93%
0
0
-0.159 -0.159 -0.031 -0.031 -0.128 -0.128
-0.54% -0.54% -0.11% -0.11% -0.44% -0.44%
-0.44% -0.44%
0
0
-0.44% -0.44%
-0.1274 -0.1274
0
0
-0.1275 -0.1275
-0.46% -0.44%
0
0
-0.46% -0.44%
4.079 5.280 4.079 5.280 4.080 5.281
7.139 5.280 7.139 5.280 7.140 5.281
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.153
15
5.281
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4.080
7.140
0

0.153
0.153
15
15
5.281
0 -1.020
0
0 -0.159
0
0
0
0
5.281
5.281
0

0.153 0.153 0.153
15
15
15
5.260 5.260 5.260
-0.161 -1.613 -0.161
-3.07% -3.07% -3.07%
0.090 -0.495 -0.495
0.31% -0.17% -0.17%
0.48%
0
0
0.1396
0
0
0.48%
0
0
5.258 4.063 5.258
5.258 7.110 5.258
0
0
0
10
10
10
24.5
24.5 24.5

Proprietary Income
µg
0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153 0.153
0.153
Annual σg
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
σg
8.810 8.810 8.810 8.810 8.810 8.810 8.810 8.810
bg ×
-0.134 -0.134 -0.134 -0.134
0
0
0
0 -0.134
ρgd−1
-1.52% -1.52% -1.52% -1.52%
0
0
0
0
σgr
0.545 0.545 -0.041 -0.041 0.587 0.587
0
0
0.545
ρgr
1.12% 1.12% -0.08% -0.08% 1.21% 1.21%
0
0
ρeu
1.21% 1.21%
0
0
1.21% 1.21%
0
0
σeu = Av. Cond. σeu 0.5864 0.5864
0
0
0.5865 0.5865
0
0
Av. Cond ρeu
1.26% 1.21%
0
0
1.26% 1.21%
0
0
σu|exp
6.806 8.809 6.806 8.809 6.807 8.810 6.807 8.810
σu|rec
11.911 8.809 11.911 8.809 11.912 8.810 11.912 8.810
σwu = Av. Cond. σwu
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 2. FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient
of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is
obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There
are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income
as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless
bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean,
return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for
descriptions). Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental
effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels
are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8
problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all
states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.203
0.975

1
0.220
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.252
0.370
0.479
0.503
0.955
0.905
0.835
0.796

1000
0.514
0.569

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.060
-0.124
-0.060
-0.124

-0.043
-0.124
-0.041
-0.116

State Dependent Mean
-0.346 -0.298 -0.183 -0.148
-0.133 -0.142 -0.139 -0.131
-0.359 -0.300 -0.183 -0.148
-0.129 -0.139 -0.137 -0.130

-0.040
-0.044
-0.041
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

-0.011
-0.008
-0.010
0.000

Covariance
-0.005 -0.008
-0.007 -0.006
-0.019 -0.009
-0.004 -0.003

with Return
-0.006 -0.005
-0.005 -0.005
-0.006 -0.005
-0.004 -0.004

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.647
-0.647
-0.712
-0.712

-0.631
-0.628
-0.712
-0.702

State Dependent Volatility
-0.566 -0.389 -0.213 -0.159
-0.568 -0.388 -0.212 -0.158
-0.353 -0.233 -0.169 -0.142
-0.338 -0.228 -0.167 -0.141

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

-0.192
—
—
—

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

∞

State Dependent Mean
-0.728 -0.439 -0.237 -0.185
—
-0.428 -0.248 -0.199
-0.728 -0.438 -0.238 -0.185
-0.856 -0.404 -0.248 -0.199

-0.040
-0.044
-0.041
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.042 -0.014
-0.034 -0.014
-0.028 -0.013
-0.035 -0.013

with Return
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.660 -0.283 -0.203
—
-0.659 -0.284 -0.202
-0.735 -0.359 -0.224 -0.182
-0.740 -0.360 -0.225 -0.183

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 3. LAST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient
of risk aversion of 6 for the last month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg ,
is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There
are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income
as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless
bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean,
return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for
descriptions). Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental
effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels
are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8
problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all
states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
1.000
0.987

1
0.806
0.807

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.417
0.371
0.358
0.355
0.418
0.371
0.358
0.355

1000
0.349
0.349

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
-0.012
-0.012
-0.012

-0.003
-0.004
-0.003
-0.004

Both
SDM
CWR
None

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.002
0.001
0.002
0.002

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

State Dependent Mean
-0.000 -0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.000
-0.000
0.000 -0.000
0.000
-0.000
0.000 -0.000 -0.000

1000

∞

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

with Return
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000

-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
0.000 -0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.000
-0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
0.001

0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

-0.007
-0.009
-0.007
-0.009

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
0.003

0.004
0.002
0.005
0.003

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

State Dependent Mean
-0.000 -0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.000
-0.000
0.000 -0.000
0.000
-0.000
0.000 -0.000 -0.000

1000

∞

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

with Return
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000
-0.000 -0.000

-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
0.000 -0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.000
-0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000
-0.001 -0.000

Table 4. FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of
risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg ,
is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. A
similar procedure is used to obtain the volatility of the logarithmic transitory income ², from its annual counterpart (fixed at 10% from Gakidis, 1997).
Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has
access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets
are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent
volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports average
stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on
one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels are present and the four rows of each
channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons
is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel C does the same using only
non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.203
0.975

1
0.218
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.252
0.369
0.480
0.503
0.954
0.905
0.834
0.796

1000
0.514
0.568

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.060
-0.124
-0.054
-0.124

-0.047
-0.124
-0.040
-0.116

State Dependent Mean
-0.345 -0.298 -0.182 -0.148
-0.133 -0.142 -0.139 -0.131
-0.359 -0.299 -0.182 -0.147
-0.129 -0.140 -0.137 -0.130

-0.040
-0.044
-0.041
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.005
0.000
0.000
0.000

-0.013
-0.008
-0.007
0.000

Covariance
-0.005 -0.008
-0.007 -0.006
-0.019 -0.009
-0.003 -0.003

with Return
-0.006 -0.005
-0.005 -0.005
-0.006 -0.005
-0.004 -0.004

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.647
-0.642
-0.712
-0.712

-0.633
-0.627
-0.710
-0.703

State Dependent Volatility
-0.567 -0.390 -0.213 -0.158
-0.568 -0.388 -0.212 -0.158
-0.354 -0.235 -0.169 -0.142
-0.338 -0.229 -0.167 -0.140

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

-0.223
—
-0.209
—

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

∞

State Dependent Mean
-0.733 -0.440 -0.237 -0.185
—
-0.427 -0.247 -0.198
-0.729 -0.439 -0.237 -0.185
-0.859 -0.406 -0.247 -0.198

-0.040
-0.044
-0.041
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.043 -0.014
-0.032 -0.014
-0.028 -0.013
-0.032 -0.013

with Return
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.663 -0.282 -0.202
—
-0.663 -0.283 -0.201
-0.730 -0.363 -0.223 -0.182
-0.737 -0.363 -0.224 -0.182

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 5.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. TRANSITORY SHOCKS. I.I.D. UNEMPLOYMENT STATE. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with
a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly
growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is
obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. A similar procedure
is used to obtain the volatility of the logarithmic transitory income ², from its annual counterpart (fixed at 10% from Gakidis, 1997). We allow for transitory
unemployment by introducing an i.i.d. unemployment shock: each month the agent receives 10% of her monthly permanent income with %0.5 probability, which
is consistent with findings in Carroll (1992). Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income
as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond.
Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and
state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports
average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on
one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels are present and the four rows of each channel’s
subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section
3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for
which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.222
0.937

1
0.215
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.248
0.361
0.468
0.493
0.950
0.900
0.826
0.787

1000
0.504
0.559

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.200
-0.114
-0.198
-0.109

-0.048
-0.124
-0.042
-0.119

State Dependent Mean
-0.326 -0.293 -0.181 -0.147
-0.138 -0.145 -0.141 -0.133
-0.340 -0.295 -0.181 -0.147
-0.133 -0.143 -0.140 -0.131

-0.040
-0.044
-0.040
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.009
-0.007
-0.008
-0.002

-0.013
-0.005
-0.007
0.000

Covariance
-0.005 -0.008
-0.008 -0.006
-0.020 -0.009
-0.003 -0.003

with Return
-0.006 -0.005
-0.005 -0.005
-0.006 -0.005
-0.004 -0.004

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.599
-0.596
-0.513
-0.507

-0.636
-0.628
-0.712
-0.705

State Dependent Volatility
-0.562 -0.391 -0.214 -0.158
-0.564 -0.389 -0.213 -0.158
-0.374 -0.243 -0.173 -0.143
-0.357 -0.237 -0.171 -0.142

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
-0.310
—
-0.310

—
—
—
—

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.110
-0.018
-0.021
-0.017

-0.223
—
-0.221
—

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
-0.311
-0.317

—
—
—
—

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

∞

State Dependent Mean
-0.730 -0.438 -0.236 -0.184
—
-0.426 -0.246 -0.198
-0.726 -0.437 -0.236 -0.184
-0.894 -0.424 -0.245 -0.197

-0.040
-0.044
-0.040
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.042 -0.014
-0.033 -0.014
-0.029 -0.013
-0.031 -0.013

with Return
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.660 -0.291 -0.201
—
-0.660 -0.291 -0.200
-0.722 -0.363 -0.222 -0.187
-0.722 -0.363 -0.223 -0.181

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 6.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. TRANSITORY SHOCKS. PERSISTENT UNEMPLOYMENT STATE. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA
agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The
mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent
income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. A
similar procedure is used to obtain the volatility of the logarithmic transitory income ², from its annual counterpart (fixed at 10% from Gakidis, 1997). We
allow for persistent unemployment by introducing time dependent transition probability matrices for the unemployment state. At the start of each year there
is %0.5 probability of being unemployed for the whole year and if so, for each month in that year agent receives 10% of her monthly permanent income. This
is consistent with findings in Carroll (1992). Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income
as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond.
Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and
state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports
average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on
one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels are present and the four rows of each channel’s
subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section
3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for
which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.172
0.698

1
0.233
0.859

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.253
0.371
0.477
0.501
0.883
0.875
0.815
0.789

1000
0.510
0.564

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.332
-0.073
-0.347
-0.069

-0.191
-0.093
-0.231
-0.086

State Dependent Mean
-0.286 -0.268 -0.167 -0.145
-0.120 -0.135 -0.135 -0.129
-0.299 -0.270 -0.168 -0.144
-0.116 -0.133 -0.134 -0.128

-0.040
-0.043
-0.040
-0.043

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.027
-0.004
-0.041
0.000

-0.013
-0.007
-0.053
-0.000

Covariance
-0.005 -0.008
-0.007 -0.005
-0.018 -0.009
-0.002 -0.003

with Return
-0.005 -0.005
-0.005 -0.005
-0.006 -0.005
-0.003 -0.004

-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.452
-0.429
-0.193
-0.152

-0.533
-0.528
-0.436
-0.383

State Dependent Volatility
-0.508 -0.366 -0.200 -0.155
-0.510 -0.363 -0.199 -0.155
-0.342 -0.233 -0.167 -0.140
-0.326 -0.227 -0.164 -0.139

-0.009
-0.009
-0.012
-0.012

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.251
-0.041
-0.185
-0.036

-0.040
-0.078
-0.040
-0.097

State Dependent Mean
-0.727 -0.436 -0.235 -0.183
-0.361 -0.439 -0.251 -0.197
-0.722 -0.439 -0.235 -0.183
-0.333 -0.434 -0.251 -0.197

-0.041
-0.044
-0.041
-0.044

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.111
-0.005
-0.056
0.000

-0.200
-0.012
-0.131
-0.000

Covariance
-0.043 -0.014
-0.029 -0.013
-0.029 -0.013
-0.008 -0.013

with Return
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006
-0.008 -0.006

-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.256
-0.189
-0.109
-0.073

-0.052
-0.053
-0.557
-0.506

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.658 -0.300 -0.200
—
-0.640 -0.301 -0.199
-0.569 -0.389 -0.222 -0.186
-0.541 -0.363 -0.222 -0.187

-0.009
-0.009
-0.013
-0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 7. FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. TOTAL PRIVATE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient
of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is
obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There
are no transitory shocks to income. Total Private Income (series CEU0500000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income
as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless
bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean,
return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for
descriptions). Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental
effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels
are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8
problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all
states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.263
0.975

1
0.263
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.290
0.482
0.557
0.565
0.954
0.905
0.834
0.796

1000
0.531
0.568

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

0.000
-0.035
0.000
-0.035

-0.020
-0.036
-0.007
-0.035

State Dependent Mean
-0.339 -0.201 -0.116 -0.094
-0.058 -0.074 -0.079 -0.077
-0.325 -0.201 -0.115 -0.094
-0.060 -0.075 -0.080 -0.078

-0.026
-0.028
-0.026
-0.028

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.013
0.001

Covariance with Return
0.004
0.009
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.004
0.004
0.018
0.008
0.006
0.005
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003

0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.677
-0.677
-0.712
-0.712

-0.677
-0.677
-0.693
-0.705

State Dependent Volatility
-0.609 -0.352 -0.202 -0.157
-0.607 -0.356 -0.203 -0.157
-0.328 -0.225 -0.166 -0.140
-0.343 -0.230 -0.168 -0.141

-0.010
-0.010
-0.012
-0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.463 -0.287 -0.150 -0.117
-0.474 -0.250 -0.149 -0.120
-0.477 -0.287 -0.149 -0.117
-0.471 -0.251 -0.154 -0.121

-0.026
-0.028
-0.026
-0.028

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
0.199
—

Covariance with Return
0.048
0.012
0.007
0.005
0.029
0.012
0.008
0.006
0.026
0.012
0.007
0.006
0.033
0.011
0.007
0.006

0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.525 -0.266 -0.197
—
-0.525 -0.265 -0.196
-0.654 -0.362 -0.217 -0.170
-0.736 -0.362 -0.225 -0.183

-0.010
-0.010
-0.012
-0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 8.

FIRST MONTH STATE-BY-STATE ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED
PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports state by state asset allocation
results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income
ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic
monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed
dynamics of permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor
Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE,
AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote,
respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can
affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports state by state stock holdings when all three channels are present (labelled ”All
Effects”), and when none are present (labelled ”No Effects”). Panel B,(C,D) reports incremental reductions in fraction of stock holdings state by state
when SDM (CWR,SDV) is switched on. The left hand columns report reductions when no other effect is present, while the right-hand columns when
both other effects are present. The last 4 rows of panels B,C and D report averages taken over all or only non-binding states of the recession states
(the highest 7 dividend yield states) and the expansion states (the lowest 12). Values for which both cases needed for comparison are strictly between
0 and 1 are italicized.

Table 8 cont.
Panel A: Allocations

d/p state
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

1

10

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.284
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.101
0.709
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

30

70

All Effects
0.000 0.000
0.000 0.000
0.000 0.004
0.000 0.064
0.000 0.131
0.000 0.200
0.054 0.267
0.116 0.328
0.184 0.384
0.238 0.435
0.277 0.485
0.361 0.550
0.533 0.657
0.791 0.793
1.000 0.930
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000

Wealth/Income Ratio
100 1000
1
10
0.000
0.000
0.054
0.119
0.185
0.249
0.310
0.368
0.424
0.475
0.525
0.585
0.669
0.775
0.885
0.987
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.024
0.106
0.177
0.239
0.295
0.348
0.396
0.443
0.488
0.531
0.573
0.614
0.654
0.694
0.733
0.769
0.803
0.843
0.924

0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.059
0.518
0.878
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

30

70

No Effects
0.057 0.057
0.294 0.223
0.502 0.362
0.676 0.487
0.828 0.599
0.969 0.700
1.000 0.794
1.000 0.882
1.000 0.965
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000
1.000 1.000

100

1000

0.056
0.205
0.327
0.433
0.528
0.618
0.702
0.781
0.857
0.929
0.998
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.048
0.143
0.222
0.289
0.349
0.404
0.455
0.503
0.549
0.593
0.636
0.676
0.716
0.753
0.788
0.820
0.848
0.884
0.959

100

1000

Panel B: Incremental Effects: State Dependent Mean (SDM)
1

10

30

70

Wealth/Income Ratio
100 1000
1
10

d/p state
All Effects vs All but SDM
1
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.011 -0.019
2
0.000 0.000 -0.099 -0.118 -0.128 -0.032
3
0.000 -0.113 -0.211 -0.220 -0.170 -0.039
4
0.000 -0.254 -0.307 -0.251 -0.188 -0.043
5
0.000 -0.386 -0.401 -0.264 -0.198 -0.045
6
0.000 -0.444 -0.485 -0.266 -0.202 -0.046
7
0.000 -0.479 -0.502 -0.264 -0.202 -0.046
8
0.000 -0.492 -0.497 -0.260 -0.200 -0.046
9
0.000 -0.522 -0.471 -0.254 -0.195 -0.046
10
0.000 -0.548 -0.441 -0.243 -0.189 -0.046
11
0.000 -0.564 -0.420 -0.231 -0.183 -0.044
12
0.000 -0.572 -0.385 -0.218 -0.174 -0.043
13
0.000 -0.728 -0.358 -0.195 -0.163 -0.041
14
-0.716 -0.291 -0.209 -0.179 -0.152 -0.040
15
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.070 -0.115 -0.038
16
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.034
17
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.031
18
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.026
19
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.020
expansion
0.000 -0.418 -0.391 -0.232 -0.181 -0.043
expansion-non binding —
— -0.275 -0.225 -0.174 -0.043
recession
-0.131 -0.196 -0.108 -0.083 -0.081 -0.035
recession-non binding — -0.143 -0.070 -0.071 -0.060 -0.035

30

70

SDM vs No Effects
0.000 -0.059 -0.057 -0.057 -0.056 -0.020
-1.000 -0.518 -0.272 -0.167 -0.133 -0.033
-1.000 -0.856 -0.372 -0.209 -0.165 -0.040
-0.823 -0.721 -0.428 -0.239 -0.184 -0.044
0.000 -0.487 -0.445 -0.258 -0.197 -0.047
0.000 -0.225 -0.447 -0.265 -0.205 -0.049
0.000 0.000 -0.341 -0.267 -0.210 -0.049
0.000 0.000 -0.209 -0.265 -0.213 -0.049
0.000 0.000 -0.083 -0.261 -0.212 -0.050
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.210 -0.210 -0.049
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.128 -0.207 -0.049
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.046 -0.137 -0.048
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.065 -0.047
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.044
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.043
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.039
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.035
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.030
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.024
-0.172 -0.192 -0.207 -0.204 -0.187 -0.046
— -0.053 -0.143 -0.162 -0.171 -0.046
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.040
—
—
—
—
— -0.040

Table 8 cont.
Panel C: Incremental Effects: Return Covariance (CWR)
1

10

30

70

Wealth/Income Ratio
100 1000
1
10

d/p state
All Effects vs All Effects but CWR
1
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
2
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
3
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.007 -0.005 -0.001
4
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
5
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
6
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
7
0.000 0.000 -0.016 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
8
0.000 0.000 -0.014 -0.007 -0.006 -0.001
9
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
10
0.000 0.000 -0.012 -0.007 -0.006 -0.001
11
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.007 -0.006 -0.001
12
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.007 -0.006 -0.001
13
0.000 -0.039 -0.018 -0.010 -0.008 -0.002
14
-0.192 -0.044 -0.016 -0.009 -0.008 -0.002
15
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.009 -0.008 -0.002
16
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.007 -0.002
17
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
18
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
19
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
expansion
0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.007 -0.005 -0.001
expansion- non binding —
— -0.008 -0.007 -0.005 -0.001
recession
-0.035 -0.016 -0.006 -0.005 -0.005 -0.002
recession- non binding -0.035 -0.016 -0.006 -0.005 -0.005 -0.002

30

70

100

1000

CWR vs No Effects
0.000 -0.041 -0.013 -0.007 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 -0.038 -0.014 -0.008 -0.006 -0.002
0.000 -0.030 -0.014 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.009 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.008 -0.007 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.008 -0.006 -0.002
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
0.000 -0.005 -0.005 -0.005 -0.006 -0.001
— -0.005 -0.005 -0.005 -0.006 -0.001
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001
—
—
—
—
— -0.001

Panel D: Incremental Effects: State Dependent Volatility (SDV)
1
d/p state
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
expansion
expansion-non binding
recession
recession-non binding

10

30

70

Wealth/Income Ratio
100 1000
1
10

All Effects vs All Effects but SDV
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.002
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.049 -0.066 -0.003
0.000 0.000 -0.117 -0.140 -0.101 -0.004
0.000 -0.239 -0.234 -0.175 -0.123 -0.004
-1.000 -0.480 -0.368 -0.202 -0.140 -0.005
-1.000 -0.746 -0.508 -0.226 -0.158 -0.006
-1.000 -0.986 -0.592 -0.252 -0.175 -0.008
-1.000 -1.000 -0.662 -0.281 -0.194 -0.008
-1.000 -1.000 -0.720 -0.312 -0.214 -0.010
-1.000 -1.000 -0.762 -0.346 -0.237 -0.011
-1.000 -1.000 -0.723 -0.380 -0.260 -0.013
-1.000 -1.000 -0.639 -0.396 -0.272 -0.013
-1.000 -0.899 -0.467 -0.343 -0.259 -0.013
-0.716 -0.291 -0.209 -0.207 -0.224 -0.013
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.070 -0.115 -0.011
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013 -0.010
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.009
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.009
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.010
-0.778 -0.729 -0.516 -0.260 -0.181 -0.008
—
— -0.198 -0.258 -0.178 -0.008
-0.327 -0.229 -0.130 -0.116 -0.112 -0.011
—
—
—
— -0.092 -0.011

30

70

100

1000

SDV vs No Effects
0.000 -0.059 -0.057 -0.057 -0.041 -0.003
-1.000 -0.518 -0.181 -0.096 -0.073 -0.004
-1.000 -0.740 -0.280 -0.130 -0.098 -0.005
-1.000 -0.720 -0.356 -0.164 -0.120 -0.006
-1.000 -0.589 -0.414 -0.197 -0.140 -0.008
-1.000 -0.531 -0.472 -0.226 -0.162 -0.009
-1.000 -0.495 -0.431 -0.255 -0.183 -0.011
-1.000 -0.485 -0.375 -0.286 -0.207 -0.012
-1.000 -0.453 -0.333 -0.320 -0.231 -0.014
-1.000 -0.419 -0.309 -0.314 -0.259 -0.015
-1.000 -0.410 -0.291 -0.277 -0.285 -0.017
-1.000 -0.398 -0.241 -0.225 -0.235 -0.018
-0.849 -0.131 -0.091 -0.137 -0.159 -0.018
0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.018 -0.066 -0.016
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.015
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.014
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.013
-0.963 -0.490 -0.330 -0.233 -0.188 -0.011
— -0.046 -0.127 -0.147 -0.164 -0.011
-0.167 -0.026 -0.018 -0.030 -0.043 -0.015
—
—
—
—
— -0.015

Table 9.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. RULE-OF-THUMB PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean monthly
growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). Volatility of logarithmic monthly growth in permanent income σg is set to
√
1/ 12 of its annual counterpart of 15% from Gakidis (1997). There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004
by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted
return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM,
CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent
labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of
the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels
can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental
stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B
reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions
of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.263
0.975

1
0.263
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.306
0.442
0.528
0.539
0.953
0.908
0.835
0.794

1000
0.517
0.540

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.655
-0.124
-0.655
-0.124

-0.639
-0.145
-0.655
-0.130

State Dependent Mean
-0.552 -0.341 -0.210 -0.185
-0.151 -0.155 -0.141 -0.136
-0.560 -0.340 -0.190 -0.152
-0.144 -0.148 -0.125 -0.106

-0.044
-0.042
-0.016
-0.014

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
-0.000
-0.016
0.000

0.000
-0.016
-0.016
0.000

Covariance with Return
-0.006 -0.010 -0.007 -0.006
-0.008 -0.007 -0.005 -0.006
-0.013 -0.008
0.014
0.027
-0.001
0.000
0.010
0.024

-0.001
-0.001
0.026
0.026

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.606
-0.606
-0.076
-0.027

-0.567
-0.582
-0.073
-0.057

State Dependent Volatility
-0.496 -0.312 -0.177 -0.143
-0.498 -0.309 -0.176 -0.142
-0.095 -0.126 -0.108 -0.094
-0.082 -0.117 -0.111 -0.097

-0.008
-0.007
-0.006
-0.006

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.566 -0.293 -0.246
-0.491 -0.273 -0.226
-0.559 -0.262 -0.199
-0.471 -0.241 -0.169

-0.044
-0.042
-0.016
-0.014

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
-0.228
-0.390
—

Covariance with Return
-0.042 -0.016 -0.009 -0.008
-0.037 -0.016 -0.009 -0.008
-0.049 -0.014
0.020
0.037
0.001 -0.003
0.022
0.044

-0.001
-0.001
0.026
0.026

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.557 -0.257 -0.190
—
-0.557 -0.237 -0.191
-0.558 -0.275 -0.173 -0.130
-0.486 -0.273 -0.161 -0.134

-0.008
-0.007
-0.006
-0.006

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

∞

Table 10.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. LUMP SUM
RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The
table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 78 year horizon, for a range of wealth
to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her
retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100,
with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income is allowed
to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002). The volatility of
the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the
assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor
Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX,
and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the
state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see
section 2.1 for descriptions).Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental
effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels are present
and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. he calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the
comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states, Panel C does the same using
only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.203
0.975

1
0.203
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.219
0.248
0.334
0.388
0.961
0.929
0.883
0.862

1000
0.517
0.684

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.060
-0.178
-0.060
-0.166

-0.060
-0.178
-0.060
-0.161

State Dependent Mean
-0.060 -0.247 -0.273 -0.249
-0.170 -0.170 -0.159 -0.153
-0.060 -0.256 -0.274 -0.249
-0.165 -0.167 -0.156 -0.150

-0.094
-0.091
-0.094
-0.090

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
-0.012
0.000
0.000

0.000
-0.017
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.003 -0.004
-0.006 -0.006
-0.003 -0.013
-0.002 -0.003

with Return
-0.006 -0.006
-0.006 -0.005
-0.007 -0.007
-0.003 -0.003

-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
-0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.593
-0.605
-0.712
-0.712

-0.593
-0.611
-0.712
-0.712

State Dependent Volatility
-0.571 -0.508 -0.387 -0.319
-0.575 -0.510 -0.386 -0.318
-0.681 -0.431 -0.273 -0.222
-0.679 -0.422 -0.269 -0.219

-0.074
-0.074
-0.071
-0.070

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.465 -0.381 -0.336
-0.628 -0.389 -0.317
-0.468 -0.391 -0.335
-0.631 -0.385 -0.314

-0.102
-0.100
-0.101
-0.100

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

with Return
-0.012 -0.010
-0.012 -0.009
-0.010 -0.009
-0.010 -0.007

-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
-0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
—
-0.663 -0.482
—
—
-0.663 -0.482
—
-0.644 -0.387 -0.308
—
-0.649 -0.387 -0.307

-0.080
-0.080
-0.078
-0.077

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.046 -0.022
-0.057 -0.019
-0.053 -0.018
-0.039 -0.021

∞

Table 11.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. LUMP SUM RETIREMENT
MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports asset
allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 78 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income
ratios from 0 to ∞. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent
income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100, with death probabilities
taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997).
The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)),
accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004
by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return
on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV
denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can
affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions).Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C
reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the
other channels are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. he calibration of the
8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states,
Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.203
0.975

1
0.203
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.239
0.306
0.432
0.471
0.964
0.923
0.875
0.844

1000
0.544
0.674

∞
0.476
0.476

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
0

1

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.060
-0.124
-0.060
-0.124

-0.060
-0.124
-0.060
-0.124

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.647
-0.647
-0.712
-0.712

-0.647
-0.647
-0.712
-0.712

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

∞

State Dependent Mean
-0.285 -0.340 -0.232 -0.214
-0.145 -0.150 -0.156 -0.137
-0.306 -0.344 -0.235 -0.214
-0.142 -0.147 -0.152 -0.134

-0.079
-0.086
-0.078
-0.085

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.003 -0.007
-0.006 -0.007
-0.023 -0.011
-0.004 -0.003

with Return
-0.006 -0.006
-0.007 -0.005
-0.009 -0.006
-0.003 -0.003

-0.003
-0.003
-0.002
-0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

State Dependent Volatility
-0.577 -0.463 -0.284 -0.233
-0.580 -0.462 -0.284 -0.233
-0.436 -0.273 -0.208 -0.156
-0.416 -0.265 -0.202 -0.153

-0.042
-0.041
-0.049
-0.049

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.523 -0.311 -0.278
-0.531 -0.331 -0.253
-0.534 -0.321 -0.278
-0.528 -0.324 -0.251

-0.081
-0.091
-0.080
-0.091

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

with Return
-0.009 -0.008
-0.012 -0.008
-0.012 -0.007
-0.007 -0.006

-0.004
-0.003
-0.002
-0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
-0.937 -0.410 -0.319
—
-0.894 -0.413 -0.320
—
-0.437 -0.304 -0.206
—
-0.436 -0.278 -0.205

-0.043
-0.042
-0.052
-0.052

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.046 -0.018
-0.037 -0.017
-0.035 -0.015
-0.053 -0.016

∞

Table 12.

FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. NO RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The table reports
asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 78 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent
income ratios from 0 to ∞. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, and receives no labor income until death. The agent dies with probability 1
at age 100, with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent
income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002).
The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)),
accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004
by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return
on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV
denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can
affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions).Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C
reports the incremental effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the
other channels are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. he calibration of the
8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all states,
Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.203
0.975

1
0.203
0.975

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.219
0.246
0.331
0.384
0.962
0.935
0.893
0.872

1000
0.537
0.702

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.060
-0.178
-0.060
-0.161

-0.060
-0.178
-0.060
-0.159

State Dependent Mean
-0.058 -0.249 -0.275 -0.232
-0.166 -0.176 -0.165 -0.171
-0.062 -0.259 -0.278 -0.233
-0.162 -0.172 -0.161 -0.169

-0.093
-0.101
-0.093
-0.100

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

0.000
-0.018
0.000
0.000

0.000
-0.019
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.003 -0.004
-0.006 -0.007
-0.006 -0.014
-0.002 -0.003

with Return
-0.007 -0.007
-0.007 -0.006
-0.011 -0.008
-0.003 -0.004

-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
-0.002

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.593
-0.611
-0.712
-0.712

-0.594
-0.612
-0.712
-0.712

State Dependent Volatility
-0.576 -0.510 -0.394 -0.314
-0.579 -0.513 -0.393 -0.313
-0.683 -0.436 -0.283 -0.252
-0.679 -0.426 -0.276 -0.248

-0.062
-0.062
-0.069
-0.069

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
0

1

10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

1000

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.562 -0.386 -0.313
-0.696 -0.417 -0.350
-0.566 -0.387 -0.317
-0.696 -0.405 -0.350

-0.099
-0.113
-0.099
-0.112

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

—
-0.344
—
—

with Return
-0.013 -0.010
-0.015 -0.010
-0.014 -0.010
-0.010 -0.010

-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
-0.003

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
—
-0.642 -0.469
—
—
-0.645 -0.452
—
-0.669 -0.400 -0.353
—
-0.670 -0.362 -0.353

-0.066
-0.066
-0.077
-0.077

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Covariance
-0.043 -0.028
-0.049 -0.023
-0.092 -0.020
-0.044 -0.022

∞

Table 13. FIRST MONTH ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME
VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. PROPRIETARY INCOME DATA. The table reports asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a
coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to ∞. The mean
monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent
income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 25% from Heaton and Lucas (2000)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent
income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Proprietary Income (Non farm Proprietor’s income in NIPA table 2.6) is also used to calibrate
labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and
to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent
mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section
2.1 for descriptions). Panel A reports average stock holdings when all three and none of the channels are present. Panel B and C reports the incremental
effects on stock holdings of switching on one of the channels. Each of these channels can be switched on when both, one, or none of the other channels
are present and the four rows of each channel’s subpanel report the incremental stock-holding reductions for these 4 cases. The calibration of the 8
problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text. Panel B reports average reductions in fractions of stock holdings using all
states, Panel C does the same using only non binding states, states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases are strictly between 0 and 1.

Panel A: Allocations Averaged Across All States

All
None

0
0.025
0.874

1
0.030
0.864

Wealth/Income Ratio
10
30
70
100
0.085
0.138
0.147
0.202
0.861
0.768
0.669
0.631

1000
0.455
0.540

∞
0.464
0.464

Panel B: Incremental Effects Averaged Across All States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

-0.035
-0.114
-0.014
-0.057

-0.028
-0.114
-0.014
-0.055

State Dependent Mean
-0.018 -0.069 -0.196 -0.180
-0.070 -0.231 -0.239 -0.209
-0.018 -0.076 -0.205 -0.186
-0.047 -0.199 -0.230 -0.209

-0.065
-0.068
-0.065
-0.068

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

-0.021
-0.080
0.000
-0.023

-0.016
-0.072
-0.002
-0.013

Covariance
-0.009 -0.008
-0.016 -0.044
-0.009 -0.014
0.007 -0.013

with Return
-0.009 -0.011
-0.035 -0.014
-0.017 -0.017
-0.026 -0.013

-0.005
-0.005
-0.005
-0.005

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

-0.712
-0.771
-0.791
-0.815

-0.707
-0.763
-0.793
-0.804

State Dependent Volatility
-0.712 -0.387 -0.256 -0.206
-0.720 -0.424 -0.283 -0.209
-0.764 -0.548 -0.299 -0.235
-0.749 -0.547 -0.308 -0.232

-0.013
-0.013
-0.016
-0.016

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Panel C: Incremental Effects Averaged Across Non Binding States
10

Wealth/Income Ratio
30
70
100

0

1

1000

∞

Both
CWR
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

-0.802
—
—
—

State Dependent Mean
-0.205 -0.339 -0.288 -0.232
-0.282 -0.414 -0.329 -0.261
-0.205 -0.340 -0.287 -0.234
-0.067 -0.411 -0.329 -0.260

-0.066
-0.069
-0.066
-0.069

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
SDV
None

—
—
—
—

-0.468
—
—
—

Covariance
-0.098 -0.047
-0.084 -0.038
-0.097 -0.054
0.129 -0.037

with Return
-0.025 -0.017
-0.022 -0.019
-0.021 -0.019
-0.022 -0.019

-0.005
-0.005
-0.005
-0.005

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Both
SDM
CWR
None

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—

State Dependent Volatility
—
—
-0.430 -0.282
—
—
-0.454 -0.284
—
—
-0.342 -0.252
—
—
-0.324 -0.252

-0.013
-0.013
-0.016
-0.016

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Marginal SDM: Cross Sectional
0

0.9

−0.1

0.8

−0.2

0.7

−0.3
Fraction in Stock

Fraction in Stock

Cross Section of Fraction in Stock
1

0.6
0.5
0.4

−0.5
−0.6
−0.7

0.3
0.2

−0.8

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effect

0.1
0
0

−0.4

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

All vs All but SDM
All vs All but SDM nb
SDM vs No Effect
SDM vs No Effect nb

−0.9
−1
0

500

50

100

Marginal CWR: Cross Sectional

350

400

450

500

Marginal SDV: Cross Sectional

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

−0.3

−0.3
Fraction in Stock

Fraction in Stock

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

1.b Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: SDM

1.a Cross-sectional Fraction in Stock

−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7

−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7

−0.8

−0.8
All vs All but CWR
All vs All but CWR nb
CWR vs No Effect
CWR vs No Effect nb

−0.9
−1
0

150

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

1.c Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: CWR

All vs All but SDV
All vs All but SDV nb
SDV vs No Effect
SDV vs No Effect nb

−0.9

500

−1
0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

500

1.d Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: SDV

FIGURE 1. FIRST MONTH CROSS-SECTIONAL ALLOCATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports cross-sectional asset allocation results for a CRRA
agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from 0 to 500. The mean
monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income
σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There are
no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described
in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of
these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent
volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Subfigure 1.a reports average stock
holdings for the combinations of channels indicated in the legend. Subfigures b, c and d report the reductions in stock holdings induced by SDM, CWR and SDV
channels, respectively. This can be done either by switching on the channel in question when no other effect is present (i.e. SDM, CWR or SDV vs. No Effect)
or switching off the channel when all other effects are present (i.e. All vs. All but SDM, CWR or SDV). nb indicates that only states for which fractions of
stock holdings for both cases needed for the comparison are strictly between 0 and 1. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed
in section 3 of the text.

Wealth/Income = 1
1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No effect

0.6

0.7
Fraction in Stock

0.7
Fraction in Stock

Initial Wealth/Income = 1

1

0.5
0.4

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0
0

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

16

18

0
0

20

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effects
2

2.a Time Series Fraction in Stock

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

16

18

20

16

18

20

2.b Simulation Fraction in Stock

Initial Wealth/Income = 1

Initial Wealth/Income = 1

30

1

28
0.9
Probability of Non−participation

26
24
22

Wealth/Income

20
18
16
14
12

0.8
0.7
All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effets

0.6
0.5
0.4

10
0.3

8
0.2

6
4

0
0

0.1

All Effects
No Effect

2
2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

16

2.c Simulation Wealth/Income Stock

18

20

0
0

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

2.d Simulation Probability of Non-participation

FIGURE 2. TIME SERIES ALLOCATION RESULTS WHEN WEALTH/INCOME IS 1. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED
PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports times series results for a CRRA agent with
a coefficient of risk aversion of 6. Subfigure 2.a always fixes the wealth to permanent income ratio at 1 for her entire lifetime. Subfigures b,c and d fix the initial
wealth to permanent income ratio at 1. 500000 paths are simulated for each case in consideration, and average allocations, wealth income ratios and fraction of
non-participating paths are recorded at each age is recorded. Subfigures b,c,d report average allocations, wealth income ratios and fraction of non participating
paths respectively. Each subfigure reports quantities for the combinations of the channels in its legend. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is
set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart
(fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade
Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market
portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section
3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which
permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is
detailed in section 3 of the text.

Initial Wealth/Income = 100
1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7
Fraction in Stock

Fraction in Stock

Wealth/Income = 100
1

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.5
0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No effect

0.1
0
0

0.6

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

16

18

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effect

0.1
0
0

20

2

3.a Time Series Fraction in Stock

4

6

18

20

18

20

Initial Wealth/Income = 100

Initial Wealth/Income = 100

1

100

0.9

90

0.8

80

Probability of Non−participation

Probability of Non−participation

16

3.b Simulation Fraction in Stock

110

70
60
50
40
30

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

20
All Effects
No Effect

10
0
0

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

All Effects
No Effect

0.1

16

3.c Simulation Wealth/Income Stock

18

20

0
0

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
Years After Start of Horizon

16

3.d Simulation Probability of Non-participation

FIGURE 3. TIME SERIES ALLOCATION RESULTS WHEN WEALTH/INCOME IS 100. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATIONBASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports times series asset allocation results
for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6. Subfigure 3.a always fixes the wealth to permanent income ratio at 100 for her entire lifetime. Subfigures
b,c and d fix the initial wealth to permanent income ratio at 100. 500000 paths are simulated for each case in consideration, and average allocations, wealth
income ratios and fraction of non-participating paths are recorded at each age is recorded. Subfigures b,c,d report average allocations, wealth income ratios and
fraction of non participating paths respectively. Each subfigure reports quantities for the combinations of the channels in its legend. The mean monthly growth
rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained
from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent income growth. There are no transitory
shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1.
Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets
are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility
channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). The calibration of the 8 problems needed to
do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

Cross Sectional Probability of Non Participation
1

Probability of Non−participation

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
ALL ON
SDMean ON
All but CorWR
SDVol ON
ALL OFF

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

500

Cross-sectional Non-participation Probabilities
FIGURE 4. FIRST MONTH CROSS-SECTIONAL NON-PARTICIPATION RESULTS. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. SPECIFICATION-BASED
PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports cross-sectional Non-participation probabilities for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her 20 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios from
0 to 500. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a. based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth
rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of permanent
income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate
labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a
riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return
covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions).
Figure reports average non-participation probabilities for the combinations of channels indicated in the legend. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do
the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

Marginal SDM: Cross Sectional
0

0.9

−0.1

0.8

−0.2

0.7

−0.3
Fraction in Stock

Average Fraction in Stock

Cross Section of Young
1

0.6
0.5
0.4
All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effect

0.3
0.2

−0.5
−0.6
−0.7
−0.8
All v.s. All but SDM
All v.s. All but SDM nb
SDM v.s. No Effect
SDM v.s. No Effect nb

−0.9

0.1
0
0

−0.4

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

−1
0

500

50

100

Marginal CWR: Cross Sectional

350

400

450

500

Marginal SDV: Cross Sectional

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

−0.3

−0.3
Fraction in Stock

Fraction in Stock

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

5.b Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: SDM

5.a Cross-sectional Fraction in Stock

−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7

−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7

All v.s. All but CWR
All v.s. All but CWR nb
CWR v.s. No Effect
CWR v.s. No Effect nb

−0.8

−0.8

−0.9
−1
0

150

All v.s. All but SDV
All v.s. All but SDV nb
SDV v.s No Effect
SDV v.s. No Effect nb

−0.9

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

5.c Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: CWR

500

−1
0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

500

5.d Cross-sectional Impact on Fraction in Stock: SDV

FIGURE 5. FIRST MONTH CROSS-SECTIONAL ALLOCATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME GROWTH
PROFILE. LUMP SUM RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL
TRADE DATA. The figure reports cross sectional asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first month of her
78 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios of 0 to 500. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout
equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent
dies with probability 1 at age 100, with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic monthly growth
rate of permanent income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes
and Maenhout (2002). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15%
from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income
(series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio
(value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text.
SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor
income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Subfigure 5.a reports average stock holdings for the combinations of channels indicated
in the legend. Subfigures b, c and d report the reductions in stock holdings induced by SDM, CWR and SDV channels, respectively. This can be done either by
switching on the channel in question when no other effect is present (i.e. SDM, CWR or SDV vs. No Effect) or switching off the channel when all other effects
are present (i.e. All vs. All but SDM, CWR or SDV). nb indicates that only states for which fractions of stock holdings for both cases needed for the comparison
are strictly between 0 and 1. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

Initial Wealth/Income = 0
1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7
Fraction in Stock

Fraction in Stock

Wealth/Income = 0
1

0.6
0.5
0.4
All Effects
SDM
CWR
SDV
No Effect
Retirement

0.3
0.2

0.5
0.4
0.3
All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effects
Retirement

0.2

0.1
0
22

0.6

0.1

27

32

37

42

47

52

57 62 67
Investor Age

72

77

82

87

92

0
22

97100

27

32

6.a Time Series Fraction in Stock

37

42

270

0.9

240

0.8

210

0.7
Fraction in Stock

Wealth/Income

1

180
150
120

0.2

30

All Effects
No Effect
47 52 57 62 67 72
Years After Start of Horizon

97100

77

82

6.c Simulation Wealth/Income Stock

87

92

97100

All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV

0.4

60

42

92

0.5

0.3

37

87

0.6

90

32

82

Initial Wealth/Income = 0

Initial Wealth/Income = 0

27

77

6.b Simulation Fraction in Stock

300

0
22

47 52 57 62 67 72
Years After Start of Horizon

0.1
0
22

27

32

37

42

47 52 57 62 67 72
Years After Start of Horizon

77

82

87

92

97100

6.d Simulation Probability of Non-participation

FIGURE 6. TIME SERIES AND SIMULATION ALLOCATION AND NON-PARTICIPATION RESULTS WHEN WEALTH/INCOME IS 0. LIFE CYCLE
SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. LUMP SUM RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports times series results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk
aversion of 6. Subfigure 6.a always fixes the wealth to permanent income ratio at 0 for her entire lifetime. Subfigures b,c and d fix the initial wealth to permanent
income ratio at 0. 500000 paths are simulated for each case in consideration, and average allocations, wealth income ratios and fraction of non-participating paths
are recorded at each age is recorded. Subfigures b,c,d report average allocations, wealth income ratios and fraction of non participating paths respectively. Each
subfigure reports quantities for the combinations of the channels in its legend. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a lump sum payout
equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent
dies with probability 1 at age 100, with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic monthly growth
rate of permanent income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes
and Maenhout (2002). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15%
from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income
(series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio
(value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text.
SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor
income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section
3 of the text.

Cross Sectional Probability of Non Participation
1

Probability of Non−participation

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
ALL ON
SDMean ON
All but CorWR
SDVol ON
ALL OFF

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Investor Wealth/Income

350

400

450

500

Cross-sectional Non-participation Probabilities
FIGURE 7. FIRST MONTH CROSS-SECTIONAL NON-PARTICIPATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME
GROWTH PROFILE. LUMP SUM RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS.
RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports cross sectional non-participation probabilities for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 for the first
month of her 78 year horizon, for a range of wealth to permanent income ratios of 0 to 500. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65, receiving a
lump sum payout equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college
graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100, with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean
logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college
graduates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual
counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income.
Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to
the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in
section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through
which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Figure reports average non-participation probabilities for the
combinations of channels indicated in the legend. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

Initial Wealth/Income = 0
1
Scaled Earnings Profile
All Effects
SDM
All but CWR
SDV
No Effect
Retirement

0.9
0.8

Fraction in Stock

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
22

27

32

37

42

47 52 57 62 67 72
Years After Start of Horizon

77

82

87

92

97100

No Earnings Hump
FIGURE 8. SIMULATION ASSET ALLOCATION RESULTS. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. FLAT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. LUMP SUM
RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The
figure reports simulation asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 and always fixing the initial wealth to permanent
income ratio at 0. 500000 paths are simulated for each case in consideration, and average allocations at each age is recorded.Initial dividend yield states are
drawn form their unconditional distribution. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65,receiving a lump sum payout equivalent to receiving 93.8% of her
retirement permanent income until death as reported in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002) for college graduates. The agent dies with probability 1 at age 100,
with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean monthly growth rate of permanent income is set to 3% p.a.
based on Gakidis (1997). The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15%
from Gakidis (1997)), accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income
(series CEU4200000004 by Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio
(value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text.
SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor
income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Each subfigure reports average stock holding paths for the combinations of channels
indicated in its legend. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

Initial Wealth/Income = 0
1
ALL ON
SDMean On
All but CorWR
SDVol ON
ALL OFF
Retirement

0.9
0.8

Fraction in Stock

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
22

27

32

37

42

47 52 57 62 67 72
Years After Start of Horizon

77

82

87

92

97100

No Retirement Money
FIGURE 9. SIMULATION ASSET ALLOCATION. LIFE CYCLE SPECIFICATION. AGE-DEPENDENT INCOME GROWTH PROFILE. NO RETIREMENT MONEY. SPECIFICATION-BASED PERMANENT INCOME VOLATILITY. NO TRANSITORY SHOCKS. RETAIL TRADE DATA. The figure reports
simulation asset allocation results for a CRRA agent with a coefficient of risk aversion of 6 and always fixing the initial wealth to permanent income ratio at
0. 500000 paths are simulated for each case in consideration, and average allocations at each age is recorded.Initial dividend yield states are drawn form their
unconditional distribution. The agent starts work at age 22 and retires at 65. The agent receives no lump sum on retirement. The agent dies with probability
1 at age 100, with death probabilities taken from the U.S. Life Tables, 2001, provided by the NCHS. The mean logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent
income is allowed to be age-dependent and is calibrated to the polynomial-smoothed income profile for college graduates in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2002).
The volatility of the logarithmic monthly growth rate of permanent income σg , is obtained from its annual counterpart (fixed at 15% from Gakidis (1997)),
accounting for the assumed dynamics of the permanent income growth. There are no transitory shocks to income. Retail Trade Income (series CEU4200000004 by
Bureau of Labor Statistics) is also used to calibrate labor income as described in Table 1. Agent has access to the market portfolio (value-weighted return on all
NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks) and to a riskless bond. Calibrations of these assets are as described in section 3 of the text. SDM, CWR and SDV denote,
respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock
holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). SDM, CWR and SDV denote, respectively, the state-dependent mean, return covariance and state-dependent volatility
channels through which permanent labor income growth can affect stock holdings (see section 2.1 for descriptions). Each subfigure reports average stock holding
paths for the combinations of channels indicated in its legend. The calibration of the 8 problems needed to do the comparisons is detailed in section 3 of the text.

