                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MIMICKING PORTFOLIOS WITH CONDITIONING INFORMATION

                                           Wayne E. Ferson
                                           Andrew F. Siegel
                                           Pisun (Tracy) Xu

                                         Working Paper 11020
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11020


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




Ferson is the Collins Chair in Finance, Carroll School of Management, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA.
and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill,
MA. 02467. http://www2.bc.edu/~ferson, phone: (617) 552-6431, fax: (617) 552-0431, email
wayne.ferson@bc.edu. Siegel is the Grant I. Butterbaugh Professor of Finance and Management Science and
Adjunct Professor of Statistics at the University of Washington, Box 353200, Seattle, WA. 98195. Phone
(206) 543-4773, email asiegel@u.washington.edu. Pisun (Tracy) Xu is a doctoral student at the University
of Washington Business School, Box 353200, Seattle, WA. 98195-3200, email psxu@u.washington.edu. We
are grateful to Ken French and Owen Lamont for making data available and to Cesare Robotti, Sergei
Sarkissian and participants at the 2004 European Finance Association meetings and the 2004 Conference on
Financial Economics and Accounting for helpful discussions. The comments of the Editor, Stephen Brown,
and of an anonymous referee were especially productive. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Wayne E. Ferson, Andrew F. Siegel, and Pisun (Tracy) Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Mimicking Portfolios with Conditioning Information
Wayne E. Ferson, Andrew F. Siegel, and Pisun (Tracy) Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 11020
January 2005
JEL No. G1, G10, G11, G12, G14

                                           ABSTRACT

Mimicking portfolios have long been useful in asset pricing research. In most empirical applications,

the portfolio weights are assumed to be fixed over time, while in theory they may be functions of the

economic state. This paper derives and characterizes mimicking portfolios in the presence of

predetermined state variables, or conditioning information. The results generalize and integrate

multifactor minimum variance efficiency (Fama, 1996) with conditional and unconditional mean

variance efficiency (Hansen and Richard (1987), Ferson and Siegel, 2001). Empirical examples

illustrate the potential importance of time-varying mimicking portfolio weights and highlight

challenges in their application.

Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Fulton Hall 330B
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808
and NBER
wayne.ferson@bc.edu

Andrew F. Siegel
University of Washington
asiegel@u.washington.edu

Pisun (Tracy) Xu
University of Washington
psxu@u.washington.edu
                                                                                            1

I. Introduction
Mimicking portfolios for economic factors are important in both asset pricing theory and

empirical work. Breeden (1979) showed how portfolios can replace the state variables in

Merton's (1973) intertemporal asset pricing model. These portfolios "hedge" the state

variable risks, and their returns describe the risk premiums. Mimicking portfolios are

needed to identify the factor risk premiums when the risk factors in the model are not

traded assets. Huberman, Kandel and Stambaugh (1987) provide characterizations of

mimicking portfolios that can replace the risk factors in empirical multiple-beta asset

pricing models.

             Many studies rely on mimicking portfolios. Breeden, Gibbons and

Litzenberger (1989) use them for aggregate consumption growth; Chen, Roll and Ross

(1986) for a number of macroeconomic factors. Ferson and Harvey (1991) use mimicking

portfolios to assess the amount of asset-return predictability captured by asset pricing

models. Eckbo, Masulis and Norli (2000) use them to measure the risk exposures of post-

seasoned-equity-offering stock returns. Lamont (2001) forms “tracking” portfolios to

study the relation of stock returns to a number of economic variables. Ferson and Harvey

(1993) employ mimicking portfolios to make inferences about the premiums attached to

risk factors in international equity markets. Fama and French (1993, 1996) propose a three-

factor model, which Fama (1998) interprets as a specification of mimicking portfolios for

the state variables in a Merton (1973) style multibeta model.

             Studies that employ mimicking portfolios typically use methodologies in

which the weights that define the portfolios are either fixed over time, or vary over time in

ad hoc ways (e.g., a rolling regression is used). However, such an approach is not optimal

when predetermined variables are available that are related to expected future returns and

second moments. This paper studies mimicking portfolios with weights that vary

optimally over time in the presence of such conditioning information.
                                                                                               2
             Mimicking portfolios with conditioning information may be characterized

with an extension of “unconditional” mean variance efficiency, as described by Hansen

and Richard (1987) and Ferson and Siegel (2001). The portfolios they describe use

conditioning information to achieve efficiency with respect to the unconditional mean and

variance. They are a subset of the “conditionally efficient “portfolios that optimize with

respect to the conditional moments. We show how these ideas extend to the “multifactor

minimum variance” portfolios described by Fama (1996).

             Using a sample of asset returns, economic factors and conditioning

information similar to Lamont (2001), we explore the empirical advantage to constructing

mimicking portfolios with the optimal, time-varying weights. An example with a single

risky asset and a riskless asset shows that we can more than double the correlation with an

inflation factor. In Lamont’s sample of industry portfolios and bond returns the potential

improvement in the correlations is more than 20%, abstracting from estimation error. Our

analysis also illustrates how estimation error and errors in specifying the form of the data

generating process present challenges for future research and applications.

             The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an

overview of the central ideas. Section III presents and interprets the main analytical

results. Section IV contains the empirical analysis. Section V offers some additional

results and discusses the relation of mimicking portfolios with conditioning information to

utility maximization. Section VI concludes.




II. Overview of the Concepts and Results
The primitives of the problem are a vector of N asset returns, Rt, a vector of L lagged

instruments, Zt-1, (the conditioning information) and a K-vector of economic state

variables or factors, Ft. The conditioning information may include the lagged values of the
                                                                                                   3
returns or Ft. We assume there is a joint probability distribution for {Rt, Ft, Zt-1}, for which

the relevant first and second moments exist. To keep the notation simple, we will drop the

time subscripts when they are not needed for clarity.



Motivating Time-varying Weights

              In asset pricing models, mimicking portfolios arise when there are stochastic

changes in the consumption-investment opportunity set. In the classical model of Merton

(1973) an investor's optimal demand for assets may be expressed as a mean-variance

component plus a component that hedges or mimicks, the unexpected shocks to the state

variables that describe future investment opportunities. The hedge portfolio weights are

proportional to conditional multiple regression coefficients of the factor on the vector of

asset returns, and therefore depend on the conditional covariances of the assets' returns

and the conditional covariances of returns with the factors.

              In a dynamic economy, the conditional means, covariances and the return

covariances with the factors are functions of current information about the economic state.

These moments will typically vary over time as information about the state of the

economy changes. Indeed, a huge empirical literature documents time-variation in the

conditional first and second moments of asset returns and their covariances with economic

variables. Despite these obvious arguments that mimicking portfolios should be dynamic,

empirical applications often assumed fixed weights.



Conditional and Unconditional Efficient Portfolios

              Hansen and Richard describe portfolios with weights that may depend on

the information, yet minimize unconditional variance for a given unconditional mean.

Such portfolios are unconditionally efficient (UE) with respect to the information. Hansen

and Richard show that UE portfolios are a subset of the conditionally efficient (CE)
                                                                                                4
portfolios, which minimize conditional variance for a given conditional mean. Ferson and

Siegel (2001) derive solutions for UE portfolios and show that they are optimal for agents

with quadratic utility, in a single-period model.

               As characterized by Fama (1996), the optimal portfolios in Merton's (1973)

dynamic multiperiod model minimize variance, for a given expected return and given

covariances with the state variables or factors. Because of the restriction on factor

covariances, the portfolios are not minimum variance efficient. Fama calls the optimal

portfolios multifactor minimum variance. We derive conditional and unconditional versions

of these portfolios.

               When all of the moments are conditioned on the information, Z, we have

conditional multifactor minimum variance portfolios (CMMV). These are the portfolios

described by Merton (1973) and Fama (1996). When the portfolios use the information Z,

yet minimize unconditional variance for a given unconditional mean and covariances with

the factors, the result is unconditionally multifactor minimum variance with respect to the

information Z (UMMV). These portfolios generalize the UE portfolios of Hansen and

Richard (1987).



Mimicking Portfolio Concepts

               A portfolio is UMMV with respect to Z if and only if its weights, x(Z) solve

the problem:


               Minx(Z) Var[x(Z)'R] subject to E[x(Z)'R]=c, E[Fx(Z)'R]=d and x(Z)'1=1,         (1)



where 1 is an N-vector of ones and c and d are constants. A portfolio is CMMV with

respect to Z if and only if its weights solve the problem:
                                                                                                  5
 Minx(Z) Var[x(Z)'R|Z] s.t. E[x(Z)'R|Z]=c(Z), E[Fx(Z)'R|Z]=d(Z) and x(Z)'1=1,               (2)



where c(Z) and d(Z) are known functions of Z. Note that when the mean of the portfolio

return is constrained, the constraint on the uncentered second comoment with the factors

is equivalent to a constraint on the portfolio’s covariance with the factors.



III. Analytical Results
We present solutions for UMMV and CMMV portfolios and interpret their properties.

UMMV portfolios are a subset of CMMV portfolios. A subset of UMMV and CMMV

portfolios maximize the correlation with a factor, in the set of all possible portfolio rules

with weights that may depend on Z.



Proposition 1:
If a portfolio is UMMV it must be CMMV (almost surely in Z), but the converse is not true.

(Proofs are in the Appendix.)



              Proposition I extends a well-known result from Hansen and Richard (1987)
to a multi-factor setting. Hansen and Richard show that UE portfolios are a subset of CE

portfolios. This result has a striking implication for tests of the conditional CAPM, which

Cochrane (2001) dubs the “Hansen-Richard Critique.” Assume that the conditional

CAPM implies that the market portfolio is mean variance efficient, conditional on an

information set, Ω , that cannot be observed. The econometrician can only test efficiency
conditional on an observable subset of information, Z ⊂ Ω. If you reject efficiency given

Z, it does not imply that you reject efficiency given Ω , because portfolios that may use Ω

and are efficient given Z, are a subset of the portfolios that are efficient given Ω . Thus, in

principle the conditional CAPM could be true despite all of the tests in the literature that
                                                                                                           6
have rejected the efficiency of the market portfolio. The Hansen-Richard critique applies

even if it was possible to measure the “true” market portfolio.

                 Using similar logic, Proposition I implies a multi-factor version of the

Hansen-Richard critique. Assume, following Fama (1996) that Merton’s (1973) model

implies the market portfolio is CMMV, and further assume that the relevant conditioning

information, Ω , cannot be observed. With a subset of the information, Z, we can reject

that the market is CMMV with respect to Z, but this does not imply that we reject

Merton’s model. The multi-factor Hansen-Richard critique applies even if it is possible to

measure both the true market portfolio and the relevant risk factors.1



Explicit Solutions

                 We provide a constructive solution for UMMV portfolios, which from

Equation (1) solve the minimization:



                 Minx(Z) E{[x(Z)'R]2} subject to E[x(Z)'R]=c, E[Fx(Z)'R]=d and x(Z)'1=1,                 (3)



Letting Λ ≡ [E(RR'|Z)]-1 and µ(Z)=E(R|Z), write the Lagrangian for this problem as:


    Minx(Z) E{ x(Z)' Λ -1x(Z) + 2 λ 1[x(Z)' µ (Z)-c] + 2[x(Z)'E(RF'|Z)-d'] λ 2 + 2 γ (Z)[x(Z)'1-1]}.



where the scalars λ 1>0 and γ (Z)>0 (almost surely in Z) and the K-vector λ 2>0, are the

multipliers. Consider a perturbation w(Z) = x(Z) + ay(Z), where x(Z) is the optimal

solution and y(Z) is any other portfolio weight function. If the weight function x(Z) is

optimal, the derivative of the Lagrangian for w(Z) with respect to a must be zero when


1An interesting solution to this problem occurs when the model is closed by assuming that the lagged
values of the observed risk factors describe the relevant information, Ω . Then the model is testable.
                                                                                              7
evaluated at a=0. The first order condition may be written as:


                     E{ y(Z)'[ Λ -1x(Z) + λ 1 µ (Z) + E(RF'|Z) λ 2 + γ (Z)1] } = 0.        (4)



Since Equation (4) must hold for all y(Z), it implies that the term in square brackets must

be zero, almost surely in Z. Solving for the optimal weight, we have:


                     x(Z) = - λ 1 Λ µ (Z) - Λ E(RF'|Z) λ 2 - γ (Z) Λ 1.                    (5)



Evaluating the multiplier γ (Z) by imposing the constraint that x(Z)'1 = 1, the solution

may be expressed as:


                        Λ1         Λ11' Λ 
              x(Z) =         + Λ −          {− λ1µ(Z) − E(RF' Z)λ 2 }                     (6)
                       1' Λ1       1' Λ1 


The CMMV solution is derived in similar fashion, except that the multipliers associated

with c(Z) and d(Z) are functions of the information, λ 1(Z) and λ 2(Z):


                        Λ1         Λ11' Λ 
              x(Z) =         + Λ −          {− λ1 (Z)µ(Z) − E(RF' Z)λ 2 (Z)}              (7)
                       1' Λ1       1' Λ1 


Maximum Correlation Portfolios

              Consider a portfolio that has maximum squared correlation with a single

factor, F. The portfolio variance must be minimal among all portfolios that have the same

mean and the same covariance with the factor, because correlation is covariance divided

by the product of the standard deviations. It follows that there are values for the

multipliers in Equations (6) and (7) for which the solutions maximize the unconditional
                                                                                                 8
and conditional correlations, respectively, with the factor. Thus, maximum correlation

portfolios are special cases of CMMV and UMMV portfolios.



Proposition 2:
               The portfolio that maximizes its squared conditional correlation with a

particular factor F, subject to portfolio weights that sum to 1.0, has weights given by

equation (7), with:


                                - γ 1(Z)[E(F|Z) - γ µF(Z)] + γ µ(Z) γ F(Z)
               λ 1(Z) =
                            γ µ(Z)[E(F|Z) - γ µF(Z)] + γ F(Z)[ γ µµ(Z)-1],


                                       - γ 1(Z)[ γ µµ(Z)-1] - γ µ(Z)2
               λ 2(Z) =
                           γ µ(Z)[E(F|Z) - γ µF(Z)] + γ F(Z)[ γ         µµ(Z)-1],


where:

         γ 1(Z) = 1/(1' Λ 1),    γ µ(Z) = 1' Λ µ(Z)/(1' Λ 1), γ F(Z) = 1' Λ E(RF′|Z)/(1' Λ 1),

                      Ω (Z) = [ Λ - Λ 1 1' Λ /(1' Λ 1)], γ µµ(Z) = µ(Z)' Ω (Z)µ(Z),

                      and γ µF(Z)= µ(Z)' Ω (Z)E(RF′|Z).



               Portfolios that maximize the squared unconditional correlation with a factor,

over all portfolio weights that may depend on Z, may similarly be obtained as a special

case of Equation (6).



Corollary:
               The portfolio that maximizes its squared unconditional correlation with a

particular factor F, subject to portfolio weights that sum to 1.0, has weights given by
                                                                                               9
equation (6), with:


                                              − γ 1 [E(F) − γ µF ] + γ µ γ F
                      λ1         =
                                           γ µ [E(F) − γ µF ] + γ F [ γ µµ − 1],


                                                                           2
                                                 − γ 1 [ γ µµ − 1] − γ µ
                      λ2         =
                                           γ µ [E(F) − γ µF ] − γ F [ γ µµ − 1],


where:
                             γ 1 = E( γ 1 ( Z)), γ µ = E( γ µ ( Z)), γ F = E( γ F ( Z))
                                 γ µµ = E( γ µµ ( Z)), and γ µF = E( γ µF ( Z)).



Interpreting the Solutions

              To interpret the various terms in the UMMV and CMMV solutions it is

convenient to express equation (7) as the sum of three terms:


                       x (Z) = x GMS (Z) − λ1 (Z)x MV (Z) − w H (Z)λ 2 (Z) ,               (8)


                                                            ′
                                          x GMS (Z) = Λ1 /(1 Λ1)
                                          x MV (Z) = Ω( Z)µ(Z)
                                          w H (Z) = Ω( Z)E(RF′ Z).



Equation (6) may be decomposed using the same three terms, but replacing λ1(Z) and
λ2(Z) with the constants, λ1 and λ2. Equation (8) reveals that the solutions satisfy a K + 2

fund separation theorem. That is, any solution can be expressed as a combination of K + 2

time-varying weight vectors, where the particular combinations depend on the values of

the multipliers associated with the constraints. (This is stated formally in Proposition 3.)

Assuming that all values for the constraints are feasible, any solution can be obtained by
                                                                                                         10
selecting particular values for the multipliers. The values correspond to choosing

particular targets for the mean return and the factor covariances. The two N-vectors

xGMS(Z) and xMV(Z), with the K columns of wH(Z) form a basis for the set of all CMMV

(and thus UMMV) solutions. In particular, by setting some of the multipliers to zero we

obtain the solutions that relax the corresponding constraints.

                If we set both λ1(Z) and λ2(Z) to zero the solution, xGMS(Z), minimizes the

conditional second moment of returns subject only to the condition that the weights sum

to 1.0. This is the global minimum conditional second moment portfolio; hence the

notation, xGMS. The GMS portfolio’s conditional mean return is
E[ x GMS ( Z)′R Z] = 1 Λµ( Z) /(1 Λ1) = γ µ ( Z). Its unconditional mean return is E (γ µ (Z)) = γ µ .
                      ′          ′

                Other coefficients in Proposition 2 may be interpreted in terms of the K + 2

spanning portfolios. The global minimum second moment portfolio must have the same
                                                                    ′
conditional second co-moment with every risky asset2, equal to 1 /(1 Λ1) = γ 1 ( Z). The

conditional second co-moment of this portfolio with the factors are
 ′              ′
1 ΛE(R F′ Z) /(1 Λ1) = γ F ( Z). The unconditional second co-moments are E[γ F (Z)] = γ F .

                If we set λ2(Z) to zero in Equation (8) we drop the constraint on covariances
with the factors. The resulting solution, x GMS (Z) − λ 1 (Z)x MV (Z) , minimizes the conditional

second moment of return for a given conditional mean. This solution is therefore CE, as

defined previously. In the special case where λ1(Z) = λ1 is a constant, the solution is the
UE solution studied by Ferson and Siegel (2001).

                Note that Ω(Z) is an NxN matrix such that , if multiplied by any N-vector,

will produce a set of portfolio weights that sum to zero. In particular xMV(Z) = Ω(Z)µ(Z)
and wH(Z) = Ω( Z)E(R F′ Z) are vectors of portfolio weights that sum to zero. Applied to

the vector of returns R, weights that sum to zero produce excess returns. The implied

2 If a portfolio has unequal conditional second moments on any two assets it cannot be the global minimum,
since by reducing the weight in the asset with the higher comoment and increasing the weight on the asset
with the lower comoment, the portfolio’s second moment could be reduced.
                                                                                                         11
portfolio is “long” those assets with positive weights and “short” those assets with

negative weights. The portfolio return is therefore the return to the long positions in

excess of those to the short positions. It follows
                             ′
that E[ x MV ( Z)′R Z] = µ(Z) Ω(Z)µ(Z ) = γ µµ (Z) , and E{γ µµ ( Z)} = γ µµ , are the conditional and

unconditional expected excess returns of the xMV(Z) portfolio.

               Finally, consider the NxK matrix of weights, wH(Z). These weights deliver

the excess returns of the K hedging portfolios for the state variables or factors. Their
conditional mean excess returns are µ( Z)′Ω( Z)E (RF′ Z) = γ µF ( Z) and the unconditional

means are E[µ( Z)′Ω( Z)E(RF′ Z)] = γ µF .



A Numerical Example

               We provide further intuition about the solutions using a simple, special case.

The example is similar to one in Brown and Warner (1980). Assume that we are given two
assets: A riskless asset with return rf , a risky asset with return R, a single factor F, and a

single instrument, Z. The vector (R t +1 , Ft +1 , Z t )′ has a trivariate normal distribution with
mean ( µ R , µ F , µ Z ) ′ and covariance matrix


                                            σ 2R   σ RF   σ RZ 
                                                                
                                            σ RF   σ 2F   σ FZ  .
                                            σ RZ   σ FZ   σ 2Z 
                                           


       Our objective is to find a portfolio weight function w ( Z ) such that the portfolio
return Rw = rf + w ( Z ) ( R − rf ) minimizes E ( Rw2 ) subject to the constraints E ( Rw ) = c and

E( RW F ) = d . The weight function represents the amount invested in the risky asset while

investing [1 – w ( Z)] in the risk-free asset. The optimal weight function is given by:
                                                                                                         12
                                      λ1 E ( R − rf | Z ) + λ 2 E ( R − rf ) F Z 
                              w(Z ) =                                            ,                    (9)
                                                   E ( R − rf ) Z
                                                                     
                                                                 2

                                                                    

where
                                                                  σ RZ
                                  E ( R − rf | Z ) = µ R − rf +        ( Z − µZ )
                                                                  σ 2Z

                                      σ σ                   σ                     σ             
          E ( R − rf ) F Z  = σ RF − RZ 2 F Ζ + µ R − rf + RZ ( Z − µ Z )  µ F + FZ ( Z − µZ )
                                      σZ                   σZ2
                                                                                     σZ2
                                                                                                

                                                                                       2
                                                  σ2              σ              
                        E ( R − rf ) Z  = σ 2R − RZ                  ( Z − µ Z )
                                     2
                                                      + µ R − rf + RZ
                                              σZ 
                                                    2
                                                                   σZ2
                                                                                  


and the constants λ1 and λ 2 are chosen to achieve the constraints. (The Appendix

provides a derivation.)

                The weight w in Equation (9) is a ratio of two quadratic polynomials in Z,

where the denominator has no real roots (assuming that the risky asset is not perfectly

correlated with Z). Therefore the weight function is continuous and has a single horizontal

asymptote as Z → ±∞ . This may be compared and contrasted to the optimal weights for

UE portfolios (Ferson and Siegel, 2001) which do not constrain the covariance with a
factor. In this special case, obtained by setting λ 2 = 0 in Equation (9), the optimal weight

function is the ratio of a linear to a quadratic function, implying a single horizontal

asymptote with a value of zero. Thus, Ferson and Siegel showed that the UE solution

exhibits a “conservative” response to extreme realizations of the information Z. As Z gets

large the weight in the risky asset approaches zero.3

                Equation (9) illustrates that the hedging component of the UMMV solution

3The conservative behavior of the UE solution contrasts with CE solutions, such as under exponential utility
and conditional normality, where the portfolio weight is linear in Z. In such cases the optimal weight is
unbounded for large values of Z. Ferson and Siegel (2003) employ UE weights in a version of the Hansen
and Jagannathan (1991) bounds, and find that the conservative response to large realizations translates into
superior finite-sample properties of the estimated weights.
                                                                                                           13
modifies the conservative response of the UE component, but the solution remains

bounded for large values of Z. Thus, the hedging component of the solution approaches a

constant for large values of Z in this example. We may therefore anticipate that estimates

of the UMMV solution could be more “robust” to extreme data observations and have

better sampling properties, compared with the CMMV solution.

                We illustrate Equation (9) using monthly data for the Standard and Poors

stock index return as the risky asset and inflation as the factor. The lagged instrument is a
percentage term spread; the data are described below. The parameters are rf = 0.003690 ,

µ R = 0.009376 , µ F = 0.003375 , µ Z = 0.503563 , σ R = 0.040540 , σ F = 0.003949 , σ Z = 0.503743 ,

σ RF = 0.000003380 , σ RZ = −0.001781 , and σ FZ = 0.0004730 .

                Consider a portfolio with time-varying weights that has minimum

(unconditional) variance subject to the constraints that it have the same unconditional
expectation as the risky asset ( µ R = E ( Rw ) = 0.009376 = c ) and the same unconditional
covariance with the factor as the risky asset ( σ RF = Cov ( Rw , F ) = 0.000003380 = d − cµ F ) .

The values of the multipliers are λ1 = −0.079850 and λ 2 = 87.122801 , found with an iterative

approximation method using numerical integration to evaluate the expectations. We find
that the variance has been reduced from σ 2R = 0.001643 to σ 2Rw = 0.001480. The weight

function that achieves this is shown in Figure 1. The x-axis extends above and below µ Z
by 3.89σ Z , representing 99.99% of Z values. Over this range the optimal weight is a

concave function of the conditional mean of the risky asset.4
                The behavior of the optimal weight function is shown in Figure 2 for

extended Z values. There is a single asymptotic limit for both large and small Z, but for

large Z values the asymptote is approached from below.

                If we seek to maximize the correlation between the portfolio and the factor in

4Concavity arises because σ RZ σ FZ < 0 in this example. If the product is positive the function is convex in
Z. Brown et al (2004) describe situations where optimizing portfolio managers may prefer concave
investment strategies.
                                                                                                              14
this example, we more than double it, increasing the correlation from 0.0211 (between the

risky asset and the factor) to 0.0481 by using the optimal portfolio weight with
λ1 = −0.33740 and λ 2 = 100 .5



IV. Empirical Results
The main feature of our solutions to the mimicking portfolio problem is portfolio weights that

vary over time with the conditioning information. The following empirical examples

therefore focus on the effects of time-varying weights.



The Data

                   The data are taken from Lamont (2001), who studies the period from January of

1947 through December of 1994.6 Mimicking portfolios are most important in empirical asset

pricing when the factors are not traded assets. Our examples therefore focus on the subset of

Lamont's factors that are not traded assets. These are US inflation, labor income growth and

industrial production growth.7 The lagged conditioning variables include a one-month

Treasury bill rate, a term spread for one-year bonds, a "default" spread, or the difference

between low grade and high grade corporate bond yields, a spread between commercial

paper and Treasury rates, the lagged growth rates of industrial production and inflation (for

the year ending one month prior to the monthly return), and the lagged annual excess return

on the stock market index.8 The base assets used to form the mimicking portfolios also follow


5   Any multiple of the vector ( λ1 , λ 2 ) will achieve this same maximal correlation.
6   We are grateful to Owen Lamont for making his data available to us.

7 Lamont also studies US consumption expenditure growth, but these data are limited to a shorter monthly
sample, so we do not use consumption.

8 Lamont also includes a long-term yield spread and a market dividend yield. Neither of these produce t-ratios
larger than two in the regressions reported in Lamont's Table 1 for the three factors we study. Furthermore, with
the full set of instruments his covariance matrices are sometimes singular (see his footnote 6), and we find the
same result. We therefore exclude these two instruments.
                                                                                                              15
Lamont (2001). These are monthly returns for eight industry-grouped common stock

portfolios, shown in Table 1, a broad market index, three maturities of Treasury bonds and a

"junk" bond.9

                Table 1 presents monthly regressions for the base asset returns and the factor

growth rates on the lagged instruments. The purpose of this table is to summarize the data

and to introduce the parameterization of our simulation exercises. The fitted regressions are
used to represent the conditional means of the returns, µ( Z). The sample covariances of the

residuals from these regressions define the conditional covariances when they are assumed to

be fixed over time (heteroskedastic models are described below). The other parameters of the

simulations are constructed from these building blocks. For example, for each value of Z, the
matrix Λ(Z) = E(RR'|Z)-1 = [Cov(R|Z) + µ (Z) µ (Z)']-1 is constructed with Cov(R|Z) and

µ (Z). For a given factor the vector E(RF|Z) = Cov(R,F|Z) + µ (Z)E(F|Z) is constructed in a

similar way.

                The regressions in Table 1 show that the fitted conditional means represent

about 10% of the variance of the monthly returns on average, with the R-squares ranging

between 5% for the energy industry to 50% for the one-year bond return. For the monthly

factors the R-squares are smaller, ranging from 0.2% to 13 %, and based on these results we

assume constant factor means in some of the exercises to follow. The coefficients seem

generally consistent with previous studies, such as Fama and Schwert (1977), Keim and

Stambaugh (1986), Fama (1990) and Ferson and Harvey (1991).

                Panels C and D of Table 1 use overlapping monthly observations for quarterly

and annual future growth rates, respectively. The adjusted R-squares increase with the

horizon of the growth rates, but because of the overlapping data the R-squares for the longer


9We use CRSP data for the market index (the Standard and Poors 500 total return), the Treasury bond returns (a
one-year, a seven year and a 30 year return) and the industry portfolios. The industry portfolios are courtesy of
Ken French, and are combinations of the 48 industry groups used in Fama and French (2000).
                                                                                                         16
horizons are likely to be biased. The standard errors in Table 1 are Newey-West (1987)

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-consistent, using 24 moving average terms as in

Lamont (2001) The t-ratios based on these standard errors do not indicate that the

explanatory power is greater for the longer-horizon growth rates.



Relation to Lamont's (2001) Tracking Portfolios

                Lamont (2001) forms "tracking portfolios" as the linear combination of returns,

b'Rt, where the weights, b, are estimated by a linear regression of the future growth rates of

an economic factor from t to t+k, on returns and lagged conditioning variables:10



                        Ft+k = a + b'Rt + c'Zt-1 + εt+k.                                      (10)



Lamont interest is in maximizing the squared correlation of changes in expectations of the

future factor growth rate, Et(Ft+k)-Et-1(Ft+k), with the unexpected excess returns, Rt - Et-1(Rt),

where Et-1(.) denotes the conditional expectation at time t-1. He notes (in his footnote 1) that a

useful extension would allow conditional coefficients in the tracking portfolios. Our

examples explore this extension.

                Lamont’s (2001) tracking portfolios maximize the (squared) correlation,

assuming that fixed weights are optimal. A special case, dropping the Zt-1 term from the
regression (10), maximizes the unconditional correlation under the same assumptions. We

compare our methods empirically to these two fixed-weight approaches.

                To see how the results in this paper refine the approach of Lamont, write Ft+k =

Et(Ft+k) + v, with Et(v)=0, and assume as in Lamont that Et-1(.)=E(.|Zt-1), so that the lagged

instruments proxy for the available information at time t-1. Let Rpt = b’Rt be the tracking

10Lamont uses excess return in his regressions, but we use raw returns for comparability. The weights, b,
are not constrained to sum to 1.0 in Lamont’s regression, unlike our portfolio solutions. When the weights
are fixed over time this does not affect the correlations of b'Rt with the factors.
                                                                                                                 17
portfolio return. Then:



                   Cov{ Et(Ft+k) - Et-1(Ft+k), Rpt - Et-1(Rpt) }                                             (11)

                 = Cov{ Ft+k - E(Ft+k|Zt-1), Rpt - E(Rpt|Zt-1) }

                 = Cov{ Ft+k, Rpt } - Cov{ E(Ft+k|Zt-1), E(Rpt|Zt-1) }

                 = E[Cov{Ft+k,Rpt|Zt-1}].



Thus, Lamont's approach focusses on the expected value of the conditional covariance. We

refine this approach in two ways. First, our solutions allow time-varying weights to replace

the fixed coefficient, b. The CMMV solution in particular, focusses on the conditional

covariance, Cov{Ft+k,Rpt|Zt-1}, which may vary over time with Zt-1. Maximizing the squared

conditional correlation for each value of Z implies maximizing the expected squared

conditional correlation. 11 Thus, with time-varying weights we should obtain a higher

expected conditional correlation. Of course, the solution with the maximum expected

conditional correlation need not have the maximum unconditional correlation.

                 Our second refinement relates to the unconditional correlation. For intuition,

consider the unconditional covariance:



                   Cov{ Ft+k, Rpt }
                 = E[Cov{Ft+k,Rpt|Zt-1}] + Cov{ E(Ft+k|Zt-1), E(Rpt|Zt-1) }.                                 (12)



The unconditional covariance between portfolio returns and a factor depends on two terms.

Lamont's approach controlls the first term. Our UMMV solution allows the time-varying


11 Let the maximum squared conditional correlation be f(x(z)). Then for any other solution, f(y(z)), we have
f(x(z))≥ f(y(z)) almost surely in z, implying that the integral against a positive measure and thus the expectation,
is also higher.
                                                                                                           18
weights to optimally control the covariation of the conditional means in the second term as

well.12

                In summary, our solutions should attain larger correlations with a factor than a

fixed-weight approach. By allowing for time-varying weights the average conditional

(squared) correlations should be higher. By controlling the conditional means with the time-

varying weights, the unconditional correlation should also be higher.



Potential Improvements Using Time-varying Weights

                Our first exercise examines the potential improvements that time-varying

weights could provide in the absence of estimation error. We abstract from estimation

error in a simulation, by forming the mimicking portfolios with full knowledge of the

form and parameters of the data generating process. We keep the initial simulations

simple by holding E(F│Z) fixed at the sample means and assuming homoskedasticity in

the conditional covariances. Heteroskedasticity and time-varying factor means present

additional sources of time-variation, which increase the potential advantage of our

solutions relative to a fixed-weight approach.

                We simulate a sample with one million observations from the data

generating process, described more completely in the Appendix. The parameters that
                                           ′
involve expectations, such as γ 1 = E{1 /(1 Λ1)} and the regression (10), are estimated from

the one million observations. The parameter estimates should essentially be at their

probability limits with so many observations, there by abstracting from estimation error

(10,000 observations produces similar results).13

12 The maximum correlation solution controls the time-varying expected portfolio return to minimize the
unconditional return variance, given its covariance with the factor. Thus, the UMMV solution refines the
fixed-weight solution even if we assume E(F│Z) is a constant.

13While a one million observation sample effectively abstracts from estimation error, there will still be come
simulation error due to numerical imprecision. For example, we compute expectations by summing over
one million observations and dividing the result by one million. These errors typically amount to less than
                                                                                                           19
                 We examine the unconditional correlations of mimicking portfolio returns

with the factors, and also the expected conditional correlations. Given the parameters of

the data generating process, the squared unconditional correlations may be computed
directly. For Lamont’s approach the solution is [b ′ Cov(R , F)] 2 /[b′ Cov(R )bVar (F)] where b

and the variances and covariances are the estimates from the one-million-observation
artificial sample. Letting E(R p ) = γ µ − λ 1 γ µµ − λ 2 γ µF and γ FF = E{E (FR ′ Z)Ω( Z)E (R F Z)} the

squared unconditional correlation for the UMMV solution given in the corollary to

Proposition 2 is:


                                                {γ   F   − λ 1 γ µF − λ 2 γ FF − E(F)E(R p )}
                                                                                            2

                               ρ =
                                2
                                                                                                         (13)
                                u
                                                {
                                        Var (F) γ 1 + λ21 γ µµ + λ22 γ FF + 2λ 1λ 2 γ µF − E(R p )
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                     }

                 For a given portfolio weight, x(Z), the expected squared conditional

correlation is:
                                      [x ( Z)′Cov(R , F Z)]2 
                                ρ = E
                                    2
                                                                       .                                (14)
                                       var(F Z) x ( Z)′Σ( Z) x ( Z) 
                                    c




To compute the expected conditional correlation we take the average of the expression

inside the expectation in (14), over the one million simulated Z observations, where the

x(Z) are formed using the true parameter values, and the conditional covariances are the

true parameters of the data generating process.

                 There are two timing conventions for the monthly factors shown in Table 2.
When k=1 Lamont’s regression, Equation (10), produces a portfolio, b′R t , to track the

future factor Ft+1. However, in some settings, such as hedging, we may be interested in a

portfolio that is maximally correlated with the contemporaneous factor, Ft. Our solutions,


3% of the figures reported in tables 2 and 3, as is illustrated below.
                                                                                               20
as well as Lamont’s regression, can accommodate either timing convention and we

present both versions. For the longer horizon factors, we follow Lamont and present the

mimicking return, Rpt, for the factor growth rate from month t to t+k.

              Table 2 shows the potential correlations, abstracting from sampling error.

The unconditional correlations of the fixed-weight solution are obtained by dropping the

lagged instruments from regression (10). The value is 13.5%, averaged across the factors

and horizons. The average expected conditional correlation of Lamont’s solution is 17.5%.

These two figures would be identical if there was no information in the lagged Z about

the future returns and factors.

              The potential improvements from time-varying weights can be substantial.

Averaged across the examples in the table, the absolute unconditional correlations are

16.5% using the UMMV solution with time-varying weights. This represents an

improvement of about 22% over the fixed-weight solution’s 13.5%. The expected

conditional correlation for Lamont’s solution and the CMMV solutions are identical. This

reflects the assumptions under which the two solutions are generated. It can be shown that if

conditional mean returns are linear in Z and conditional covariances are fixed over time, then

the CMMV solution that maximizes the squared conditional correlation has fixed weights

and is equivalent to Lamont’s solution.



Heteroskedasticity

              To illustrate how time-varying weights in a CMMV solution can offer

improved conditional correlations, we introduce a simple form of conditional

heteroskedasticity. The heteroskedasticity is driven by time-varying factor betas, which

are assumed to be linear functions of Z. For asset i the conditional beta is Bi(Z) = boi +
b1′i Z . We calibrate the betas to regressions with interaction terms. When the returns and

factors are measured contemporaneously the regression is: Rit+1 = aoi + a 1′i Zt + boiFt+1 +
                                                                                                21
b1′i (ZtFt+1) + vit+1. The conditional covariances are then modelled as functions of Z:
                                     2                                                  2
Cov(Rit+1 Rjt+1│Zt) = Bi(Zt) Bj(Zt) σ F + Cov(vi, vj), and Cov(Rit+1, Ft+1│Zt) = Bi(Z) σ F , where
   2
σ F and Cov(vi vj) are fixed parameters.

              Using the simple model of heteroskedasticity there are signs of overfitting

the moments in Lamont’s data. When we use all seven lagged instruments we find that

the fitted conditional covariances appear unreasonably large. The simulated potential

correlations of the time-varying weight solutions approach 99% in a few cases. To provide

a more realistic comparison we use a subset of the lagged instruments for the experiments

in Table 3. The one-year term spread, used in the numerical example above, is the first

choice. Additional experiments also include the risk-free rate and default spread.

              Table 3 shows that under conditional heteroskedasticity, time-varying

weights can produce larger expected conditional correlations than the fixed-weight

approach. Averaged across the horizons and instruments, the conditional correlations of

the fixed-weight solutions are 32.9% for industrial production, 33.5% for labor income and

24.3% for inflation. The time-varying weight solutions average 49% for industrial

production, 53.2% for labor income and 36.0% for inflation. The average ratio of the

conditional correlation for a time-varying solution to the fixed-weight solution is 1.57, so

the potential improvement is about 57% on average.



Sample Results

              The next two tables present the actual sample performance of the mimicking

portfolios. In Table 4 the parameters are estimated assuming that the homoskedastic

process with linear conditional mean returns is correct, and estimating the parameters

using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM, Hansen, 1982). The “average

conditional correlations” are the sample correlations of the residuals from regressing the

fitted mimicking portfolio returns and the factors on the lagged conditioning variables.
                                                                                             22
Under the homoskedastic model assumptions the average conditional correlations

produced by the CMMV solution and Lamont’s regression approach are identical. These

range from 14.7% to 31.1% depending on the factor and the horizon, with no clear patterns

across factors or horizons.

              The unconditional correlations are the sample correlations between a fitted

mimicking portfolio and its factor. The regression approach delivers a larger

unconditional correlation than the UMMV solution in every example. In the case of labor

income and at shorter horizons the differences are often small. However, at the annual

horizon the regression performs markedly better.

              In Table 5 the sample performances are compared again, this time assuming

that the data generating process features linear conditional means and heteroskedasticity,

driven by time-varying betas as described above. The results with all seven instruments

are reported in the first of the two rows of figures for each example. In the first row of

figures only the lagged term spread is used as an instrument. The fixed-weight

approaches obviously produce the same results as in the previous table when all seven

conditioning variables are used.

              Under the heteroskedastic model the UMMV solution performs better than

under the homoskedastic model. The unconditional correlations are larger than in Table 4,

often substantially so. The UMMV solution also slightly outperforms the regression

method. For example, averaged across the horizons and instrument choices, the UMMV

solution delivers correlations of 24.9% for industrial production, 30.1% for labor income
and 26.7% for inflation. The corresponding figures for the fixed-weight regression are

20.7%, 29.0% and 26.1% respectively. Together with the results in Table 4 this shows that

with a more accurate data generating process it is possible to obtain better results with the

UMMV solution.

              The conditional correlations in Table 5 also present some interesting
                                                                                                       23
patterns. First, the CMMV solution performs much worse than the simpler approach of

Lamont. Many of the CMMV conditional correlations are insignificantly different from

zero, and the averages are about 1/3 of the values produced by Lamont’s approach.

Second, the choice of instruments has a pronounced effect on the CMMV solutions, and

overfitting is apparent when all seven are used. Assuming heteroskedasticity, the CMMV

correlation is larger using the term spread alone than using all seven instruments, in all

but three examples.

               In summary, the UMMV solution performs about as well, or better, when all

seven conditioning variables are used as when the single instrument is used. The CMMV,

in contrast, typically performs less well with seven instruments. This is interesting given

our previous observation that the heteroskedastic model appears overfit with all seven

instruments. When the conditional second moment matrix is overfit its inverse is less

stable numerically, which hurts the sampling properties of the estimators. The UMMV

solution should be more robust than the CMMV solution to extreme values in the sample,

as are likely to be produced by overfitting.



Estimation Error

               Estimation error in some form must explain why the optimal time-varying

weight solutions do not fully deliver their potential performance in the sample.

Estimation error enters the problem in several ways. First, the mimicking portfolio

weights depend on parameters that can only be estimated with error. This introduces
randomness in repeated samples that affects the sampling distribution of the mimicking

portfolio returns. For example, even if the asset returns are normally distributed, the

products of returns with the estimated weights are nonnormal.14

14This problem was encountered in different contexts by Brown and Warner (1980), who examine the use of
“control portfolios” in event studies, and by Dybvig and Ross (1985), who study the optimal portfolios of
informed investment managers.
                                                                                                       24
               The second effect of estimation error relates to our ability to evaluate the

various approaches. In finite samples our estimates of the expected conditional and

unconditional correlations are subject to estimation error.

               The third effect relates to the specification of the form of the data generating

process. The “true” generating process for the data is difficult to discover, and might be

more complex than our examples imagine.

               We present additional simulation exercises to address these issues. We can

control the second effect in a simulation setting, as described below. This leaves the

effects of parameter estimation error and specification error in the data generating process.

The time-varying-weight approaches involve more estimated parameters, and they

require that the functional form of the conditional means and covariances be specified. If

parameter estimation error can explain the gap between the potential and realized

performance of the mimicking portfolios it suggests that research can be profitably

directed at obtaining better parameter estimates. If not, we are left with the problem of

better specifying the form of the generating process. Perhaps, both issues deserve our

attention.15



Parameter Estimation and Data Generating Process Errors

               The next experiments focus on parameter estimation error and errors in

specifying the form of the data generating process (DGP), either in isolation or taken

together. The first type of error is present in all of the approaches, although perhaps the

performance is affected to varying dergrees. It is interesting to see which approaches are

more affected by estimation error. The fixed-weight approaches do not need to specify the

15Of course the two issues interact in general. If we could know the data generating process down to the
form of the probability distribution, we could estimate the parameters by maximum likelihood and attain
the Cramer-Rao efficiency bound. Our interest here focuses on the central parameters of the problem—the
conditional means and covariance matrix—and their functional relation to the lagged conditioning
variables.
                                                                                             25
form of the DGP and thereby avoid the second type of error. If the time-varying weight

approaches specify the wrong DGP they are no longer the optimal solutions, so it is

interesting to see how sensitive their results are to DGP error. Finally, the two types of

errors may interact, so we are interested in the combined effects.

              The first experiment isolated estimation error in the parameters of the

mimicking portfolio weights, abstracting from errors in specifying the form of the data

generating process. Estimation error is captured by simulating artificial samples with 576

observations, matching the sample of Table 1. The heteroskedastic DGP is used to

generate the data and the correct form of the process is assumed when estimating the

parameters. We abstract from estimation error in our evaluation of the results by

extending each of the 300 simulated samples to one million observations. The mimicking

portfolio solutions continue to rely on the noisy parameter estimates based on the first 576

observations. However, the factor correlations with the mimicking portfolio returns are

estimated using the one million observations. The results of the first experiment are

shown in the first two columns of tables 6 and 7.

              The second experiment isolates the effects of errors in specifying the DGP,

abstracting from parameter estimation error. Here we generate data from the

heteroskedastic process, but the “artificial analyst” in the simulations assumes the

homoskedastic process. We abstract from parameter estimation error by using an artificial

sample with one million observations.

              The third experiment combines the effects of parameter estimation and DGP
error. This experiment is essentially the same as the experiment with parameter

estimation error, except that the artificial analyst incorrectly assumes that the

homoskedastic DGP is correct.

              Tables 6 and 7 summarize the results by reporting the ratio of each expected

absolute correlation (as a percent) to the potential absolute correlation, computed as in
                                                                                           26
Table 3. We concentrate on the industrial production factor.

              Focussing on the pure effects of parameter estimation error, the first two

columns of table 6 show the impact on the unconditional correlations for the fixed-weight

and UMMV approaches. The time-varying weight UMMV solution delivers smaller

fractions (15% - 68%) of its potential unconditional correlation than the fixed-weight

solution, which delivers 54% - 92%. This makes sense given that the UMMV solution

requires the estimation of more parameters. However, the potential correlations of the

UMMV solution are larger, as shown in Table 3. Multiplying the two figures shows that

the UMMV solution is expected to deliver slightly larger correlations on average (13.7%,

versus 13.1% for the regression approach).

              Table 7 shows the impact of estimation error on the expected conditional

correlations, comparing Lamont’s fixed-weight approach with the time-varying-weight

CMMV approach. The fractions are in favor of the fixed-weight approach, which range

from 72% to almost 100% of the potential correlations. The time-varying-weight approach

delivers 33% - 89% of its potential. This makes sense given the larger number of

parameters in the CMMV solution. The fact that the percentages are closer together than

in Table 6 also makes sense, as the numbers of parameters to be estimated in the two

approaches is more similar in this experiment.

              Average across the examples in Table 7, and considering the potential

conditional correlations shown in Table 3, the expected conditional correlations are 29%

for Lamont’s method, versus 36% for the CMMV approach. Thus, while parameter
estimation error hurts the time-varying-weight approaches more in percentage terms, the

higher potential correlations of the optimal solutions can offset the effect.

              The middle column of Table 6 focusses on DGP error in isolation. Only the

UMMV solution is shown, because the fixed-weight regression is not affected by DGP
                                                                                                               27
error and thus delivers 100%.16 Similarly, the results of this experiment are not reported in

Table 7, as both solutions deliver 100%. (Recall that the CMMV solution is identical to

Lamont’s solution when it assumes linear expected asset returns and homoskedasticity.)

The UMMV solution delivers between 82% and 98% of its potential correlation under pure

DGP error.

                The right-hand column of Table 6 combines DGP error and parameter

estimation error. Only the UMMV solution is shown, because the fixed-weight solution

produces the same results as in the first column of the table. (In Table 7, the results for

this experiment are the same as for the case with parameter error only, for the reason

described previously.) Compared to the second column with parameter error only, the

overall percentages are similar. In some cases, the UMMV solution actually performs

better than in the second column. This illustrates an interaction between DGP error and

parameter estimation error. With the much smaller number of parameters in the

homoskedastic process, the reduction in parameter estimation error can offset the effects

of DGP error, and result in better performance even when the DGP is wrong.



Step-Ahead Comparisons

                We conduct step-ahead comparisons of the approaches. We use the first Te
observations to estimate the parameters, then we apply the estimated weights to the
returns, R Te +1 , to form a mimicking portfolio return for Te + 1. We roll the entire

procedure forward one period, and repeat until the end of the sample. With T

observations in the sample, we produce T – Te step-ahead returns. The rolling window is
Te = 120 months (Te = 60 results in similar conclusions). These mimicking portfolios are

feasible in the sense that they could have been estimated using the available data at the


16We ran the analysis, and the variation of the results around 100% illustrates the effects of the numerical
errors described previously. These are never more than 2.2 % of the figures in Table 3.
                                                                                                    28
portfolio formation date. However, a rolling procedure may convey an “unfair”

advantage to a fixed-weight approach. In each window the “fixed” weights can be

different, and the weights will therefore vary slowly over time. We use the simple

homoskedastic model assumptions consistent with Table 2. We also examine an example

where we assume heteroskedasticity, driven by linear conditional betas. The results are

similar using all seven instruments, slightly better when only a single instrument is used.

               The step-ahead performance of all the fixed and time-varying-weight
approaches are poor. Using the approximation 1 / T − Te to the standard error of a

sample correlation, only 15 out of 42 cases examined, are significantly different (two

standard deviations) from zero. The “fixed” weight solution outperforms the time-

varying weight solution in 19 out of 24 comparisons.




V. Additional Results
This section presents additional results that include a generalization of the representation

of UE and CE portfolios in Hansen and Richard (1987). We also describe the utility

functions for which UMMV portfolios are optimal, and present an alternative
representation of the CMMV solution.



Characterizations

               Hansen and Richard (1987) show that it is possible to represent all UMV and

CMV portfolios in terms of two returns that are conditionally minimum variance. The
first return, R *0 , is a portfolio with weights that sum to 1.0. The second, R *e , is an excess

return with weights that sum to 0.0. They show that all CMV portfolio returns may be
expressed as R *0 + w(Z)R *e , where w(Z) is a scalar function of Z, while all UMV portfolios

may be expressed as R *0 + w R *e , where w is a constant. Our solutions generalize this
                                                                                                    29
result for UMMV and CMMV portfolios.



Proposition 3:
                Any CMMV portfolio may be expressed as R *0 + w(Z) R *e + Σj=1,...,Kvj(Z) R *ej ,

where R *e and R *ej are CMMV excess returns, with weights that sum to 0.0, and the vj(Z)

are a scalar functions of Z. Any UMMV portfolio may be expressed as R *0 + w R *e +
Σj=1,...,Kvj R *ej , where w and the vj, j=1,...,K are constants.



Relation to Utility Maximization

                Fama (1996) describes how under the assumption of normality, agents in

Merton's (1973) model choose multifactor minimum variance portfolios. This refers to

CMMV portfolios given the agents' information sets. The optimization problem at time t-1

is to choose the consumption expenditures Ct-1 and the portfolio weight x(Zt-1) to:



         Max u(Ct-1) + E{J(Wt,Ft)|Zt-1}, subject to Wt=(Wt-1-Ct-1)x(Zt-1)'Rt, x(Zt-1)'1=1,     (15)



where J(W,F) is the indirect utility function for wealth, which depends at time t on the

state variables or factors, Ft. The first order condition for this problem with respect to the
portfolio choice is:


                        (Wt-1-Ct-1)E{ Jw(Wt,Ft) Rt |Zt-1} + γ 1 (Zt-1)1 = 0,                   (16)



where Jw(.,.) denotes the partial derivative with respect to the first argument and γ 1 (Zt-1) is

a Lagrange multiplier. Expand the expectation of the product into the product of the

expectations plus the covariance, and use Stein's (1973) Lemma to write Cov(Jw,R|Z) =

E(Jww|Z) Cov(W,R|Z) + E(JwF|Z)' Cov(F,R|Z). Now, Cov(Wt,Rt|Zt-1) =
                                                                                             30
(Wt-1-Ct-1)Σ(Z)x(Z), where Σ(Z)is the conditional covariance matrix of Rt. The solution for

x(Z) can be expressed as:



                     x(Z) = a1(Z)Σ(Z)-11 + a2(Z)Σ(Z)-1µ(Z) + Σ(Z)-1E(RF'|Z)b(Z)            (17)



for scalar functions of the information a1(.), a2(.) and K-vector b(.). The solution therefore

minimizes the conditional variance of x(Z)'Rt subject to constraints on E[x(Z)'R|Z],

E[Fx(Z)'R|Z] and x(Z)'1=1. Minimizing conditional variance, for each Z, subject to

constraints that fix the conditional mean, implies minimizing the conditional mean of the

squared return. Therefore the solution in Equation (17) also solves the problem in

Equation (2), and is CMMV. Thus, Merton's (1973) agents choose CMMV portfolios, and

the solution for the optimal portfolio weight is the same as given by Equation (7). The

Appendix provides a representation for UMMV portfolios, analogous to Equation (17),

written in terms of covariances instead of second moment matrices.

              Since UMMV portfolios are a special case of CMMV portfolios, the question

remains as to which subset of agents would find UMMV portfolios optimal. Ferson and

Siegel (2001) show that UMV portfolios are optimal for agents with quadratic utility

functions in a single period model. The next proposition generalizes this finding for

UMMV portfolios in an intertemporal model.



Proposition 4:
              In an intertemporal model, agents with the indirect utility function given by

J(W,F) = W - a W2 - b'FW, where a and b are constants, and who observe the conditioning
information Z, choose optimal portfolios that are UMMV.

              Proposition 4 establishes that a class of generalized quadratic utility

investors will find UMMV portfolios to be optimal choices. Unlike our derivation of
                                                                                            31
Equation (17), the proposition does not assume normal distributions. The utility function

may be interpreted as augmenting the quadratic utility with a preference for covariance

with the factor, via the product term. Alternatively, the utility function may be written as

[1-b'F]W - a W2, a quadratic utility with "state dependent" utility that depends on F.



V. Conclusions
Mimicking portfolios for economic risk factors have long been useful in asset pricing

research. In many applications the weights are assumed to be fixed over time, while in

theory they should be functions of the economic state. We study mimicking portfolios

where the weights depend on predetermined state variables, or conditioning information.

This leads to extensions of results on conditional and unconditional mean variance

efficiency, as developed by Hansen and Richard (1987), generalizations of the closed-form

solutions for unconditionally mean variance efficient portfolios in Ferson and Siegel

(2001), and conditional and unconditional versions of multifactor minimum variance

portfolios, as described by Fama (1996). The relation between conditional and

unconditional multifactor minimum variance portfolios is analogous to the relation

between conditional and unconditional minimum variance efficient portfolios.

              Under the assumption of normality, agents in Merton's (1973) model choose

multifactor minimum variance portfolios given the agents' information set. We show that

a class of generalized quadratic utility investors will choose unconditional multifactor

minimum variance portfolios. The utility function may be interpreted as having state

dependent risk aversion that depends on the factor. These results do not require

normality.

              Special cases of our solutions are maximum correlation portfolios that refine

the "economic tracking portfolios" studied by Lamont (2001). In this case the correlation

with an economic factor is maximized over the set of portfolio weight functions that may
                                                                                             32
vary over time, depending on lagged conditioning variables.

              We provide empirical examples to illustrate the implications of our results.

Using a sample of asset returns, economic factors and conditioning information similar to

Lamont (2001), we explore the potential advantage to constructing mimicking portfolios

with the optimal, time-varying weights. The potential advantages can be large. A

numerical example with a single risky asset and a riskless asset shows that we can more

than double the correlation with an inflation factor. In Lamont’s sample the potential

improvement is more than 20%, abstracting from estimation error.

              Estimation error in mimicking portfolio weights presents challenges for

future research and for practical applications. We present simulation experiments that

isolate the effects of parameter estimation error and error in specifying the form of the

data generating process (DGP). The first type of error is present in all the approaches, but

to a greater extent in the time-varying optimal solutions because they involve more

parameters. The fixed-weight approaches (based on OLS regression) do not need to

specify the DGP. If the time-varying weight approaches use the wrong DGP they are no

longer optimal.

              We find that the time-varying weight solutions are affected more by

parameter estimation error than the fixed-weight approaches, and their performance

suffers when the wrong DGP is assumed. The tradeoff is thus similar to the tradeoff

between efficiency and robustness that is frequently encountered in econometric practice.

We found examples where the higher correlations delivered by an optimal solution more
than offset the negative effects of parameter estimation error. However, the actual sample

performance of the fixed-weight approaches is typically superior. This leads us to

conclude that in a setting where the correct DGP is known or specified as part of the

model (e.g., when the forcing processes are a part of the model to be examined) the

optimal solutions may be preferred in practice. Where robustness to the form of the DGP
                                                                                                  33
is also at issue, the simpler regression methods may be expected to perform better.



Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1:
               We show that UMMV implies CMMV almost surely by contradiction. Assume that
the portfolio Rp, with weights wp(Z), is not almost surely CMMV. Let Ω be the subset of possible

values of Z for which Rp is not CMMV, a set with positive measure. Define the portfolio Rw =
w(Z)'R, where the weights w(Z) are defined as follows. If z ε Ω, then w(z) is CMMV with

w(z)'E(R|z) = E(Rp|z) and w(z)'E{RF|z} = E(RpF|z). Otherwise, w(z) = wp(z) for all values of z not
in Ω. It follows that Var(Rw|z) ≤ Var(Rp|z) for all z, with strict inequality for z ε Ω, while

E(Rp|Z)=E(Rw|Z) and E(FRp|Z)=E(FRw|Z). By iterated expectations, this implies E(Rp)=E(Rw) and
E(FRp)=E(FRw). Since the conditional means of the two portfolios are identical, Var(Rw|Z) <
Var(Rp|Z) implies E(Rw2|Z) < E(Rp2|Z) with positive probability, which implies E(Rw2) < E(Rp2),
which implies Var(Rw) < Var(Rp). Thus, Rp cannot be UMMV, and we have established that
UMMV implies CMMV almost surely.
               To show that CMMV does not imply UMMV, it suffices to find a portfolio that is
CMMV but not UMMV. The example has three assets with returns {R1,R2,R3}. The information
set is chosen to have two points, so that Z=1 with probability 0.5 and Z=2 with probability 0.5. The
asset returns are chosen to be conditionally independent of each other, given Z. Each asset has two
possible returns, each value observed with conditional probability 0.5. When Z=1 the possible
values are: R1={5%, 15%}, R2={4%, 14%}, R3={6%, 16%}. When Z=2 the possible values are:
R1={5%, 15%}, R2={6%, 16%}, R3={4%, 14%}. For the factor, we choose the first asset, so that
F=R1. Consider the CMMV portfolio with the choice c(Z)=E(R2|Z), d(Z)=E(FR2|Z) and x(Z)'1=1.
This imposes three constraints for each Z. With three assets, the solution is generally unique. Thus
R2 is CMMV with this choice of c(Z) and d(Z). While R2 is CMMV, it is not UMMV because it is
dominated by the equally-weighted portfolio formed from assets 2 and 3 (which is UMMV). The
                                                                                                    34

variance of R2 is 0.0026, while the variance of (R1+R2)/2 is 0.00125, a reduction of more than half.
The constraints are satisfied in the sense that E(R2)=E{c(Z)}=E{(R1+R2)/2}=10%, and
E(FR2)=E{d(Z)}=E{F(R1+R2)/2}=0.01. QED



Proof of Proposition 2:
               The proof follows by maximizing the squared conditional correlation, or
equivalently x(Z)'Cov(RF|Z)/[x(Z)'Cov(R|Z)x(Z)]1/2, over the choice of weight functions x(Z). The
search for the optimal weights may be restricted to weight functions that satisfy Equation (7).
Since the squared correlation is invariant to a constant linear transformation, the search may be
limited, for each z, to the space of random variables of the form d(z) + c(z)x(z)'R = d(z) + c(z)R' Λ 1
/(1' Λ 1) - λ1(z)c(z)R'Ω(z)µ(z) - λ2(z)c(z)R'Ω(z)E(RF|z) = d(z) + c(z)U1 - λ1(z)c(z)U2 -
λ2(z)c(z)U3, where U1 = R' Λ 1 /(1' Λ 1), U2 = R'Ω(z)µ(z) and U3 = R'Ω(z)E(RF|z). For given

values of z, this expression may be recognized as the fitted values of a regression equation

to predict the factor, F, with the regressors U1, U2 and U3. The coefficients are b(z)=

[d(z),c(z),-λ1(z)c(z),-λ2(z)c(z)]'. Letting X=(1,U1,U2,U3)' the coefficients satisfy b(z) =

[E{XX'|Z}]-1E{XF|Z}. The coefficients given in the proposition are the solution to this

system of equations. QED.

               The proof of the Corollary is a special case of Proposition 2, and proceeds by

simply replacing d(z), c(z), λ1(z) and λ2(z) by the constants d, c, λ1 and λ2. QED.


Proof of Proposition 3:

               The proposition follows directly from inspection of Equations (6) and (7).
The first term of these equations gives the weight for R *0 = x1(Z)'R, with x1(Z) =

Λ 1/(1' Λ 1). This is a portfolio with weights that sum to 1.0. In particular, R *0 is the global

minimum conditional second moment portfolio. The global minimum conditional second

moment portfolio has some conditional mean return and some conditional covariance
                                                                                                   35
function with each factor. From equation (7) it is a CMMV portfolio, with target

conditional mean and covariance with the factors equal to the values that correspond to

the "unconstrained" global minimum second moment solution (λ1(Z)=λ2(Z)=0). The

remaining terms of equation (6) and (7) describe portfolio weights that sum to zero, as can

be seen by premultiplying the terms in square brackets by 1'. These two terms define the
excess returns R *e and R *e fj, j=1,...,K. The scalar weights {λ1(Z) and λ2j(Z), j=1,...,K} on these

excess returns are functions of Z in equation (7), when the solution is CMMV. In the

UMMV solution of equation (6), these scalars are constants.



Proof of Proposition 4:

               The proof of Proposition 4 does not require normality. First, we establish

that if a portfolio weight function x(Z) maximizes the conditional expectation

E{J(Wt,Ft)|Zt-1}, subject to the constraints, then it must also maximize the unconditional

expectation E{J(Wt,Ft)}, subject to the constraints. Suppose, by contradiction that another

solution y(Z) maximizes the unconditional expectation and implies the indirect utility J(y),

while x(Z) maximizes the conditional expectation and implies J(x). Then E{J(x) - J(y)|Z } ≥

0, implying E{J(x) - J(y)} ≥ 0, contradicting that y(Z) maximizes the unconditional

expectation, unless y(Z) = x(Z), almost surely. Using the specific form of the indirect

utility we have E{J(W,F)} = E{W - aW2 - b'FW} = E(W) - a[Var(W) + E(W)2] - b'[Cov(W,F) -
E(W)E(F)]. Maximizing this function is equivalent to minimizing the unconditional

variance for a given unconditional mean return and covariances with the factors. The

solution is therefore UMMV. QED.



Derivation of Equation (9):

The Lagrangian is
                                                                                                                                      36
              1 
   L ( w) =    E ( Rw − rf )  − λ1  E ( Rw ) − c  − λ 2  E ( Rw F ) − d 
                             2

              2               
       1  2
        E w ( Z ) ( R − rf     )  − λ    r + E  w ( Z ) ( R − rf )  − c  − λ 2  rf µ F + E  w ( Z ) ( R − rf ) F  − d  .
                                2
   =                                                                                                                  
       2                                  f                                                                                 
                                       1




We proceed by perturbation, assuming that w ( Z ) is the optimal solution and allowing
                                                                                                              ∂
y ( Z ) to be any function for which expectations exist. Then we have                                            L ( w + ay ) = 0 ,
                                                                                                              ∂a             a =0


and hence


                 E  w ( Z ) y ( Z ) ( R − rf )  − λ1 E  y ( Z ) ( R − rf )  − λ 2 E  y ( Z ) ( R − rf ) F 
                                                2

                                                 

                      {
                 = E y ( Z ) E  w ( Z ) ( R − rf
                                
                                                            )
                                                                2
                                                                                                         }
                                                                    − λ1 ( R − rf ) − λ 2 ( R − rf ) F Z  = 0
                                                                                                          

for all such functions y ( Z ) , which in turn implies that


                            E  w ( Z ) ( R − rf   )       − λ1 ( R − rf ) − λ 2 ( R − rf ) F Z  = 0
                                                        2                                              a.s.

                                                                                                 

from which we obtain the functional form of the optimal solution:

                                                λ1 E ( R − rf | Z ) + λ 2 E ( R − rf ) F Z 
                                    w(Z ) =                                                .
                                                             E ( R − rf ) Z 
                                                                           2

                                                                              

Now observe that the conditional distribution of ( R, F ) given Z (using the joint normal
distribution assumption) is

                                      σ RZ                      σ 2RZ                                  σ RZ σ FZ   
                                 µ R + 2 ( Z − µ Z )   σ R − 2                                σ RF −
                                                                 2

                   R                                                                                               
                                       σZ                          σZ                                        σ 2Z      .
                     Z  ~ N                      ,
                   F             σ FZ                     σ σ                                        σ2FZ     
                                 µ F + 2 ( Z − µ Z )   σ RF − RZ 2 FZ                           σ2F −              
                                     σZ                         σZ                                       σ2Z        

From this we immediately have
                                                                                                                    37
                                                                                       σ RZ
                             E ( R − r f | Z ) = E ( R | Z ) − r f = µ R − rf +             ( Z − µZ ) ,
                                                                                       σ 2Z

             E ( R − rf ) F Z  = Cov ( R, F | Z ) + E ( R − rf | Z ) E ( F | Z )
                              
                                         σ σ                      σ                     σ             
                                                                     2 (
                                 = σ RF − RZ 2 F Ζ + µ R − rf + RZ      Z − µ Z )  µ F + FZ
                                                                                             2 (
                                                                                                 Z − µZ ) ,
                                            σZ                    σZ                    σZ            

and

                            E ( R − rf   )       Z  = Var ( R | Z ) +  E ( R − rf | Z ) 
                                              2                                                  2

                                                  
                                                                                                          2
                                                           σ2              σ             
                                                                              2 (
                                                      = σ − RZ
                                                           2
                                                           R   + µ R − rf + RZ   Z − µZ ) .
                                                           σZ 
                                                             2
                                                                            σZ            



Alternative Characterization:

                   Equation (17) provides an alternative representation for the CMMV solution

of Equation (7), expressed in terms of covariances instead of second moment matrices.

Here we provide a corresponding alternative formula for the UMMV optimal weight
function. Let the conditional covariance matrix of the returns be Σ = Σ( Z) = Cov(R Z) .

The weight function (6) may be written as17



                                                                                                               (A.1)
                                                                                                     −1
                                                     1′ Σ −11       ′
                                                                   1 Σ −1µ( Z)   1 
                           x ( Z) = Σ −1 (1 µ( Z) )
                                                     µ ′Σ −11 1 + µ ′( Z)Σ −1µ( Z)   − λ 1 
                                                                                   
                             1′ Σ −11        ′
                                                               −1
                                                                     ′ 
                                              1 Σ −1µ( Z)   1  −1
       − I − Σ −1 (1 µ( Z) )                                              Σ [Cov(R , F′ Z) − µ( Z)E(F′ Z)]λ 2 .
                             µ ′( Z)Σ −11 1 + µ ′Σ −1µ( Z)   µ ′( Z) 
                                                                     




Simulation Details

17   A derivation of this characterization is available by request to the authors.
                                                                                                     38
               The simulations are calibrated to the sample moments of the actual data,

using the sample means and covariances and the sample regression functions on the

lagged variables as parameters of the data generating process. One prominent feature of

the data is the high degree of persistence in the lagged instruments. We capture this
through a first order vector autoregression: ( Z t − Z) = A ( Z t −1 − Z) + U Zt , where the matrix

A becomes a parameter of the simulation. We generate the artificial data using a
parametric bootstrap approach. For a given factor, the T × (n + L + 1) matrix of sample
residuals, u = {(u Rt , u Zt , u Ft )}t serves as the population of shocks, where the u Ft are the

unexpected factor realizations and the u Rt are the regression residuals for the asset returns

on the lagged instruments. We randomly resample rows from u with replacement. The

lagged instruments are then built up recursively using the matrix A. The returns are

formed as their conditional means, given the lagged Z, plus a shock.

               When the data generating process features conditional heteroskedasticity

driven by linear beats, we modify the simulations as follows. The regression
u Rt = b o u Ft + B( Z t −1 − Z) ⊗ u Ft + v t determines the parameters (bo,B) for the linear

conditional betas. We resample from the residuals {( v t , u Zt , u Ft )}t and generate the draw

for uRt from the regression function.




References

Breeden, Douglas T. 1979. An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7: 265-96.

Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical tests
of the consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-62.

Brown, Stephen, David R. Gallagher, Ono W. Steenbeck and Peter L. Swan, 2004, Double
or nothing: Patterns of equity fund holdings and transactions, working paper, New York
University.
                                                                                               39

Brown, Stephen J. and Jerold B. Warner, 1980, Measuring security price performance,
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 205-258.

Chen, Nai-fu, Roll, Richard R. and Ross, Stephen A. 1986. Economic Forces and the
Stock Market. Journal of Business 59: 383-403.

Cochrane, John H. 2001. Asset Pricing. Princeton Unversity Press, Princeton, N.J.

Connor, Gregory and Robert A. Korajczyk. 1988. Risk and return in an equilibrium APT:
applications of a new test methodology. Journal of Financial Economics 21: 255-289.

Dybvig, Philip and Stephen A. Ross, 1985. Differential Information and Performance
Measurement Using a Security Market Line, Journal of Finance 40, 383-399.

Eckbo, Espen B., Ronald W. Masulis and Oyvind Norli, 2000, Seasoned public offerrings:
Resolution of the 'new issues puzzle,' Journal of Financial Economics 56, 251-291.

Fama, E.F., 1990, Stock Returns, Expected Returns and Real Activity. Journal of Finance 45,
1089-1109.

Fama, E.F., 1996, Multifactor portfolio efficiency and multifactor asset pricing, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 441-465.

Fama, E.F., 1998, Determining the number of priced state variables in the ICAPM, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 217-231.

Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33: 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing
anomalies. Journal of Finance 51: 55-87.

Fama, Eugene F. and MacBeth, James D., 1973, Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical
Tests, Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-36.

Fama, E. F., and G.W. Schwert. 1997. Asset Returns and Inflation. Journal of Financial
Economics, 5, 115-146.

Ferson, W. and C. R. Harvey. 1991. The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums. Journal of
Political Economy 99: 385-415.

Ferson W. and C.R. Harvey, 1993, "The Risk and Predictability of International Equity
Returns," Review of Financial Studies 6, 527-566.
                                                                                            40
Ferson, W. and Andrew F. Siegel, 2001, The efficient use of Conditioning Information in
Portfolios, Journal of Finance 56:3, 967-982.

Ferson, W. and Andrew F. Siegel, 2003, Stochastic Discount Factor Bounds with
Conditioning Information, Review of Financial Studies 16, 567-595.

Hansen, Lars P. 1982. Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moment
Estimators. Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, L.P., and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of Security market Data for
Models of Dynamic Economics. Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.

Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning information in deducing
testable restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models. Econometrica 55, No. 3, 587-
613.

Huberman, Gur and Kandel, Shmuel A., 1987, Mean-Variance Spanning, Journal of Finance
42, 383-88.

Keim, Donald an R.F. Stambough. 1986. Predicting Returns in Stock and Bond Markets.
Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.

Lamont, Owen A. 2001, Economic tracking portfolios, Journal of Econometrics 105, 161-184.

Merton, Robert, 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867,
887.

Ross, S. 1976. The arbitrage theory of capital market asset pricing. Journal of Economic
Theory 13: 341-360.

Sharpe, William. F. 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk. Journal of Finance 19: 425-42.
                                                                                                                      41
                                                        Table 1

Regressions to Determine the Parmeters of the conditional means in the Simulations. The sample period is
January 1947 through December, 1994 (576 months). Continuously compounded returns and factors are
regressed monthly on the seven lagged instruments indicated in the columns. rflag is the lagged Treasury bill
rate, term1y is the one-year term spread, defbond is the default-related bond yield spread, defcp is the spread of
commercial paper over short term Treasury yields. Laginf, lagipx and lagrm are the lagged values over the
preceding year for inflation, industrial production growth and the stock market return, respectively. The
coefficient estimates are shown on the first line and Newey-West (1987) standard errors with 24 moving
average terms are shown on the second line. Rsq is the adjusted coefficient of determination. Quarterly and
annual factors are measured as overlapping monthly observations. All variables are in natural decimal units.
The intercepts are not shown.

                                   rflag    term1y defbond          defcp    lagipx laginf     lagrm         Rsq

Panel A: Monthly returns

market return                      -2.82    -0.729   2.51           -0.022 -0.040     0.031    0.072          0.117
                                    0.877    0.462   0.547           0.454 0.023      0.043    0.012

basic industries                   -2.87    -0.965   2.72           -0.195 -0.048     0.058    0.083          0.108
                                    1.16     0.448   0.645          0.527   0.026     0.055    0.014

capital goods                      -3.08    -0.831   2.57           -0.296 -0.061     0.022    0.068          0.082
                                    1.16     0.531   0.826          0.506   0.036     0.069    0.015

construction                       -4.82    -0.958   2.91           -0.294 -0.123     0.170    0.105          0.086
                                    2.57     0.909   1.25           0.851   0.055     0.125    0.025

consumer goods                     -2.07    -1.01    3.12           -0.507 -0.067 -0.031       0.065          0.134
                                    0.951    0.406   0.605          0.595   0.027 0.047        0.014

energy                             -3.71    -0.588   1.36           0.101    -0.049   0.22     0.071         0.050
                                    1.30     0.692   0.685          0.508     0.033   0.07     0.022

finance                            -2.94    -1.17    3.22           -0.189 -0.043     0.032    0.079          0.110
                                    1.09     0.571   0.743          0.546   0.035     0.062    0.016

transportation                     -3.49    -1.61    3.81           -0.580 -0.028     0.064    0.080          0.104
                                    1.40     0.664   0.889          0.767   0.039     0.080    0.018

utilities                          -1.50    -1.60    2.80           0.211    -0.025 -0.061     0.035          0.112
                                    0.87     0.480   0.648          0.317     0.023 0.036      0.010

longbond                           -0.049 -1.88      2.47           0.737    0.051    -0.125 -0.009           0.166
                                    0.911 0.270      0.397          0.281    0.016     0.044 0.009

intermediate bond                  0.455    -1.54    1.80           0.456    0.041 -0.088 -0.013              0.247
                                   0.600     0.203   0.278          0.190    0.0107 0.0301 0.007

one year bond                      0.876    -0.467   0.607          0.148    0.012    -0.027 -0.004           0.508
                                   0.182     0.087   0.105          0.057    0.004     0.010 0.002

junk bond                          -0.826 -1.44      2.79           -0.133   0.034    -0.010   0.001          0.193
                                    0.672 0.263      0.391          0.203    0.013     0.027   0.007
                                                                                                   42
table 1, page 2

                                rflag    term1y defbond   defcp    lagipx laginf   lagrm   Rsq

Panel B: Monthly Factor Growth Rates

industrial production           -1.15    0.0453 0.511     0.183    -0.024 -0.044 -0.003    0.076
                                 0.266   0.125 0.174      0.129     0.011 0.022 0.005

labor income                    -0.622   0.274   0.022    0.151    -0.014 -0.026   0.002   0.002
                                 0.285   0.110   0.132    0.082     0.007 0.013    0.003

inflation                        0.410   0.136 -0.160     0.0343 -0.000    0.019   0.001   0.131
                                 0.175   0.0549 0.096     0.0671 0.005     0.015   0.001

Panel C: Quarterly Factor Growth Rates

industrial production           -3.10    -3.8E-05 1.43    0.408    -0.067 -0.120 -0.012    0.127
                                 0.726    0.322 0.423     0.345     0.028 0.062 0.014

labor income                    -1.56    0.392   0.181    -0.129 -0.036 -0.051 -0.006      0.026
                                 0.638   0.268   0.328    0.216   0.018 0.038 0.008

inflation                        1.28    0.342   -0.436   0.0487 -0.001 0.053      0.002   0.185
                                 0.512   0.178    0.287   0.194   0.015 0.044      0.004

Panel D: Annual Factor Growth Rates

industrial production           -9.29    1.35    3.30     -2.28    -0.272 -0.362   0.069   0.401
                                 2.60    0.810   1.46     0.859     0.096 0.222    0.027

labor income                    -5.39    0.371   2.01     -0.469 -0.038 -0.289     0.054   0.432
                                 1.58    0.391   0.846    0.550   0.049 0.095      0.017

inflation                        5.37    0.547   -1.75    -0.246   0.051   0.481   0.009   0.522
                                 1.74    0.392    0.919   0.466    0.034   0.136   0.013
                                                                                                                        43
                                                          Table 2

Potential correlations of Mimicking Portfolios. The absolute correlations, in percent (%), between mimicking portfolios
and economic factors are shown. The computations abstract from sampling error in the estimation of the mimicking
portfolios weights, via a simulation with one million time-series observations. The data generating process features linear
conditional expected returns, fixed factor means and homoskedasticity. The simulations are calibrated to the sample in
Table 1. The Fix-weight solutions use a simple regression of the factor on returns where unconditional correlations are
shown, and follow Lamont (2001), where expected conditional correlations are shown. The TV-weight solutions allow for
optimal, time-varying weights that depend on the conditioning variables.


                   Industrial Production                  Labor Income                     Inflation
                Fix-weight       TV-weight        Fix-weight      TV-weight         Fix-weight       TV-weight



Panel A: Contemporaneous Monthly Factors

Unconditional 9.0                15.3             26.0              30.4            17.9             18.3
Correlation

Expected        16.3             16.3             31.0              31.0            21.1             21.1
Conditional
Correlation

Panel B: Monthly future Factors

Unconditional 11.4               13.3             13.8              19.8            10.9             13.0
Correlation

Expected        13.9             13.9             20.8              20.8            14.1             14.1
Conditional
Correlation

Panel C: Quarterly future Factors

Unconditional 12.7               14.7              18.7             21.7            10.5             12.7
Correlation

Expected        15.1             15.1             22.2              22.2            14.0             14.0
Conditional
Correlation

Panel D: Annual future Factors

Unconditional    6.2             10.2             8.1               10.7            16.9             17.0
Correlation

Expected        11.3              11.3             11.8             11.8            18.3             18.3
Conditional
Correlation

Averages:

Unconditional 9.8                13.4             16.7              20.7            14.1             15.3
Conditional   14.2               14.2             21.5              21.5            16.9             16.9
                                                                                                                    44
                                                       Table 3

Potential correlations of Mimicking Portfolios. The expected absolute conditional correlations, in percent (%), between
mimicking portfolios and economic factors are shown. The computations abstract from sampling error in the estimation
of the mimicking portfolios weights, via a simulation with one million time-series observations. The data generating
process features linear conditional expected returns, and heteroskedasticity driven by linear conditional betas. The
simulations are calibrated to the sample in Table 1. The Fix-weight solutions follow Lamont (2001). The TV-weight
solutions allow for optimal, time-varying weights. L refers to the number of lagged instruments. When L = 1 the term
spread is the only instrument. When L = 2 the lagged, risk-free rate is included. When L = 3 we also include the lagged
default spread.


                   Industrial Production                Labor Income                    Inflation
                Fix-weight       TV-weight      Fix-weight      TV-weight        Fix-weight       TV-weight


Panel A: Contemporaneous Monthly Factors

L=1             17.8             25.0           28.8             36.4            28.8            36.3

L=2             35.6             53.4           29.6             64.7            31.6            44.2

L=3             24.4             48.7           28.5             70.0            26.1            45.3

Panel B: Monthly future Factors

L=1             17.9             22.8           20.2             25.6            20.7            23.5

L=2             34.9             58.9           35.4             52.6            16.3            37.0

L=3             28.0             60.8           30.1             56.6            15.0            42.2

Panel C: Quarterly future Factors

L=1             21.1             25.3           25.9             29.1            27.0            28.5

L=2             50.4             61.7           39.7             62.5            15.0            27.9

L=3             39.5             60.7           35.1             66.9            14.2            31.9

Panel D: Annual future Factors

L=1             35.3             37.0           36.3             39.6            38.3            39.1

L=2             47.8             68.3           49.1             67.6            28.5            37.5

L=3             38.0             67.1           43.8             67.1            30.0            38.0


Averages        32.9             49.1           33.5             53.2            24.3            36.0
                                                                                                                         45
                                                         Table 4

Sample performance of mimicking portfolios. The sample is the same as in Table 1. The estimates assume that the data
generating process features linear conditional expected asset returns and homoskedasticity. The Fixed solution estimates
the weights with an OLS regression of the factor on the vector of contemporaneous returns where unconditional
correlations are shown, and uses the method of Lamont (2001) where average conditional correlations are shown. The
TVW solutions allow weights that depend on the lagged conditioning variables in the previous month. The
unconditional correlations are the sample correlations between the fitted mimicking portfolio returns and the factors. The
Average conditional correlations are the correlations between the regression residuals of the returns and the factors,
regressed on the lagged instruments.


                                 Industrial Production                Labor Income                         Inflation


                                 Fixed            TVW              Fixed           TVW              Fixed              TVW


Panel A: Monthly Contemporaneous Factors

Unconditional
Correlation                      15.6             11.8             31.1            31.1             23.2               11.9

Average Conditional
Correlation                      17.1             17.1             31.3            31.3             22.8               22.8


Panel B: Monthly future Factors

Unconditional
Correlation                      15.4             10.5             20.6            19.4             21.0               8.6

Average Conditional
Correlation                      14.5             14.5             20.9            20.9             15.1               15.1


Panel C: Quarterly future Factors

Unconditional
Correlation                      19.2             14.3             26.4            24.1             23.5               7.4

Average Conditional
Correlation                      16.0             16.0             22.8            22.8             15.5               15.5


Panel D: Annual future Factors

Unconditional
Correlation                      32.6             4.4              37.8            6.5              36.8               10.1

Average Conditional
Correlation                      14.7             14.7             15.6            15.6             25.6               25.6

Averages:

Unconditional                    20.7             10.3             29.0            20.3             26.1               9.5

Conditional                      15.6             15.6             22.7            22.7             19.8               19.8
                                                                                                                         46
                                                         Table 5

Sample performance of mimicking portfolios. The sample is the same as in Table 1. The estimates assume that the data
generating process features linear conditional expected asset returns, and heteroskedasticity driven by linear conditional
betas. The Fixed solution estimates the weights with an OLS regression of the factor on the vector of contemporaneous
returns where unconditional correlations are shown, and uses the method of Lamont (2001) where average conditional
correlations are shown. The TVW solutions allow weights that depend on the lagged conditioning variables in the
previous month. The unconditional correlations are the sample correlations between the fitted mimicking portfolio
returns and the factors. The Average conditional correlations are the sample correlations between the regression
residuals of the returns and the factors, regressed on the lagged instruments. The first row of numbers is based on the
lagged term spread only. For the second row all seven lagged instruments are used.


                                 Industrial Production                Labor Income                         Inflation


                                 Fixed            TVW              Fixed           TVW              Fixed              TVW


Panel A: Monthly Contemporaneous Factors

Unconditional                    15.6             17.7             31.1            33.3             23.2               25.2
Correlation                      15.6             27.0             31.1            30.7             23.2               29.3

Average Conditional              15.6             0.8              31.1            5.5              22.4               0.7
Correlation                      17.1             0.1              31.3            4.9              22.8               19.6


Panel B: Monthly future Factors

Unconditional                    15.4             19.7             20.6            22.5             21.0               20.9
Correlation                      15.4             23.0             20.6            32.6             21.0               24.8

Average Conditional              15.4             0.9              20.5            22.6             19.0               1.1
Correlation                      14.5             1.5              20.9            3.2              15.1               0.3


Panel C: Quarterly future Factors

Unconditional                    19.2             22.7             26.4            28.2             23.5               27.2
Correlation                      19.2             28.8             26.4            31.7             23.5               23.8

Average Conditional              18.9             21.4             26.3            6.2              21.3               6.3
Correlation                      16.0             4.2              22.8            0.0              15.5               2.5


Panel D: Annual future Factors

Unconditional                    32.6             32.6             37.8            38.7             36.8               39.9
Correlation                      32.6             27.8             37.8            23.2             36.8               22.6

Average Conditional              32.4             32.1             36.8            3.4              34.7               17.7
Correlation                      14.7             3.1              15.6            5.8              25.6               4.5

Averages:

Unconditional                    20.7             24.9             29.0            30.1             26.1               26.7

Conditional                      18.1             8.0              25.7            6.5              22.1               6.6
                                                                                                                       47
                                                           Table 6

Effects of parameter estimation error and error in specifying the form of the data generating process on the unconditional
correlations of mimicking portfolios. The table shows the ratio of actual to potential absolute unconditional correlations
with an industrial production growth factor, in percent. The potential correlations follow Table 3, assuming that the data
generating process (DGP) features linear conditional mean asset returns and heteroskedsticity driven by linear
conditional betas. In the colums labelled "Parameter error only," the simulations incorporate estimation error but the
correct form of the DGP is used. In the columns labelled "DGP Error only," the simulations abstract from estimation
error by using a sample with one million observations, but the portfolios incorrectly assume that the DGP features linear
conditional asset returns and homoskedasticity, as in Table 2. In the columns labelled "Both DGP and Parameter Error,"
there is estimation error and the homoskedastic process is incorrectly assumed. The simulations are calibrated to the
sample in Table 1. When L=1 only the lagged term spread is used as a conditioning variable. When L=2 the lagged risk-
free rate is also included and when L=3 the lagged default spread is included as well. The FIX solution estimates the
weights with an OLS regression of the factor on the vector of contemporaneous returns. The TVW solutions are the
UMMV solutions that allow weights to depend on the lagged conditioning variables in the previous month.


                                    Parameter Error Only             DGP Error Only         DGP and Parameter Error
                                   FIX            TVW                       TVW                  TVW


Panel A: Contemporaneous Monthly Factor

L=1                              70.7             15.4                      93.0                    15.8
L=2                              57.7             20.3                      88.9                    21.1
L=3                              57.6             43.2                      84.2                    44.4


Panel B: Monthly future Factor

L=1                                71.4           26.2                      94.7                    59.6
L=2                                56.4           23.1                      85.3                    63.3
L=3                                54.5           30.2                      83.9                    30.9

Panel C: Quarterly future Factor

L=1                                79.5           42.6                      93.2                    41.4
L=2                                67.3           34.4                      84.5                    37.0
L=3                                60.2           45.4                      82.4                    46.1


Panel D: Annual future Factor

L=1                                92.2           68.2                      98.1                    67.7
L=2                                70.7           17.4                      83.8                    16.5
L=3                                58.8           19.0                      85.3                    12.7
                                                                                                                          48
                                                          Table 7

Effects of parameter estimation error on the expected conditional correlations of mimicking portfolios. The table shows
the ratio of actual to potential absolute unconditional correlations with an industrial production growth factor, in percent.
 The potential correlations follow Table 3, assuming that the data generating process features linear conditional mean
asset returns and heteroskedsticity driven by linear conditional betas. The simulations incorporate estimation error, and
the correct form of the DGP is used. When L=1 only the lagged term spread is used as a conditioning variable. When
L=2 the lagged risk-free rate is also included and when L=3 the lagged default spread is included as well. The FIX
solution estimates the weights using the regression approach of Lamont. The TVW solutions are the CMMV solutions
that allow the weights to depend on the lagged conditioning variables in the previous month.


                                                            Parameter Error Only
                                                            FIX            TVW


Panel A: Contemporaneous Monthly Factor

L=1                                                        71.9              65.2
L=2                                                        79.1              72.1
L=3                                                        88.9              66.3


Panel B: Monthly future Factor

L=1                                                        73.2              33.5
L=2                                                        89.3              75.0
L=3                                                        97.9              74.8

Panel C: Quarterly future Factor

L=1                                                        77.3              72.1
L=2                                                        75.4              78.4
L=3                                                        95.1              74.7


Panel D: Annual future Factor

L=1                                                        90.7              88.8
L=2                                                        85.1              78.1
L=3                                                        82.3              77.5
                                                                   49
                                 Figure 1




         1


         0
weight




         -1


         -2


         -3
              -2      -1         0          1        2        3
                                       Z




                                 Figure 2
          5

          0

          -5
weight




         -10

         -15

         -20

         -25
               -30   -20   -10         0        10       20   30
                                       Z
