NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEPARATING UNCERTAINTY FROM
HETEROGENEITY IN LIFE CYCLE EARNINGS
Flavio Cunha
James J. Heckman
Salvador Navarro
Working Paper 11024
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11024
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

Heckman is also affiliated with the American Bar Foundation and University College London, Department
of Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Flavio Cunha, James J. Heckman, Salvador Navarro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Separating Uncertainty from Heterogeneity in Life Cycle Earnings
Flavio Cunha, James J. Heckman, Salvador Navarro

NBER Working Paper No. 11024
January 2005
JEL No. C33, D84, I21

ABSTRACT
This paper develops and applies a method for decomposing cross section variability of earnings into
components that are forecastable at the time students decide to go to college (heterogeneity) and
components that are unforecastable. About 60% of variability in returns to schooling is forecastable.
This has important implications for using measured variability to price risk and predict college
attendance.
Flavio Cunha
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
flavio@uchicago.edu
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
Salvador Navarro
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
snavarro@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

This lecture commemorates the 100th anniversary of the birth of Sir John Hicks. In most
of his work, Hicks relied on the Marshallian fiction of a representative agent and abstracted
from heterogeneity and variability among people and firms. Economic theory now recognizes
the importance of accounting for heterogeneity among agents in explaining a variety of phenomena. See the survey in Browning et al. (1999). A major discovery of microeconometrics is
that diversity among agents is a central feature of economic life (see Heckman, 2001). While
Hicks generally ignored heterogeneity, he did discuss uncertainty. The distinction between
ex ante and ex post income played a central role in his analysis of economic dynamics (see
Hicks, 1946, p.178). It is featured in our analysis.
This paper develops and implements a method for estimating the importance of uncertainty about lifetime earnings facing agents at the stage of their life cycles when they make
their college-going decisions. We estimate what components of measured lifetime income
variability among persons are due to uncertainty realized after that stage and discuss what
assumptions must be maintained to identify the distributions of these components. In accomplishing this task, we distinguish unobservables from the point of view of the econometrician
from unobservables from the point of view of the agents being studied. We distinguish
components of outcome variability that are forecastable and acted on at a given stage of
the life cycle from unpredictable components. If agents act on (make choices based on)
all forecastable information, under the conditions specified in this paper, we can estimate
components of intrinsic uncertainty and distinguish them from components of forecastable
uncertainty. Using the tools presented here, analysts can determine how much of lifetime

2

earnings variability or inequality is forecastable at a given age and how much is unforecastable ‘luck.’ With concavity in utility and lack of full insurance, at the same level of mean
income, the greater the fraction of variability in lifetime incomes that is unforecastable, the
lower the welfare of agents. Like Hicks, we distinguish ex ante returns from ex post returns.
We build on, and extend, methods developed in Carneiro et al. (2003) who separate
earnings heterogeneity (defined here as information about future earnings known to agents
and acted on in their choices) from unforecastable (at the date choices are made) uncertainty.
They assume an environment of complete autarky. In this paper, we consider a complete
markets environment. A companion paper, Cunha et al. (2004), considers an environment
with partial insurance of the type analyzed by Aiyagari (1994) and Laitner (1992).
A major theoretical issue discussed in this paper is the difficulty in separately identifying
the market structure facing an agent from the agent’s information set. We develop methods
for distinguishing components of future outcomes that are both forecastable and are acted on
from those components that cannot be acted on. What can be acted on and the magnitude
of the effects of the actions depends upon the market structure facing agents and their
preferences.
A major empirical finding reported in all three of our papers is that across a variety
of market environments and for different assumptions about and estimates of risk aversion,
a substantial part of the variability in the ex post returns to schooling is predictable and
acted on by agents. Variability cannot be equated with uncertainty and this has important
empirical consequences.
The plan of the rest of this paper is as follows. Section 2 states the problem of distinguishing between predictable earnings heterogeneity and unpredictable uncertainty for a
3

specified market environment and presents the empirical strategy used in this paper. Section
3 motivates the econometric method we use. This part of the paper is an intuitive summary
of the methods formally developed in Carneiro et al. (2003) and our extensions of it. Section
4 discusses the fundamental problem of separating preferences from market structures and
information. Section 5 presents our empirical analysis and simulations of the model and
discusses the implications of the findings. Section 6 concludes. Two appendices describe our
approach to identification and how we pool data sets to create synthetic life cycles. A third
appendix posted at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Hicks2004/ describes our data.

2

Distinguishing between heterogeneity and uncertainty

In the literature on earnings dynamics (e.g., Lillard and Willis, 1978), it is common to
estimate an earnings equation of the sort

Yi,t = X i,t β + Si τ + vi,t ,

(1)

where Yi,t , X i,t , Si , vi,t denote (for person i at time t), the realized earnings, observable characteristics, educational attainment, and unobservable characteristics, respectively, from the
point of view of the observing economist. We use bold characters to denote vectors and
distinguish them from scalars. The variables generating outcomes realized at time t may or
may not have been known to the agents at the time they made their schooling decisions.
Often the error term vi,t is decomposed into two or more components. For example, it is

4

common to specify that

vi,t = φi + εi,t .

(2)

The term φi is a person-specific effect. The error term εi,t is generally assumed to follow
an ARMA (p, q) process (see, e.g., MaCurdy, 1982) such as εi,t = ρεi,t−1 + mi,t , where
mi,t is a mean zero innovation independent of X i,t and the other error components. The
components X i,t , φi , and εi,t all contribute to measured ex post variability across persons.
However, the literature is silent about the difference between heterogeneity and uncertainty,
the unforecastable part of earnings as measured from a given age—what Jencks et al. (1972)
call ‘luck.’
An alternative specification of the error process postulates a factor structure for earnings,

υ i,t = θ i αt + δ i,t ,

(3)

where θ i is a vector of skills (e.g., ability, initial human capital, motivation, and the like), αt
is a vector of skill prices, and the δ i,t are mutually independent mean zero shocks independent
of θ i . See Hause (1978) and Heckman and Scheinkman (1987) for analysis of such a model.
Any process in the form of equation (2) can be written in terms of (3). The latter specification
is more directly interpretable as a pricing equation than (2) and is a natural starting point
for human capital analyses. It is the one used in this paper.
Depending on the available market arrangements for coping with risk, the predictable
components of vi,t will have a different effect on choices and economic welfare than the un-

5

predictable components, if people are risk averse and cannot fully insure against uncertainty.
Statistical decompositions based on (1), (2), and (3) or versions of them describe ex post
variability but tell us nothing about which components of (1) or (3) are forecastable by
agents ex ante. Is φi unknown to the agent? εi,t ? Or φi + εi,t ? Or mi,t ? In representation
(3), the entire vector θ i , components of the θ i , the δ i,t , or all of these may or may not be
known to the agent at the time schooling choices are made.
The methodology presented in this paper provides a framework within which it is possible
to identify components of life cycle outcomes that are forecastable and acted on at the
time decisions are taken from ones that are not. The essential idea of the method can be
illustrated in the case of educational choice, the problem we study in our empirical work.
In order to choose between high school and college, say at age 19, agents forecast future
earnings (and other returns and costs) for each schooling level. Using information about
educational choices at age 19, together with the ex post realization of earnings and costs
that are observed at later ages, it is possible to estimate and test which components of
future earnings and costs are forecast by the agent at age 19. This can be done provided
we know, or can estimate, the earnings of agents under both schooling choices and provided
we specify the market environment under which they operate as well as their preferences
over outcomes. For certain market environments where separation theorems are valid, so
that consumption decisions are made independently of the wealth maximizing decision, it
is not necessary to know agent preferences to decompose realized earnings outcomes in this
fashion. Our method uses choice information to extract ex ante or forecast components
of earnings and to distinguish them from realized earnings. The difference between forecast
and realized earnings allows us to identify the distributions of the components of uncertainty
6

facing agents at the time they make their schooling decisions.
To be more precise, consider a version of the generalized Roy (1951) economy with two
sectors.1 Let Si denote different schooling levels. Si = 0 denotes choice of the high school
sector for person i, and Si = 1 denotes choice of the college sector. Each person chooses
to be in one or the other sector but cannot be in both. Let the two potential outcomes
be represented by the pair (Y0,i , Y1,i ), only one of which is observed by the analyst for any
agent. Denote by Ci the direct cost of choosing sector 1, which is associated with choosing
the college sector (e.g., tuition and non-pecuniary costs of attending college expressed in
monetary values).
Y1,i is the ex post present value of earnings in the college sector, discounted over horizon
T for a person choosing at a fixed age, assumed for convenience to be zero,

Y1,i

T
X
Y1,i,t
=
t,
(1
+
r)
t=0

and Y0,i is the ex post present value of earnings in the high-school sector at age zero,

Y0,i

T
X
Y0,i,t
=
,
(1 + r)t
t=0

where r is the one-period risk-free interest rate. Y1,i and Y0,i can be constructed from time
series of ex post potential earnings streams in the two states: (Y0,i,0 , . . . , Y0,i,T ) for high
school and (Y1,i,0 , . . . , Y1,i,T ) for college. A practical problem is that we only observe one or
1

See Heckman (1990) and Heckman and Smith (1998) for discussions of the generalized Roy model. In
this paper we assume only two schooling levels for expositional simplicity, although our methods apply more
generally.

7

the other of these streams. This partial observability creates a fundamental identification
problem which we address in this paper.
The variables Y1,i , Y0,i , and Ci are ex post realizations of returns and costs, respectively.
At the time agents make their schooling choices, these may be only partially known to the
agent, if at all. Let Ii,0 denote the information set of agent i at the time the schooling choice
is made, which is time period t = 0 in our notation. Under a complete markets assumption
with all risks diversifiable (so that there is risk neutral pricing) or under a perfect foresight
model with unrestricted borrowing or lending but full repayment, the decision rule governing
sectoral choices at decision time ‘0’ is

Si =




 1, if E (Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci | Ii,0 ) ≥ 0

(4)



 0, otherwise.2
Under perfect foresight, the postulated information set would include Y1,i , Y0,i , and Ci . In
either model of information, the decision rule is simple: one attends school if the expected
gains from schooling are greater than or equal to the expected costs. Under either set
of assumptions, a separation theorem governs choices. Agents maximize expected wealth
independently of how they consume it.
The decision rule is more complicated in the absence of full risk diversifiability and depends on the curvature of utility functions, the availability of markets to spread risk, and
possibilities for storage. (See Cunha et al., 2004, and Navarro, 2004, for a more extensive
discussion.) In more realistic economic settings, the components of earnings and costs required to forecast the gain to schooling depend on higher moments than the mean. In this
2

If there are aggregate sources of risk, full insurance would require a linear utility function.

8

paper we use a model with a simple market setting to motivate the identification analysis of
a more general environment we analyze elsewhere (and is analyzed in Carneiro et al., 2003).
Suppose that we seek to determine Ii,0 . This is a difficult task. Typically we can only
partially identify Ii,0 and generate a list of candidate variables that belong in the information
set. We can usually only estimate the distributions of the unobservables in Ii,0 (from the
standpoint of the econometrician) and not individual person-specific information sets. To fix
ideas, we start the analysis discussing identification of Ii,0 for each person but in our empirical
work we only partially identify person-specific Ii,0 and instead identify the distributions of
the remaining unobserved components.
To motivate the objectives of our analysis we offer the following heuristic discussion. We
seek to decompose the ‘returns coefficient’ in an earnings-schooling model into components
that are known at the time schooling choices are made and the components that are not
known. For simplicity we assume that, for person i, returns are the same at all levels of
schooling. Write discounted lifetime earnings of person i as

Yi = ρ0 + ρ1,i Si + Ji ,

(5)

where ρ1,i is the person-specific ex post return, Si is years of schooling, and Ji is a mean zero
unobservable. We seek to decompose ρ1,i into two components ρ1,i = η i + ν i , where η i is
a component known to the agent when he/she makes schooling decisions and ν i is revealed
after the choice is made. Schooling choices are assumed to depend on what is known to the
agent at the time decisions are made, Si = λ (η i , Z i , τ i ), where the Z i are other observed
determinants of schooling and τ i represents additional factors unobserved by the analyst
9

but known to the agent. We seek to determine what components of ex post school lifetime
earnings Yi enter the schooling choice equation.
If η i is known, it enters λ. Otherwise it does not. Component ν i and any measurement
errors in Y1,i or Y0,i should not be determinants of schooling choices. Neither should future
skill prices that are unknown at the time agents make their decisions. If agents do not use η i
in making their schooling choices, even if they know it, η i would not enter the schooling choice
equation. Determining the correlation between realized Yi and schooling choices based on
ex ante forecasts enables us to identify components known to agents making their schooling
decisions. Even if we cannot identify ρ1,i , η i , or ν i for each person, under conditions specified
in this paper we can identify their distributions.
Suppose that the model for schooling can be written in linear in parameters form:

Si = λ0 + λ1 η i + λ2 ν i + λ3 Z i + τ i ,

(6)

where τ i has mean zero and is independent of Z i . Z i is assumed to be independent of η i
and ν i . The Z i and the τ i proxy costs and may also be correlated with Ji in (5).3 In this
framework, the goal of the analysis is to determine if λ2 = 0, i.e., to determine if agents pick
schooling based on ex post shocks to returns and, if they do, the relative magnitude of the
variance of η i to that of ν i .
Application of Z i as an instrument for Si in outcome equation (5) does not enable us to
decompose ρ1,i into forecastable and unforecastable components. Only if agents do not use
η i in making their schooling decisions does the instrumental variable (IV ) method recover
3

Card (2001) presents a model that can be written in this form.

10

the population mean of ρ1,i . In that case, standard random coefficient models can identify
the variance of (η i + ν i ) which is assumed to be independent of Si .4
Notice that even under the most favorable conditions for applications of the IV method,
we are only able to recover the ex post mean and total ex post variability of ρ1,i = η i + ν i .
We cannot, however, decompose V ar (η i + ν i ) into its components. That is, we are not able
to assign the proportion of the variance in the return that is due to η i and that due to ν i .
Since we cannot identify how much of the ex post return to schooling is unknown to the
agent at the time he makes his decision, we cannot solve the stated problem using just the
instrumental variable method.
Our procedure is not based on the method of instrumental variables. Rather, it exploits
certain covariances that arise under different information structures. To see how the method
works, simplify the model down to two schooling levels. Suppose, contrary to what is possible,
that the analyst observes Y0,i , Y1,i , and Ci . Such information would come from an ideal data
set in which we could observe two different lifetime earnings streams for the same person
in high school and in college as well as the costs they pay for attending college. From such
information we could construct Y1,i −Y0,i −Ci . If we knew the information set Ii,0 of the agent,
we could also construct E (Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci | Ii,0 ). Under the correct model of expectations,
we could form the residual

VIi,0 = (Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci ) − E (Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci | Ii,0 ) ,
4

bi to decompose the variance components, where
One can use the residuals from Yi − b
ρ0 − b
ρ1 S i = U
instrumental variables are used to generate the coefficient estimates.

11

and from the ex ante college choice decision, we could determine whether Si depends on
VIi,0 . It should not if we have specified Ii,0 correctly. In terms of the model of equations (5)
and (6), if there are no direct costs of schooling, E (Y1,i − Y0,i | Ii,0 ) = η i , and VIi,0 = ν i .
A test for correct specification of candidate information set Iei,0 is a test of whether Si


e
depends on VIei,0 , where VIei,0 = (Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci ) − E Y1,i − Y0,i − Ci | Ii,0 . More precisely,
the information set is valid if Si ⊥⊥ VIei,0 | Iei,0 , where X ⊥
⊥ Y | Z means X is independent
of Y given Z. In terms of the simple model of (5) and (6), ν i should not enter the schooling
choice equation (λ2 = 0). A test of misspecification of Iei,0 is a test of whether the coefficient
of VIei,0 is statistically significantly different from zero in the schooling choice equation.
More generally, Iei,0 is the correct information set if VIei,0 does not help to predict schooling.
We can search among candidate information sets Iei,0 to determine which ones satisfy the
requirement that the generated VIei,0 does not predict Si and what components of Y1,i −Y0,i −Ci
(and Y1,i − Y0,i ) are predictable at the age for the specified information set.5 For a properly
specified Iei,0 , VIei,0 should not cause (predict) schooling choices. The components of VIei,0 that
are unpredictable are called intrinsic components of uncertainty, as defined in this paper.
Usually, we cannot determine the exact content of Ii,0 known to each agent. If we could,
we would perfectly predict Si given our decision rule. More realistically, we might find
variables that proxy Ii,0 or their distribution. Thus, in the example of equations (5) and (6)
we would seek to determine the distribution of ν i and allocation of the variance of ρ1,i to
η i and ν i rather than trying to estimate ρ1,i , η i , or ν i for each person. This is the strategy
pursued in this paper for a two-choice model of schooling.
5

This procedure is a Sims (1972) version of a Wiener-Granger causality test.

12

Inference
The procedure just described is not practical for general models of educational outcomes.
We do not know all of the information possessed by the agent. We do not observe Y1,i,t and
Y0,i,t together for anyone. We must solve the problem of constructing counterfactuals. This
entails solving the selection problem.
One conventional way to solve the selection problem is to invoke a ‘common coefficient’
assumption,

Y1,i,t = ϕt (X i,t ) + Y0,i,t ,

t = 0, . . . , T,

where ϕt (X i,t ) is the same for everyone with the same X i,t . A special case is where
ϕt (X i,t ) = ϕ, a constant. This specification assumes that for each person i, the earnings in college at age t differ from the earnings in high school by a constant, or a constant
conditional on X i,t . Under standard assumptions, conventional econometric methods such
as matching, instrumental variables, or control functions recover ϕt (X i,t ) for everyone (see
Heckman and Robb, 1986, reprinted 2000, for discussions of alternative assumptions).
A common coefficient returns to schooling assumption for all groups with the same values
of X i,t rules out comparative advantage in the labor market that has been shown to be
empirically important (see Carneiro et al., 2004, and Heckman, 2001). This assumption can
be tested nonparametrically and is decisively rejected (Heckman et al., 1997). An alternative
and weaker assumption is that ranks in the distribution of Y1,i,t can be mapped into ranks
in the distribution of Y0,i,t (e.g., the best in the Y1,i,t distribution is the best in the Y0,i,t
distribution or the best in one is the worst in the other). We present evidence against that
13

assumption below.
An alternative approach is to use matching. Given matching variables Qi , we can form
counterfactual marginal distributions from observed distributions using the matching assumption that

F (Y1,i,t | X i,t , Si = 1, Qi ) = F (Y1,i,t | X i,t , Si = 0, Qi )
= F (Y1,i,t | X i,t , Qi ) ,

t = 0, . . . , T.

If the matching assumptions are valid, we can construct counterfactuals for everyone since the
first distribution is observed and the second is the distribution of the counterfactual (what
persons who do not attend college would have earned if they had attended college). By a
parallel analysis of F (Y0,i,t | X i,t , Si = 0, Qi ), we can construct F (Y0,i,t | X i,t , Si = 1, Qi ) =
F (Y0,i,t | X i,t , Qi ) for everyone, t = 0, . . . , T . This is the distribution of high school outcomes for those who attend college. The marginal distributions acquired from matching are
not enough to construct the distribution of returns Y1,i − Y0,i because they do not identify
the covariance or dependence between Y1,i,t and Y0,i,t , unless it is assumed that the only
dependence across the Y1,i,t and Y0,i,t is due to Qi and/or X i,t , and the parameters of this
dependence can be determined from the marginal distributions, or else special assumptions
about dependence across outcomes are invoked.
Matching makes strong assumptions about the richness of the data available to analysts
and does not, in general, identify joint distributions of counterfactual returns and hence the
distribution of the rate of return. It assumes that the return to the marginal person is the
same as the return to the average person (Heckman and Navarro, 2004).
14

Either matching or IV solves the selection problem under their assumed identifying
conditions. Neither method provides a way for identifying the information agents act on
ex ante. In this paper, we build on Carneiro et al. (2003) and use the factor structure
representation (3) to construct the missing counterfactual earnings data without invoking
either type of ad hoc identifying assumption.
To understand the essential idea underlying our method, consider the following linear in
parameters model:

Y0,i,t = X i,t β 0,t + v0,i,t ,

t = 0, . . . , T,

Y1,i,t = X i,t β 1,t + v1,i,t ,
Ci = Z i γ + vi,C .

We assume that the life cycle of the agent ends after period T . Linearity of outcomes in
terms of parameters is convenient but not essential to our method.
Suppose that there exists a vector of factors θ i = (θi,1 , θi,2 , . . . , θi,L ) such that θi,k and
θi,j are mutually independent random variables for k, j = 1, . . . , L, k 6= j. Assume we can
represent the error term in earnings at age t for agent i in the following manner:

υ 0,i,t = θ i α0,t + ε0,i,t ,
υ 1,i,t = θ i α1,t + ε1,i,t ,

where α0,t and α1,t are vectors and θ i is a vector distributed independently across persons.
The ε0,i,t and ε1,i,t are mutually independent of each other and independent of the θ i . We
15

can also decompose the cost function Ci in a similar fashion:

Ci = Z i γ + θ i αC + εi,C .

All of the statistical dependence across potential outcomes and costs is generated by θ,
X, and Z. Thus, if we could match on θ i (as well as X and Z), we could use matching
to infer the distribution of counterfactuals, and capture all of the dependence across the
counterfactual states through the θ i . However, in general, not all of the required elements
of θ i are observed.
The parameters αC and αs,t for s = 0, 1, and t = 0, . . . , T are the factor loadings. εi,C
is independent of the θ i and the other ε components. In this notation, the choice equation
can be written as:

Ii = E



T
X
X i,t β 1,t + θ i α1,t + ε1,i,t − X i,t β 0,t + θ i α0,t + ε0,i,t
t=0

(1 + r)t

− (Z i γ + θ i αC + εiC )

Si = 1 if Ii ≥ 0; Si = 0 otherwise.

Ii,0

!

(7)

The sum inside the parentheses is the discounted earnings of agent i in college minus the
discounted earnings of the agent in high school. The second term is cost. Constructing (7)
entails making a counterfactual comparison. Even if the earnings of one schooling level are
observed over the lifetime using panel data, the earnings in the counterfactual state are not.
After the schooling choice is made, some components of the X i,t , the θ i , and the εi,t may
be revealed (e.g., unemployment rates, macro shocks) to both the observing economist and
the agent, although different components may be revealed to each and at different times.

16

Examining alternative information sets, one can determine which ones produce models for
outcomes that fit the data best in terms of producing a model that predicts date t = 0
schooling choices and at the same time passes our test for misspecification of predicted
earnings and costs. Some components of the error terms may be known or not known at the
date schooling choices are made. The unforecastable components are intrinsic uncertainty
as we have defined it.6
To formally characterize our empirical procedure, it is useful to introduce some additional
notation. Let

denote the Hadamard product (a

b = (a1 b1 , . . . ,aL bL )) for vectors a and

b of length L. Let ∆X , ∆Z , ∆θ , ∆εC , ∆εt , t = 0, . . . , T , denote coefficient vectors associated
with the X, the Z, the θ, the ε1,t − ε0,t , and the εC , respectively. These coefficients will
be estimated to be nonzero in a schooling choice equation if there is a deviation between
the proposed information set and the actual information set used by agents. For a proposed
information set Iei,0 which may or may not be the true information set on which agents act
we can define the proposed choice index Iei in the following way:
Iei =

T
X



E X i,t

| Iei,0




β 1,t − β 0,t +

T
X

h



X i,t − E X i,t

| Iei,0

i

β 1,t − β 0,t



∆X
(8)
(1 + r)t
(1 + r)t
t=0
" T
#
(" T
#
)
h

i
X (α1,t − α0,t )
X (α1,t − α0,t )
+E(θ i | Iei,0 )
− αC + θ i − E θ i | Iei,0
− αC
∆θ
t
(1
+
r)
(1 + r)t
t=0
t=0


h

i
e
e
T E ε
T
−
ε
|
I
(ε
−
ε
)
−
E
ε
−
ε
|
I
X
X
1,i,t
0,i,t
i,0
1,i,t
0,i,t
1,i,t
0,i,t
i,0
+
+
∆εt
t
t
(1
+
r)
(1
+
r)
t=0


h
 t=0
i

 h

i
e
−E Z i | Ii,0 γ − Z i − E Z i | Iei,0 γ ∆Z − E εiC | Iei,0 − εiC − E εiC | Iei,0 ∆εC ,
t=0

6

As pointed out to us by Lars Hansen, the term ‘heterogeneity’ is somewhat unfortunate. Under this
term, we include trends common across all people (e.g., macrotrends). The real distinction we are making
is between components of realized earnings forecastable by agents at the time they make their schooling
choices vs. components that are not forecastable.

17

To conduct our test, we fit a schooling choice model based on the proposed model (8).
We estimate the parameters of the model including the ∆ parameters. This decomposition
for Iei assumes that agents know the β, the γ, and the α. We discuss this assumption in
section 5. If it is not correct, the presence of additional unforecastable components due to
unknown coefficients affects the interpretation of the estimates. A test of no misspecification
of information set Iei,0 is a joint test of the hypothesis that ∆X = 0, ∆θ = 0, ∆Z = 0,
∆εC = 0, and ∆εt = 0, t = 0, . . . , T . That is, when Iei,0 = Ii,0 then ∆X = 0, ∆θ = 0,
∆Z = 0, ∆εC = 0, ∆εt = 0, t = 0, . . . , T , and the proposed choice index Iei = Ii .
In a correctly specified model, the components associated with zero ∆j are the unforecastable elements or the elements which, even if known to the agent, are not acted on in
making schooling choices. To illustrate the application of our method, assume for simplicity
that the X i,t , the Z i , the εi,C , the β 1,t , β 0,t , the α1,t , α0,t , and αC are known to the agent,
and the εj,i,t are unknown and are set at their mean zero values. We can infer which components of the θ i are known and acted on in making schooling decisions if we postulate that
some components of θ i are known perfectly at date t = 0 while others are not known at all,
and their forecast values have mean zero given Ii,0 .
If there is an element of the vector θ i , say θi,2 (factor 2), that has nonzero loadings
(coefficients) in the schooling choice equation and a nonzero loading on one or more potential
future earnings, then one can say that at the time the schooling choice is made, the agent
knew the unobservable captured by factor 2 that affects future earnings. If θi,2 does not
enter the choice equation but explains future earnings, then θi,2 is unknown (not predictable
by the agent) at the age schooling decisions are made. An alternative interpretation is that

18

the second component of

hP

(α1,t −α0,t )
T
t=0
(1+r)t

i
− αC is zero, i.e., that even if the component is

known, it is not acted on. Thus, we can only test for what the agent knows and acts on.
One plausible scenario is that εi,C is known but the future ε1,i,t and ε0,i,t are not, have
mean zero, and are insurable. If there are components of the εj,i,t that are predictable at age
t = 0, they will induce additional dependence between Si and future earnings beyond the
dependence induced by the θ i . Under a perfect foresight assumption we can identify this
extra dependence. We develop this point further in section 3 after we introduce additional
helpful notation. Our procedure can be generalized to consider all components of (8). We
can test the predictive power of each subset of the overall possible information set at the
date the schooling decision is being made.
The intuition underlying our testing procedure is thus very simple. The components that
are forecastable and acted on in making schooling choices are captured by the components
of ex post realizations that are known by the agents when they make their educational
choices. In terms of the simple model of equations (5) and (6), and by decomposing ρ1,i into
η i and ν i so ρ1,i = η i + ν i , we determine how much of the ex post variability in ρ1,i is due
to forecastable η i and unforecastable ν i . The predictable components will be estimated to
have nonzero coefficients in the schooling choice equation. The uncertainty at the date the
decision about college is being made is captured by the factors that the agent does not act
on when making the decision of whether or not to attend college.7
A similar but distinct idea motivates Flavin’s (1981) test of the permanent income hypothesis and her measurement of unforecastable income innovations. She picks a particular
7

This test has been extended to a nonlinear setting, allowing for credit constraints, preferences for risk,
and the like. See Cunha et al. (2004) and Navarro (2004).

19

information set Iei,0 (permanent income constructed from an assumed ARMA (p, q) time
series process for income, where she estimates the coefficients given a specified order of the
AR and MA components) and tests if VIei,0 (our notation) predicts consumption. Her test
of ‘excess sensitivity’ can be interpreted as a test of the correct specification of the ARMA
process that she assumes generates Iei,0 which is unobserved (by the economist), although she
does not state it that way. Blundell and Preston (1998) and Blundell et al. (2004) extend her
analysis but, like her, maintain an a priori specification of the stochastic process generating
Ii,0 . Blundell et al. (2004) claim to test for ‘partial insurance.’ In fact their procedure can
be viewed as a test of their specification of the stochastic process generating the agent’s information set. More closely related to our work is the analysis of Pistaferri (2001), who uses
the distinction between expected starting wages (to measure expected returns) and realized
wages (to measure innovations) in a consumption analysis.
In the context of our factor structure representation, the contrast between our approach
to identifying components of intrinsic uncertainty and the approach followed in the literature
is as follows. The traditional approach would assume that the θ i are known to the agent
while the {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 are not.8 Our approach allows us to determine which components
of θ i and {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 are known and acted on at the time schooling decisions are made.
Assuming that the problems raised by selection on Si are solved by the methods exposited
in the next section and their vector generalizations, we can estimate the distributions of the
components of (3) and the coefficients on the factors θ i from panel data on earnings. This
statistical decomposition does not tell us which components of (3) are known at the time
8

The analysis of Hartog and Vijverberg (2002) exemplifies this approach and uses variances of ex post
income to proxy ex ante variability.

20

agents make their schooling decisions. If some of the components of {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 are
known to the agent at the date schooling decisions are made and enter (8), then additional
dependence between Si and future Y1,i − Y0,i due to the {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 , beyond that due to
θ i , would be estimated.
It is important to contrast the dependence between Si and future Y0,i,t , Y1,i,t arising from
θ i from the dependence between Si and the {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 . Some of the θ i in the ex post
earnings equation may not appear in the choice equation, and some additional dependence
between Si and {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 may appear under certain information sets. The contrast
between the sources generating earnings outcomes and the sources generating dependence
between Si and εi income realized is the essential idea in this paper. The method can
be generalized to deal with nonlinear preferences and imperfect market environments.9 A
central issue, discussed in section 4, is how far one can go in identifying income information
processes without specifying preferences, insurance, and market environments.
9

In a model with complete autarky with preferences G, ignoring costs,
"


T
X
G X i,t β 1,t + θ i α1,t + ε1,i,t − G X i,t β 0,t + θ i α0,t + ε0,i,t
Ii =
E
t
(1 + ρ)
t=0

#

Iei,0 ,

where ρ is the time rate of discount, we can make a similar decomposition but it is more complicated given
the nonlinearity in G. For this model we could do a Sims noncausality test where
VIei,0

=



T
X
G X i,t β 1,t + θ i α1,t + ε1,i,t − G X i,t β 0,t + θ i α0,t + ε0,i,t
t=0

T
X
t=0

E

−
t
(1 + ρ)
"


G X i,t β 1,t + θ i α1,t + ε1,i,t − G X i,t β 0,t + θ i α0,t + ε0,i,t
t

(1 + ρ)

#

Iei,0 .

This requires some specification of G. See Carneiro et al. (2003), who assume G(Y ) = ln Y and that the
equation for ln Y is linear in parameters. Cunha et al. (2004) and Navarro (2004) generalize that framework
to a model with imperfect capital markets where some lending and borrowing is possible.

21

3

Identifying counterfactual distributions and extracting components of unpredictable uncertainty using
factor models

To motivate our econometric procedures, it is useful to work with a slightly more abstract
notation and a simpler set up. Omit the individual i subscript to simplify the notation
and suppose that there is one period only (T = 0) so Y1 = Y1,0 , Y0 = Y0,0 . We relax
this assumption later in this section but initially use this framework to focus on the main
econometric ideas motivating our solution of the selection problem. Assume that (Y0 , Y1 )
have finite means and can be expressed in terms of conditioning variables X. Write

Y0 = µ0 (X) + U0 ,

(9a)

Y1 = µ1 (X) + U1 ,

(9b)

where E (U0 | X) = E (U1 | X) = 0, E (Y0 | X) = µ0 (X), and E (Y1 | X) = µ1 (X). The
ex post gain for an individual who moves from S = 0 to S = 1 is Y1 − Y0 .
Write index I as a net utility,

I = Y1 − Y0 − C,

22

(10)

where C is the cost of participation in sector 1. We write C = µC (Z) + UC , where the Z
are determinants of cost. We may write

I = µI (X, Z) + UI .

(11)

Under perfect certainty,

µI (X, Z) = µ1 (X) − µ0 (X) − µC (Z) and UI = U1 − U0 − UC .

More generally, we define UI as the error in the choice equation and it may or may not
include all future U1 , U0 , or UC . Similarly, µI (X, Z) may only be based on expectations of
future X and Z at the time schooling decisions are made. We write

S = 1 if I ≥ 0; S = 0 otherwise.

(12)

A major advantage of our approach over previous work on estimating components of uncertainty facing agents is that we control for the econometric consequences of endogeneity in
the choice of S and thereby avoid self-selection biases. The choice equation is also a source of
identifying information for extracting forecastable components. This paper builds on recent
research by Carneiro et al. (2003) that solves the problem of constructing counterfactuals by
identifying the joint distribution of (Y0 , Y1 ) conditional on S (or I) using a factor structure
model. These models generalize the LISREL models of Jöreskog (1977) and the MIMIC
models of Jöreskog and Goldberger (1975) to produce counterfactual distributions. We now
exposit the main idea underlying our method, working with a one-factor model to simplify
23

the exposition. Carneiro et al. (2003) develop the general multifactor model we use in our
empirical analysis.

3.1

Identifying counterfactual distributions

Identifying the joint distribution of potential outcomes is a difficult problem because we do
not observe both components of (Y0 , Y1 ) for anyone. Thus, one cannot directly form the
joint distribution of potential outcomes (Y0 , Y1 ). Heckman and Honoré (1990) show that
if (i) C = 0 for every person, (ii) decision rule (12) applies in an environment of perfect
certainty, (iii) there are distinct variables in µ1 (X) and µ0 (X), (iv) X is independent of
(U1 , U0 ), and other mild regularity restrictions are satisfied, then one can identify the joint
distribution of (Y0 , Y1 ) given X, even without additional Z variables. In this case the agents
choose S solely in terms of the differences in potential outcomes. However, in an environment
of uncertainty or if C varies across people and contains some variables unobserved by the
analyst, this method breaks down. We present a more general analysis without maintaining
the perfect certainty assumption.
As shown by Heckman (1990), Heckman and Smith (1998), and Carneiro et al. (2003),
under the assumptions that (i) (Z, X) are statistically independent from (U0 , U1 , UI ), (ii)
µI (X, Z) is a nontrivial function of Z given X, (iii) µ0 (X) , µ1 (X), and µI (X, Z) have
full support, and (iv) the elements of the pairs (µ0 (X), µI (X, Z)) and (µ1 (X) , µI (X, Z))
can be varied independently of each other, then one can identify the joint distributions of
(U0 , UI ), (U1 , UI ) up to a scale σ ∗I for UI and also µ0 (X) , µ1 (X) , and µI (X, Z) , the last
expression up to scale σ I .10 Thus, one can identify the joint distributions of (Y0 , I ∗ ) and
10

Full support means that the support of µ1 (X) matches (or contains) the support of U1 ; the support

24

(Y1 , I ∗ ) given X and Z where I ∗ = I/σ I . As a by-product we identify the mean functions.
One cannot recover the joint distribution of (Y0 , Y1 ) or (Y0 , Y1 , I ∗ ) given X and Z without
further assumptions. We provide an intuitive motivation for why F (Y0 , I ∗ ) and F (Y1 , I ∗ ) are
identified in Appendix 1. Once we estimate these distributions, we perform factor analysis
on (Y0 , I ∗ ) and (Y1 , I ∗ ).
The factor structure approach provides a solution to the problem of constructing counterfactual distributions. We show the essential ideas. Suppose that the unobservables follow
a one-factor structure (i.e., θ is a scalar). Carneiro et al. (2003) generalize these methods
to the multifactor case. We can extend these methods to nonseparable models using the
analysis reported in Heckman, Matzkin, Navarro, and Urzua (2004), but we do not do so in
this paper.
We assume that all of the dependence across (U0 , U1 , UI ∗ ) is generated by a scalar factor
θ,

U0 = θα0 + ε0 ,
U1 = θα1 + ε1 ,
UI ∗ = θαI ∗ + εI ∗ .

We assume that θ is statistically independent of (ε0 , ε1 , εI ) and satisfies E (θ) = 0, and

E θ2 = σ 2θ . All the ε’s are mutually independent with E (ε0 ) = E (ε1 ) = E (εI ∗ ) = 0,
V ar (ε0 ) = σ 2ε0 , V ar (ε1 ) = σ 2ε1 , and V ar (εI ) = σ 2εI (the ε terms are called uniquenesses in
of µ0 (X) matches (or contains) the support of U0 and the support of µI (X, Z) matches (or contains) the
support of UI . (See Heckman and Honoré, 1990, and Carneiro et al., 2003, for more precise formulations of
these conditions.) The support of a random variable is the set of values where it has a positive density.

25

factor analysis). Because the factor loadings may be different, the factor may affect outcomes
and choices differently and may even have different signs in different equations.
To show how one can recover the joint distribution of (Y0 , Y1 ) using factor models, we
break the argument into two parts. First we show how to recover the factor loadings, factor
variance, and the variances of the uniquenesses. This part is like traditional factor analysis
except that some latent variables (e.g., I ∗ ) are only observed up to scale so their scale must
be normalized. Then, we show how to construct joint distributions of counterfactuals.

3.2

Recovering the factor loadings

We consider identification of the model when the analyst has different types of information
about the choices and characteristics of the agent.

3.2.1

The case when there is information on Y0 for I < 0 and Y1 for I > 0 and
the decision rule is (12)

Under the conditions stated in section 3.1 and the papers referenced there, after conditioning
on X and controlling for selection, one can identify F (U0 , UI ∗ ) and F (U1 , UI ∗ ). From these
distributions one can identify the left hand side of

Cov (U0 , UI ∗ ) = α0 αI ∗ σ 2θ

and

Cov (U1 , UI ∗ ) = α1 αI ∗ σ 2θ .

26

The scale of the unobserved I is normalized, a standard condition for discrete choice
models. A second normalization that we need to impose is σ 2θ = 1. This is required since the
factor is not observed and we must set its scale. That is, since αθ = kα kθ for any constant k,
we need to set the scale by normalizing the variance of θ. We could alternatively normalize
some αj to one. Finally, we set αI ∗ = 1, an assumption we can relax, as noted below.
Under these conditions, we can identify α1 and α0 from the known covariances above.
From the first covariance, we identify α0 . From the second, we identify α1 . From the normalization, we know σ 2θ . Since

Cov (U1 , U0 ) = α1 α0 σ 2θ ,

we can identify the covariance between Y1 and Y0 even though we do not observe the pair
(Y1 , Y0 ) for anyone. We then use the variances V ar (U1 ) , V ar (U0 ) and the normalization
V ar (UI ∗ ) = 1 to recover the variance of the uniquenesses σ 2ε0 , σ 2ε1 , σ 2εI ∗ .
The fact that we needed to normalize both σ 2θ = 1 and αI ∗ = 1 is a consequence of our
assumption that we have only one observation for Y1 and Y0 . If we have access to more
observations on life cycle earnings from panel data, as we do in our empirical work, we can
use (Y0,0 , . . . Y0,T , Y1,0 , . . . , Y1,T ) to relax one normalization, say σ 2θ = 1, since then we can
form, conditional on X and Z, the left hand side of

Cov (U1,t0 , U1,t )
= α1t
Cov (U1,t0 , UI ∗ )

27

and

Cov (U0,t0 , U0,t )
= α0t ,
Cov (U0,t0 , UI ∗ )

and recover σ 2θ from, say, Cov (U1,t , UI ∗ ) = α1,t σ 2θ . Identification of the variances of the
uniquenesses follows as before.
The central idea motivating our identification strategy is that even though we never
observe (Y0 , Y1 ) as a pair, both Y0 and Y1 are linked to S through the choice equation.
From S we can generate I ∗ , using standard methods in discrete choice analysis. From this
analysis we effectively observe (Y0 , I ∗ ) and (Y1 , I ∗ ). The common dependence of Y0 and
Y1 on I ∗ secures identification of the joint distribution of Y0 , Y1 , I ∗ . We next develop a
complementary strategy based on the same idea where, in addition to a choice equation,
we have a measurement equation observed for all observations whether or not Y1 or Y0
is observed. The measurement may be a test score which is a proxy for ‘ability’ θ. This
measurement plays the role of I ∗ and, in certain respects, identification with a measurement
of this type is more transparent and more traditional.

3.2.2

Adding a measurement equation

Suppose that we have access to a measurement for θ that is observed whether S = 1 or
S = 0 in addition to data on outcomes S and Y0 or Y1 . In educational statistics, a test score
is often used to proxy ability. Suppose that the analyst has access to one ability test M for

28

each person. Measured ability M is

M = µM (X) + UM .

Assume that

UM = θαM + εM ,

where εM is mutually independent from (ε0 , ε1 , εI ) , and θ.11 We assume αM 6= 0. With this
additional information we can form

Cov (M, Y0 |X, Z) = Cov (UM , U0 ) = αM α0 σ 2θ ,
Cov (M, Y1 |X, Z) = Cov (UM , U1 ) = αM α1 σ 2θ ,
Cov (M, I ∗ |X, Z) = Cov (UM , UI ∗ ) = αM αI ∗ σ 2θ .

Conditioning on (X, Z), we can recover the error terms for the unobservables U0 , UI ∗ and
UM using the preceding arguments. If we impose the normalization αM = 1, which can
be interpreted as requiring that higher levels of measured ability are associated with higher
levels of factor θ, we can form the ratio

Cov (U0 , UI ∗ )
= α0
Cov (UM , UI ∗ )
11

For simplicity, we assume that this is a continuous measurement. Discrete measurements can also be
used. See Carneiro et al. (2003).

29

and identify α0 . In a similar fashion, we can form

Cov (U1 , UI ∗ )
= α1
Cov (UM , UI ∗ )

and we can recover α1 . From

Cov (UM , U0 ) = α0 σ 2θ ,

we can obtain σ 2θ . Finally, we can identify αI ∗ based on information from

Cov (UM , UI ∗ ) = αI ∗ σ 2θ ,

so we can obtain αI ∗ up to scale. Thus, with one measurement, one choice equation and
two outcomes we can identify σ 2θ and αI ∗ up to scale. We can use the identified variances
V ar (U0 ) , V ar (U1 ) , V ar (UI ∗ ) = 1, and V ar (UM ) to recover the uniquenesses σ 2ε0 , σ 2ε1 , σ 2εI ∗ ,
and σ 2εM . Thus, having access to a measurement (M ) and choice data with decision rule
(10)–(12) allows us to estimate the covariances among the counterfactual states.12
But how to identify the distributions? Traditional factor analysis assumes normality. We
present a more general nonparametric analysis. Allowing for nonnormality is essential for
getting acceptable empirical results as we note below.
12

We cannot dispense with the choice equation unless we have data on F (Y0 , M | X, Z) and F (Y1 , M |
X, Z). Recall that, in most cases, we observe data that allows us to construct F (Y0 , M | X, Z, S = 0) and
F (Y1 , M | X, Z, S = 1). The required information for dispensing with the choice equation might be obtained
when we have limit sets Z̄u and Z̄l such that Pr(S = 1 | X, Z) = 1 for z ∈ Z̄u and Pr(S = 0 | X, Z) = 0 for
z ∈ Z̄l . Then we can replace I with M and do factor analysis. (See Carneiro et al., 2001.)

30

3.3

Recovering the distributions nonparametrically

Given the identification of factor loadings, factor variances, and uniquenesses, we show how
to identify the marginal distributions of θ and ε0 , ε1 , εI ∗ nonparametrically (the last one up
to scale). The method is based on a theorem by Kotlarski (1967). For completeness, we
state his theorem.
Theorem 1 Suppose that we have two random variables T1 and T2 that satisfy:

T1 = θ + v1
T2 = θ + v2

with θ, v1 , v2 mutually statistically independent, E (θ) < ∞, E (v1 ) = E (v2 ) = 0, that
the conditions for Fubini’s theorem are satisfied for each random variable, and that the
random variables possess nonvanishing (almost everywhere) characteristic functions. Then,
the densities fθ , fv1 , fv2 are identified.
Proof See Kotlarski (1967).



Applied to the current context, we have a choice equation, two outcome equations, and
a measurement equation.13 Assume that we normalize αM = 1 so that all factor loadings,
13

Again, for the sake of simplicity, we assume that M is continuous but our methods work for discrete
measurements. (See Carneiro et al., 2003).

31

factor variances, and variances of uniquenesses are known. The system is

I ∗ = µI ∗ (X, Z) + θαI ∗ + εI ∗ ,
Y0 = µ0 (X) + θα0 + ε0 ,
Y1 = µ1 (X) + θα1 + ε1 ,
M = µM (X) + θ + εM .

Note that this system can be rewritten as

I ∗ − µI ∗ (X, Z)
εI ∗
= θ+
,
αI ∗
αI ∗
Y0 − µ0 (X)
ε0
= θ+ ,
α0
α0
Y1 − µ1 (X)
ε1
= θ+ ,
α1
α1
M − µM (X) = θ + εM .

Applying Kotlarski’s theorem to any pair of equations, we conclude that we can identify the
densities of θ, αεII∗∗ , αε00 , αε11 , εM . Since we know αI ∗ , α0 , and α1 , we can identify the densities of
θ, εI ∗ , ε0 , ε1 , εM .14 Thus, we can identify the distributions of all of the error terms. Finally,
to recover the joint distribution of (Y1 , Y0 ), note that

F (Y1 , Y0 | X) =

Z

F (Y1 , Y0 | θ, X) dFθ (θ) .

From Kotlarski’s theorem, Fθ (θ) is known. Because of the factor structure, Y1 , Y0 , and S are
14

Recall that UI is only known up to scale σ I .

32

independent once we condition on θ, so it follows that

F (Y1 , Y0 | θ, X) = F (Y1 | θ, X) F (Y0 | θ, X) .

But F (Y1 | θ, X) and F (Y0 | θ, X) are identified once we condition on the factors since

F (Y1 | θ, X, S = 1) = F (Y1 | θ, X)
F (Y0 | θ, X, S = 0) = F (Y0 | θ, X) .

Note further that if θ were known to the analyst, our procedure would be equivalent to
matching on θ which is equivalent, for identification, to matching on the propensity score
Pr (S = 1 | X, Z, θ).15 Our method generalizes matching by allowing the variables that
would produce the conditional independence assumed in matching to be unobserved by the
analyst.
The discussion in this section is for a one-factor model. In our empirical work, we use a
multifactor model where the factors are used to characterize earnings dynamics and possible
dependence between future ε and S. Carneiro et al. (2003) provide the analysis we need for
the general multifactor case. The key idea is that, with enough measurements, outcomes
and choice equations, we can identify the number of factors generating dependence among
the Y1 , Y0 , C, S, and M and the distributions of the factors.16
15

Carneiro et al. (2003) discuss the matching relationship between factor and matching models. For a
discussion of factor models and control functions, see Heckman and Navarro (2004).
16
A precise statement of what is ‘enough’ information is given in Carneiro et al. (2003). See their discussion
of the Ledermann bound. The key idea is that the number of factors has to be small relative to the number of
measurements, outcomes and choice equations. This bound can be relaxed if there are a priori restrictions on
the factor loadings beyond innocuous normalizations. Using nonnormality one can also relax the Ledermann
bound.

33

3.4

Models with multiple factors and tests for full insurance versus perfect certainty

Our empirical work is based on a 5 period (t = 0, . . . , 4) version of equations (1) and (8).
In fitting the model, we introduce the possibility of additional sources of dependence in the
choice equation (8), distinct from the dependence arising from some or all of the components
of θ. This additional dependence may be generated from future (ε1,i,t , ε0,i,t ), t = 0, . . . , T
that affect schooling choices.
From the covariances between Si (or Ii∗ ) and Y0,i,t and Y1,i,t , t = 0, . . . , T , under certain
information sets, we can identify additional sources of dependence between (Y0,i,t , Y1,i,t ) and
Ii∗ apart from θ i arising from the dependence of ε0,i,t and ε1,i,t with

PT

t=0

ei,0 )
E(ε1,i,t −ε0,i,t |I
.
t
(1+r)

In our empirical specification discussed below, there are multiple earnings outcomes in each
schooling state, a choice equation and a vector of measurement equations to tie down the
distribution of θ i and the distributions of the {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 .
To see how additional sources of dependence might arise in fitting the data, consider a
model with perfect foresight. Following the analysis in section 3.2 and in the papers cited
there, we can estimate

α0j,t
Cov (Yj,i,t , Ii∗ | X, Z) = ∗ ΣΘ
σI

"P

#  
(α1,t − α0,t )
1 V ar (εj,i,t )
− αC +
,
t
σ ∗I
(1 + r)
(1 + r)t

T
t=0

t = 0, . . . , T ; j = 0, 1,

where ΣΘ is the variance-covariance matrix of the θ i . Conditional on X and Z, dependence
between Yj,i,t and Ii∗ can arise from two sources: from the θ i and from the εj,i,t . Under

34

complete markets, if the εj,i,t are unknown at date t = 0 and have mean zero given Ii,0 ,
the second term on the right hand side vanishes and the factors θ i capture any dependence
between Yj,i,t and Si .
Using limit set arguments, as in Carneiro et al. (2003) and Cunha et al. (2004), we can
identify the αj,t , j = 0, 1, t = 0, . . . , T , the distribution of θ i and the distributions of the
εj,i,t from earnings data alone in the limit sets.17 Under either complete markets or under
perfect foresight, we can identify αC up to scale σ ∗I from the covariances between Yj,i,t , and
Ii∗ , provided a rank condition is satisfied. In the case of scalar θi , we can identify αC for a
fixed scale of Ii∗ from the preceding equation for perfect foresight as
"
#
P
1
V ar (εj,i,t )
αj,t 2 Tt=0 (α1,t − α0,t )
αC
∗
−Cov (Yj,i,t , Ii | X, Z) + ∗
σ
= ∗.
t +
t
2
∗ θ
αj,t σ θ
σI
σI
(σ I ) (1 + r)
(1 + r)
Since we know all of the ingredients on the left hand side, we can identify αC up to scale σ ∗I .
If there is an element of X not in Z, we can identify the scale σ ∗I (See equation (7)). Since
αC is overidentified if T > 0, we can test between a perfect foresight model and a complete
contingent claims model by checking if the same αC is estimated for different Cov (Yj,i,t , I ∗ )
terms.18 In the complete contingent claims model with uncertainty, the middle term in the
brackets would be zero for all εj,i,t .19
17

Footnote 12 defines the limit sets. See Carneiro et al. (2003) for a more complete discussion of identification in limit sets.
18

V ar (εj,i,t )
(1+r)t

This procedure would break down only if
αj,t ΣΘ

19

PT

(α1,t −α0,t )

is constant across all t.

(1+r)t

t=0

This testing procedure generalizes to the case of vector θ provided that a rank condition
α0j,t ΣΘ

PT

t=0

(α1,t − α0,t )
t

(1 + r)

6= 0

holds for a collection of L terms of the covariances of Yj,i,t with Ii∗ where L is the number of factors.

35

4

More general preferences and market settings

To focus on the main ideas regarding model identification in this paper, we have deliberately
used the simple market structures of complete contingent claims markets. What can be
identified in more general environments? In the absence of perfect certainty or perfect
risk sharing, preferences and market environments also determine schooling choices. The
separation theorem we have used to this point breaks down.
If we postulate information processes a priori, and preferences up to some unknown
parameters as in Flavin (1981), Blundell and Preston (1998), and Blundell et al. (2004), we
can identify departures from specified market structures. In Cunha et al. (2004), we postulate
an Aiyagari (1994) – Laitner (1992) economy with one asset and parametric preferences to
identify the information processes in the agent’s information set. We take a parametric
position on preferences and a nonparametric position on the economic environment and the
information set.
An open question, not yet fully resolved in the literature, is how far one can go in nonparametrically jointly identifying preferences, market structures and information sets. In
Cunha et al. (2004), we add consumption data to the schooling choice and earnings data
to secure identification of risk preference parameters (within a parametric family) and information sets, and to test among alternative models for market environments. Alternative
assumptions about what analysts know produce different interpretations of the same evidence. The lack of full insurance interpretation given to their empirical results by Flavin
(1981) and Blundell et al. (2004) may be a consequence of their misspecification of the
agent’s information set generating process. We discuss this point further in section 5 when

36

we present our estimates, to which we now turn.

5

Empirical results

We first describe our data and estimating equations. We then discuss the estimates obtained
from our model, and their economic implications.

5.1

The data, equations, and estimation

Appendix 2 considers a practical problem that plagues life cycle analysis. Few data sets
contain the full life cycle of earnings along with the test scores and schooling choices needed
to directly estimate our model and extract components of uncertainty. We need to combine
data sets. Otherwise, we can only obtain partial identification of the model. In our empirical
analysis, we use a sample of white males from the NLSY data pooled with PSID data, as
described in Appendix 3 (found at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Hicks2004/), to produce life
cycle data on earnings and schooling.
Following the preceding theoretical analysis, we consider only two schooling choices: high
school and college graduation. From now on we use c, h to denote college and high school,
respectively. ‘c’ corresponds to 1 and ‘h’ corresponds to 0 in the previous notation. For
simplicity and familiarity, in this paper we assume complete contingent claims markets.
Because we assume that all shocks are idiosyncratic, schooling choices are made on the basis
of expected present value income maximization. Carneiro et al. (2003) assume the absence
of any credit markets or insurance. One of the goals of this paper is to check whether their
empirical findings about components of income inequality are robust to different assumptions

37

about the operation of the credit market and insurance markets. Cunha et al. (2004) estimate
an Aiyagari-Laitner economy with a single asset and borrowing constraints and discuss risk
aversion and the relative importance of uncertainty.
The method developed in this paper is based on the idea that some or all components
of expected future earnings may affect current choices. In order to gain some preliminary
insights on whether components of future earnings (and returns) affect current schooling
choices, we present a simple empirical analysis in Table 1. Using the sample described below
and in Appendix 3 (found at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Hicks2004/), we regress log ex post
earnings on schooling and schooling interacted with an ability test (ASVAB) to obtain an
estimate of the ex post return to schooling under the assumption that, conditional on the test
score, the ex post return is the same for everyone.20 This is a form of matching estimator
as described in Section 2. Assuming that the conditioning variable controls for selection,
we use the estimated return to schooling and plug it into a schooling choice model to test
whether future earnings affect college choices. In order to account for possible selection
biases not controlled for by matching, we repeat the exercise using instrumental variables
estimates of returns instead.21 The matching (OLS ) estimator is reported in the first row
of Table 1. The IV estimator is reported in the second row. The estimated effects of
these estimators on schooling choices are given in the third and fourth rows. For either
estimation method, we find statistically significant evidence that estimated ex post returns
affect current schooling choices. This evidence suggests that some components of future
earnings may predict schooling.
20

We only use the NLSY sample because of the availability of instruments in it.
See Heckman and Navarro (2004) for an exposition of the strong conditions required for this to be a
valid procedure.
21

38

However, this evidence is not decisive. The estimates do not clearly delineate what is
unknown to the agent at the time schooling choices are made. They also do not distinguish
between the role of ability in generating future earnings from the role of ability in reducing
costs of schooling. The procedure developed in this paper makes these distinctions. We can
also determine the information set facing agents using the method developed in the previous
sections, which we now apply.22
Table 2.1 presents descriptive statistics of the data used to estimate the model. College
graduates have higher present value of earnings than high school graduates. College graduates also have higher test scores, come from better family backgrounds, and are more likely
to live in a location where college tuition is lower.
To simplify the empirical analysis, we divide the lifetimes of individuals into 5 periods.
The first period covers ages 19 through 28, the second goes from 29 through 38, the third
from 39 to 48, the fourth from 49 to 58, and the fifth from 59 to 65. For each schooling
level s, s ∈ {c, h}, and for each period t, we calculate the present value of earnings as of age
19, Ys,t .23 To simplify notation drop the ‘i’ subscript. If Ys,t is generated by a three factor
model, we would write:

Ys,t = Xβ s,t + θ1 αs,t,1 + θ2 αs,t,2 + θ3 αs,t,3 + εs,t for t = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, s ∈ {c, h} .

(13)

It turns out that a three factor model is all that is required to fit the data. Since the scales
22

A better test would be based on variables that more plausibly affect returns but not schooling, except
through returns. Labor market prices for different schooling levels are one plausible candidate.
23
In our empirical work we use a 3% interest rate. We assume it is constant. It would be useful to explore
alternative time series of interest rates based on the data actually facing our cohorts. Alternative choices of
constant interest rates do no affect the main qualitative findings about the relative importance of forecastable
heterogeneity.

39

of the factors are unknown, it is necessary to normalize some loadings (the α). In this paper,
we set αh,0,2 = αh,2,3 = 1. The normalization for ability (associated with the measurements
M based on test scores) is presented in the next paragraph. Using the identification scheme
of Carneiro et al. (2003) for the factor loadings, we also normalize αs,t,3 = 0, for t = 0 and
t = 1 and for s = c and s = h. This normalization has the substantive interpretation that
θ3 affects earnings only in the third and subsequent periods. Thus, θ3 is associated with
mid-career wage developments.
For the measurement system for cognitive ability (M in the notation of section 3.2.2)
we use five components of the ASVAB test battery: arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge,
paragraph comprehension, math knowledge and coding speed. We dedicate the first factor
(θ1 ) to this test system, and exclude the others from it. This justifies our interpretation of θ1
as ability. We include family background variables among the covariates X M in the ASVAB
test equations. In Table 2.2 we list the elements of X M . Formally, let Mj denote the test
score j,

Mj = X M ω j + θ1 αtestj ,1 + εtestj .

(14)

To set the scale of θ1 , we normalize αtest1 ,1 = 1.
The cost function C is given by

C = Zγ + θ1 αC,1 + θ2 αC,2 + εC ,

(15)

where the Z are variables that affect the costs of going to college and include variables that

40

do not affect outcomes Ys,t such as local tuition. Table 2.2 shows the full set of covariates
used, and the exclusions (the variables in Z not in X.) We include tuition among the
elements of Z but allow for a more general notion of costs in our empirical work, including
psychic costs.
The valuation or net utility function for schooling choice is

I = E0

4
X
Yc,t − Yh,t
t=0

(1 + r)t

!

− E0 (C) ,

(16)

where E0 denotes the information set under I0 and r is the interest rate. Individuals go to
college if I > 0. The individual decision maker is assumed to be the child although parental
resources can affect C. Cost variable C also includes the effect of ability on reducing tuition
costs. We test and do not reject the hypothesis that individuals, at the time they make college
going decisions, know their cost functions, the Z and the X, factors θ1 , θ2 , and unobservables
in cost εC . However, they do not know factor θ3 , or εs,t , s ∈ {c, h}, t ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} , at
the time they make their educational choices. Addition of these components to the choice
equation does not improve the fit of the model to the data.24
We assume that each factor k, is generated by a mixture of Jk normal distributions,

θk v

Jk
X

pk,j φ θk | µk,j , τ k,j

j=1



Jk

P
here φ η | µj , τ j is a normal density for η with mean µj and variance τ j and
pk,j = 1,
j=1

and pk,j > 0. As shown in Ferguson (1983), mixtures of normals with a large number of
24

We use ‘t’ statistics in the choice equation to determine whether additional factors enter the choice
equation. We use χ2 goodness of fit measures to determine if additional factors are required.

41

components approximate any distribution of θk arbitrarily well in the `1 norm. The εs,t are
also assumed to be generated by mixtures of normals. We estimate the model using Markov
Chain Monte Carlo methods as described in Carneiro et al. (2003). In Tables 2.3 − 2.5 we
present estimated coefficients and factor loadings. For all factors, a two-component model
(Jk = 2, k = 1, . . . , 3) is adequate.25

5.2
5.2.1

Empirical results
How the model fits the data

To assess the validity of our estimates and to assess the number of factors we need and the
number of components of the mixtures that are required, we perform a variety of checks of fit
of predictions against the data. We first compare the proportions of people who choose each
schooling level. In the NLSY data, 52.9% choose high school and 47.1% choose college. The
model predicts roughly 53.2% and 46.8%, respectively. The model replicates the observed
proportions remarkably well, and formal tests of equality of predicted and actual proportions
cannot be rejected at the 5% significance level. This is also true when we partition the data
on subsets of X and Z.
Figures 1.1–1.5 show the densities of the predicted and actual present values of earnings
for the overall sample of the pooled NLSY-PSID data sets.26 The fit is good. When we
perform formal tests of equality of predicted and actual overall distributions at the 5% level,
the model marginally fails to fit the data for the overall sample for the first, third and
25

Additional components do not improve the goodness of fit of the model to the data.
The earnings are pretax. It would be better to use post-tax earnings and we propose to do so in
subsequent work.
26

42

last periods (see Table 3a). However, addition of factors and additional components of the
mixture of normals do not significantly improve the fit. Reducing the number of factors by
one substantially reduces the overall fit (see Table 3b). Figures 2.1–2.5 and 3.1–3.5, show
the same densities restricted to the sample of those who choose high school (sequence 2) and
college (sequence 3). The fit is also good. The model fits the data better when we perform
formal tests of equality of predicted and actual distributions for each schooling choice than it
does overall, suggesting the failure of fit is due to the failure to predict mean differences. As
is apparent from Table 3a, the only case in which the model does not pass the χ2 goodness
of fit test is for the high-school distribution of earnings in period 4. We conclude that a
three factor model with our normalizations fits the data. From this analysis, we conclude
that earnings innovations εs,t in a three factor model are not in the agents’ information sets
at the time they are making schooling decisions. If they were, additional factors would be
required to capture the full covariance between educational choices and future earnings.27

5.2.2

The factors: non-normality and evidence on selection

Figure 4 reveals that in order to fit the data, one must allow for non-normal factors. The
figure plots the estimated densities of the factors along normal versions with the same mean
and variance. None of the factors is normally distributed. A traditional assumption used in
factor analysis (see Jöreskog, 1977) is violated. Our approach is more general and does not
require normality.
Figure 5.1 plots the density of factor 1 conditional on educational choices. The solid line
is the density of factor 1 for agents who are high school graduates, while the dashed line is
27

Cunha et al. (2004) consider application of alternative testing and model selection criteria.

43

the density of the factor for agents who are college graduates. Since factor 1 is associated
with cognitive tests, we can interpret it as an index of ‘ability’ . The agents who choose
college have, on average, higher ability. Factor 1 is estimated from a test score equation that
controls for parental background and level of education at the date the ASVAB tests are
taken. Figure 5.1 shows that selection on ability is an important factor in explaining college
attendance. A similar analysis of factor 2 that is presented in Fig. 5.2 reveals that schooling
decisions are not very much affected by it, while we see no evidence of selection by schooling
level on factor 3 (see Fig. 5.3). This evidence is consistent with the interpretation that at
the time agents make their schooling decisions, they do not know factor 3. Agents cannot
select on factors they do not know when they are making their schooling decisions.

5.2.3

Estimating joint distributions of ex ante and ex post counterfactuals:
returns, costs, and ability as determinants of schooling

A major contribution of this paper is the identification and estimation of ex ante and ex
post distributions of outcomes and returns without imposing special assumptions about the
dependence across potential outcomes. Letting E0 denote the expectation under the ex ante
information set I0 , we construct the distribution of (Y0 , Y1 ) (ex post) and of (E0 (Y0 ) , E0 (Y1 ))
ex ante conditional on X. The X are assumed to be known both ex ante and ex post. The
ex post gross return R (excluding cost) is

R=

Y1 − Y0
Y0

44

while the ex ante gross return is

E0 (R) = E0



Y1 − Y 0
Y0



.

Both population heterogeneity and uncertainty produce the randomness generating R. Population heterogeneity in I0 (information sets) produces the randomness generating E0 (R) .
A standard argument shows that the means of R and E0 (R) over the entire population, and
on any conditioning subset, are the same.
In estimating the distribution of earnings in counterfactual schooling states within a
policy regime (e.g., the distributions of college earnings for people who actually choose to be
high school graduates under a particular tuition policy), one standard approach is to assume
that both distributions are the same except for an additive constant—the coefficient of a
schooling dummy in an earnings regression possibly conditioned on the covariates. Recently
developed methods relax this assumption by assuming preservation of ranks across potential
outcome distributions, but do not freely specify the two outcome distributions (see Heckman
et al., 1997; Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005; Shaikh and Vytlacil, 2004).
Table 4.1 presents the ex post conditional distribution of college earnings given high school
earnings decile by decile. If the dependence across outcomes were perfect and positive, the
diagonal elements would be ‘1’ and the off diagonal elements would be ‘0.’ There is negative
dependence between the relative positions of individuals in the two distributions, and the
dependence is far from perfect. For example, almost 10% of those who are at the sixth decile
of the ex post high school distribution would be in the eighth decile of the ex post college
distribution.
45

Note that this comparison is not made in terms of positions in the overall distribution of
earnings. We can determine where individuals are located in the population distribution of
potential high school earnings and the population distribution of potential college earnings
although in the data we only observe individuals in either one or the other state. The
assumption of perfect dependence across factual and counterfactual distributions that is
often made in the literature is incorrect for the data we analyze.
While Table 4.1 is the conditional distribution of ex post earnings across people, Table 4.2 presents the conditional distribution of population ex ante college earnings on high
school earnings decile by decile. These conditional distributions are produced by allowing
X, θ1 , θ2 , εC to vary across persons as they do in the population, but integrating out the
unknown εs,t , s = c, h, t = 0, . . . , 4, and θ2 . (In Table 4.1, these components contribute to
the measured variability.) The ex ante conditional distribution shows less dispersion than
the distribution of ex post outcomes since components of future realizations are integrated
out. Ex ante, agents forecast more negative dependence across counterfactual earnings states
than the ex post dependence on realized earnings. Realized θ3 and the {εs,t }4t=0 are forces
toward positive dependence. The distinction between ex ante and ex post counterfactual distributions is a major contribution of this paper and demonstrates that information revelation
is an important aspect of life cycle decision making.
Our ability to distinguish ex ante outcomes from ex post outcomes highlights a major
advantage of our approach over conventional instrumental variable and matching approaches
to estimating returns to education which focus on ex post returns. Decisions are made ex
ante. Outcomes are measured ex post. It is the ex ante return that agents act on but the ex

46

post, or realized, return that empirical economists usually measure.28
Let I =

P4

t=0

(Yc,t −Yh,t )
(1+r)t

−C. Using our empirical model, we present three sets of estimates:

(i) Ex ante returns based on ex ante choices E0 (R | E0 (I) ≥ 0) and E0 (R | E0 (I) < 0); (ii)
Ex post returns based on choices made with ex ante information (R | E0 (I) ≥ 0) , (R | E0 (I) < 0)
(what is usually presented in the literature on ‘program evaluation’) and (iii) Ex post returns based on ex post choices (R | I ≥ 0) , (R | I < 0). The last set of returns conveys how
returns and choices would differ if agents could ‘do it over again,’ i.e., make decisions based
on hindsight. The same people are used to form measures (i) and (ii). For measure (iii),
agents are allowed to change their schooling choices with hindsight.
Figures 6.1 and 6.2 present, respectively, the fitted and counterfactual marginal distributions of ex post earnings for high school and college graduates. Figure 6.1 reveals that
high school graduates are more likely to be successful in the high school sector than those
who attend college. In Fig. 6.2, we compare the densities of present value of earnings in the
college sector for persons who choose college with the counterfactual distributions of college
earnings for high school graduates. The density of the present value of earnings for college
graduates is to the right of the counterfactual density of the present value of earnings of
high school graduates if they were college graduates. The surprising feature of both figures
is that the overlap of the distributions is substantial. Ex post, many high school graduates
would have large earnings as college graduates. This suggests the importance of costs and
expectational elements in explaining schooling decisions. The densities of ex ante earnings
is more compressed than the densities of ex post earnings (see Figs 6.3 and 6.4) but the
28

As Hicks (1946, p.179) puts it, ‘Ex post calculations of capital accumulation have their place in economic
and statistical history; they are a useful measuring for economic progress; but they are of no use to theoretical
economists who are trying to find out how the system works, because they have no significance for conduct.’

47

patterns are similar reflecting the fact that most of the measured variability in earnings
is due to heterogeneity. The densities under perfect certainty (Figs 6.5 and 6.6) for high
school and college, respectively, show a much sharper separation between the earnings in
the choice taken and the counterfactual earnings. Using hindsight, people would make wiser
choices, and separate out more sharply, but there is still considerable overlap between the
two distributions for both schooling choices.
Tables 5.1–5.4 provide further evidence on the importance of distinguishing between ex
ante and ex post returns. In Table 5.1, we report the estimated and counterfactual ex post
present value of earnings for agents who choose high school. The typical high school student
would earn $605.92 thousand dollars over the life cycle. She would earn $969.34 thousand if
she had chosen to be a college graduate.29 This implies a lifetime return of 117% to a college
education over the whole life cycle (i.e., a monetary gain of $363.42 thousand dollars for
four years of college). In Table 5.2, we note that the typical college graduate earns $1,007.64
thousand dollars (above the counterfactual earnings of a typical high school student), and
would make only $536.43 thousand dollars over her lifetime if she chose to be a high school
graduate instead. The lifetime returns to college education for the typical college graduate
(which in the literature on program evaluation is referred to as the effect of Treatment on
the Treated) is 133%, above that of the return for a high school graduate.
Table 5.3 reports the ex post earnings in high school and college and returns to college for
people indifferent between college and high school. Not surprisingly, people on the margin
of indifference have returns that are intermediate between those who go to college and those
who go to high school.
29

These numbers may appear to be large but are a consequence of using only a 3% discount rate.

48

Table 5.4 presents rates of return to college under different assumptions about agent
information, for people who choose high school, for people who choose college and for those
at the margin of indifference between going to college or not. The persons at the margin
are more likely to be affected by a policy that encourages college attendance, and their
returns should be used to compute the marginal benefit of policies that induce people into
schooling.30
Ex ante and ex post mean returns must be the same for any subpopulation if agents use
the information available to them. The mean returns under perfect certainty are different
from the other returns because of resorting by persons into schooling in response to the information revealed after initial college choices are made. Some people would choose different
levels of schooling if they had hindsight. Returns to college for those choosing high school
in hindsight would be lower; returns to college would be higher. For those on the margin of
indifference, the returns are about the same under perfect certainty as they are in the other
two experiments reported in the table.
While ex ante and ex post mean returns must be identical, the ex ante and ex post
distributions are not.31 Figure 7.1 plots the density of ex post returns to education for
agents who are high school graduates (the solid curve), and the density of ex post returns
to education for agents who are college graduates (the dashed curve). College graduates
30

Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005) develop an alternative method for estimating the ex post return to
persons at the margin of attending school.
31
Let W1 = µ (η, ν 1 ) be the outcome in period ‘1.’ The agent in period ‘0’ knows (η, ν 0 ). The ex ante
mean value of W1 given η and ν 0 is
Z
E0 (W1 | η, ν 0 ) = µ (η, ν 1 ) dF (ν 1 | η, ν 0 )
where F (a | b) is the distribution of a given
R b. The ex post mean of W1 given (η, ν 1 ) is µ (η, ν 1 ). The ex
post mean of W1 given (η) is E (W1 | η) = µ (η, ν 1 ) dF (ν 1 | η) averaging over (η, ν 0 ) and E (W1 , η) over η
produces the same mean outcome. This is true for any central moment.

49

have returns distributed ‘to the right’ of high school graduates, so the difference is not only
a difference for the mean individual but is actually present over the entire distribution.
Agents who choose a college education are the ones who tend to gain more from it.
Figure 7.2 presents the ex ante returns for college and high school students. These
densities are not much different from that of the ex post densities. Figure 7.3 shows the
densities of returns for those who would choose high school and college in an environment of
perfect certainty. Clearly, the distributions are more sharply separated. Uncertainty reduces
the force of comparative advantage emphasized by Roy (1951).
Figure 8 shows the estimated densities of the monetary value of cost, both overall and
by schooling level. College is less costly for those who attend college. ‘Psychic costs’ can
stand in for expectational errors and attitudes towards risk. We do not distinguish among
these explanations in this paper. The estimated costs are too large to be due to tuition costs
alone.
It is important to note that our cost estimates are critically dependent on the assumption
that the α, β, and γ are known by the agent. If the agent cannot accurately forecast future
prices, and the prices are random variables but statistically independent of the θ (as would
be plausible, since the prices are set in national markets and the θ are individual specific),
then what we are calling estimated costs include expectational errors (see Carneiro et al.,
2003).32 In the absence of cost data, and data on expectations, this ambiguity is intrinsic and
highlights the importance of maintained assumptions in interpreting evidence on schooling
32

This is obvious from expression (2.8). If the α, β, and γ are random variables from the point of view of
the agent using information set Iei,0 , and are independent of X, Z, and θ, then expectational errors enter
symmetrically with cost shocks. Thus, consider the first two terms in (2.8) associated with the X and β.
Analyzing the contribution of expectations about β to the total error term in the schooling choice index,

50

choices.
In the human capital literature, a conventional maintained assumption used when computing rates of return from measured earnings data is that direct costs are only a small
fraction of total earnings (see Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2004). Our evidence casts
doubt on the validity of this assumption. Psychic costs (including expectational forecast
errors) are a sizeable component of the net return, and they explain why agents who face
high gross returns do not go to college. Ignoring direct costs overstates the rates of return.
The existence of large ex post returns that could be realized by high school students who do
not attend college are attributable in our model to psychic costs and expectational errors in
some unknown proportion.
we obtain four components


e
T E X
X
i,t | Ii,0
t

(1 + r)


e
T E X
X
i,t | Ii,0 h

t=0

+

t

t=0

+



E β 1,i,t − β 0,i,t | Iei,0

(1 + r)




T
X i,t − E X i,t | Iei,0
X
t



E β 1,i,t − β 0,j,t | Iei,0

(1 + r)



T
h
X i,t − E X i,t | Iei,0
X
t=0

+

h 
ii
β 1,i,t − β 0,i,t − E β 1,i,t − β 0,i,t | Iei,0

t

t=0

(1 + r)

∆β

∆X

h 
ii
β 1,i,t − β 0,i,t − E β 1,i,t − β 0,i,t | Iei,0

∆X,β

where, as before,
is a Hadamard product, and ∆β and ∆X,β are defined as coefficients analogous to
the coefficients used in (2.8). A comparable expression can be derived for the other coefficients if they are
random. The expectational errors about the coefficients are an additional source of variability in outcomes
that cannot be distinguished from variations due to the expectational errors in the X without using additional
information. See the second and fourth terms and note they they would enter εC as we have defined it in
the previous sections and would hence be conflated with costs.

51

5.2.4

How well can agents predict future earnings?

In Figs 9.1 through 9.3, we separate the effect of heterogeneity (total unobserved variance)
from uncertainty in earnings. These calculations are reported for the population as a whole.
Figure 9.1 plots the densities of the present value of earnings for the agent, using different
information sets, denoted by Θ. First, consider the case in which the agent has no information about the θ or the {ε0,t , ε1,t }Tt=0 . The Z, X, εC , and the model coefficients are assumed
to be known in all of these simulations. They are set at mean values. The choice of means
affects the locations but not the shapes of the densities. The εs,t are unknown and various
assumptions about which the agent knows are tested. Note that the density has a large variance, if the agent knows only factor 1, i.e., the factors in the information set are Θ = {θ1 }.33
In this case, the reduction in the forecast from knowing ability only from knowledge of her
cognitive ability adds little to the forecast of her future earnings. Now, assume that the
agent is given knowledge of factor 2 as well, so that Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }. Note that knowledge of
factor 2 causes a substantial reduction in the variance of the present value of earnings in
high school. Thus, while factor 2 does not greatly affect college choices, it greatly informs
the agent about her future earnings. When the agent is given knowledge of factors 1, 2,
and 3, that is, Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 } , she can forecast earnings somewhat better. However, our
analysis suggests that agents do not know factor 3. Figure 9.2 reveals much the same story
about college earnings, except that knowledge of factor 3 now substantially increases the
predictability of college earnings.
Knowledge of the factors enables agents to make better forecasts of returns. Figure 9.3
33

As opposed to the econometrician who never gets to observe the Θ.

52

presents the same type of exercise regarding information sets available to the agent for returns
to college (Y1 − Y0 ). Knowledge of factor 2 also helps the agents forecast their gains better.
Almost 48% of the variability in returns is forecastable at age 19. Knowledge of factor 3,
which is not known at age 19, would greatly improve predictability of future earnings.
Table 6.1 presents the variance of potential lifetime earnings in each state, and returns
under different information sets available to the agent. Tables 6.1–6.6 are calculated for the
entire population. Note that in Table 6.1 knowledge of factor 2 is quantitatively important
in reducing forecast variance of lifetime earnings for college and high school. Factor 3 is more
powerful but, according to our estimates, it is not known by the agent at age 19. Tables 6.2–
6.6 show the period by period predictability of discounted earnings from the vantage point
of age 19 when the agent knows only θ1 and θ2 . Earnings in later periods are less predictable
than earnings in earlier periods using only factors one and two. Quantitatively, factors 2 and
3 are important in predicting future earnings and returns whereas ability (factor 1) is not.
This discussion sheds light on the issue of distinguishing predictable components of heterogeneity from uncertainty. We have demonstrated that there is a large dispersion in the
distribution of the present value of earnings. This dispersion is largely due to heterogeneity,
which is forecastable by the agents at the time they are making their schooling choices.
The remaining dispersion is due to luck (uncertainty) or unforecastable errors regarding the
coefficients as of age 19. Since any measurement errors in ex post earnings are allocated
to uncertainty, our estimates arguably underestimate the degree of predictability of future
earnings known to the agents at age 19.

53

5.2.5

Ex ante choices versus choices under perfect certainty

Once the distinction between heterogeneity and uncertainty is made, we can talk meaningfully about the distinction between ex ante and ex post decision making. From our analysis,
we conclude that, at the time agents pick their schooling, {ε0,i,t , ε1,i,t }Tt=0 and θ3 in their
earnings equations are unknown to them. These are the components that correspond to
‘luck’ as defined by Jencks et al. (1972). It is clear that schooling choices would be different,
at least for some individuals, if they knew the realized components of earnings. If agents
knew these luck components when choosing schooling levels, decision rule (10)–(12) would
now be

I =

4
X
(Yc,t − Yh,t )
t=0

(1 + r)t

−C >0

S = 1 if I > 0; S = 0 otherwise,

where no expectation is taken to calculate I since all components are known with certainty
by the agents.
In our empirical model, if individuals could pick their schooling level using their ex post
information (i.e., after learning their luck components in earnings), 25.19% of high school
graduates would rather be college graduates and 31.40% of college graduates would have
stopped at the high school level. Uncertainty about future outcomes greatly affects schooling
choices, and there is plenty of scope for ex post regret.34
34

In a companion paper (Cunha et al., 2005), we address issues similar to the ones addressed in this paper
but use a more ad hoc approach to pooling data across samples to construct a life cycle data set. That
procedure follows Carneiro et al. (2003) rather than the more rigorous methodology derived in Appendix 2.
That paper shows even less uncertainty than we have shown here and establishes a strong correlation across
latent skill levels, which is positive. We are much more confident in the empirical results in this paper than

54

6

Summary and conclusions

This paper discusses the problem of separating heterogeneity from uncertainty. We develop
and apply a method for estimating both heterogeneity and uncertainty from ex post earnings
data and from schooling choices. We estimate substantial predictable and unpredictable
components of earnings as of age 19. Agents have greater difficulty in predicting outcomes
in later periods of their life cycles than they do in earlier periods. Procedures that equate
variability with uncertainty overstate risk and, hence, understate the pricing of risk. If agents
knew their ex post earnings outcomes resulting from their schooling choices, a substantial
fraction (around 30%) would change their schooling decisions. Hicks’ distinction between ex
ante and ex post is an empirically important one.
This paper takes a first step toward resolving an empirical puzzle in the labor economics
literature. Ex post returns to college are high for those who stop at high school. Our evidence
is that, within a complete markets setting, psychic costs of schooling (and expectational errors in a more general model) account for this phenomenon. This evidence has importance
implications for the conventional human capital literature that ignores these costs in computing rates of return to schooling. However, a story that relies on psychic costs to explain the
puzzle is not entirely satisfactory. One needs to account more systematically for borrowing
constraints and risk aversion, and we do so elsewhere in Carneiro et al. (2003), Cunha et al.
(2004), and Navarro (2004).
Throughout this paper we have maintained the assumption of complete markets for idiosyncratic components of risk. An open question which we address, but do not solve, is how
in the results reported in the previous paper.

55

to simultaneously identify constraints (market structure), preferences and information confronting agents. Different scholars focus on different aspects of the decision problem facing
agents. Those who postulate specific information structures and the preferences of agents
test for alternative market structures (e.g., partial insurance). In this paper, we have estimated information structures, making assumptions about market structures and constraints
that neutralize the effects of risk preferences and uncertainty on schooling choices.
In Cunha et al. (2004), we build on the analysis of this paper to estimate an Aiyagari
(1994) – Laitner (1992) economy and simultaneously identify preferences (within a parametric family) and information sets allowing for market incompleteness. We extend the analysis
of Carneiro et al. (2003) by considering more flexible parameterizations of preferences against
risk aversion and allowing for restricted lending and borrowing. (They assume an environment of complete autarky). A robust finding across all environments we have studied is
that uncertainty is empirically important. Hicks’ important distinction between ex ante and
ex post income receives substantial empirical support in the data on schooling choice and
earnings, and changes the way we interpret a vast empirical literature on ex post returns to
schooling.

Acknowledgements
We have greatly benefitted from comments on previous drafts received from Lars Hansen,
David Hendry, John Muellbauer, Robert Townsend, and participants at the Gorman Memorial Conference, London, June 2004. Martin Browning, Lars Hansen, Annette VissingJorgenson, and Sergio Urzua provided very helpful comments on this revision. Paul Schrimpf

56

provided excellent research assistance and made many useful comments on both drafts. We
thank two anonymous referees for their comments on this paper and Jennifer Boobar and
Weerachart Kilenthong for very close and helpful readings of this paper.
This paper was presented as the Hicks Lecture at Oxford University on April 27, 2004.
This research was supported by NIH R01-HD043411 and NSF grant SES-0241858. Cunha
acknowledges support from CAPES grant 1430/99-8. Navarro received support from Conacyt, Mexico and from the George G. Stigler and the Esther and T.W. Schultz fellowships at
the University of Chicago.

Appendix 1

A motivation for the nonparametric identification of the joint distribution of outcomes and the binary choice equation

The following intuition motivates conditions under which F (Y0 , I ∗ | X, Z) is identified. A
formal proof is given in Carneiro et al. (2003). A parallel argument holds for F (Y1 , I ∗ | X, Z).
First, under the conditions given in Cosslett (1983), Manski (1988), and Matzkin (1992), we
can identify

µI (X,Z)
σI

from Pr(S = 1 | X, Z) = Pr(µI (X, Z) + UI ≥ 0 | X, Z). We can also

identify the distribution of

UI 35
.
σI

Second, from this information and F (Y0 | S = 0, X, Z) =

35

An alternative to the conventional approach, which requires large support conditions, postulates that
µI (X, Z) = Xγ X + Zγ Z and normalizes one coefficient on a continuous coordinate of Z, say Z1 , to unity
(e.g., γ Z1 = 1). Then, fixing the remaining values of X and Z at specified values (X = x, Ẑ = ẑ, where
Ẑ is Z removed of its first coordinate) and tracing Z1 over its support, we identify the distribution of UI
over the support of Z1 , assumed to lie in an interval [CL , CU ) which may or may not be the support of UI .

57

Pr(Y0 ≤ y0 | µI (X, Z) + UI ≤ 0, X, Z), we can form

F (Y0 | S = 0, X, Z) Pr(S = 0 | X, Z) = Pr(Y0 ≤ y0 , I ∗ ≤ 0 | X, Z).

The left hand side of this expression is known (we observe Y0 when S = 0 and we know the
probability that S = 0 given X, Z). The right hand side can be written as




UI
µI (X, Z)
Pr Y0 ≤ y0 ,
≤−
| X, Z .
σI
σI

We know

µI (X,Z)
σI

and can vary it for each fixed X. In particular if µI (X, Z) gets small

(µI (X, Z) → −∞) we can recover the marginal distribution Y0 from which we can recover
µ0 (X).
Using (9a), we can express this probability as




UI
−µI (X, Z)
Pr U0 ≤ y0 − µ0 (X),
≤
| X, Z .
σI
σI
Assuming UI is absolutely continuous, we can thus identify
FUI (uI | CL ≤ UI < CU ) =

FUI (uI )
.
FUI (CU ) − FUI (CL )

Since Pr (S = 1 | X, Z) = FUI (Xγ X + Zγ Z ), if the supports of Z1 and UI match, we can invert for each
X, Z
FU−1
(Pr (S = 1 | X, Z)) = Xγ X + Zγ Z
I
and identify the coefficients γ X , γ Z provided that (X, Z) is of full rank. However, if the support of UI
strictly contains that of Z1 , the same operation identifies


Pr (S = 1 | X, Z)
−1
FUI
= Xγ X + Zγ Z
FUI (CU ) − FUI (CL )
where FUI (CU ) − FUI (CL ) is unknown.

58

Note that X and Z can be varied and y0 is a number. Thus we can trace out the joint


distribution of U0 , UσII . Thus we can recover the joint distribution of

∗

(Y0 , I ) =



µ (X, Z) + UI
µ0 (X) + U0 , I
σI



.

Notice the three key ingredients. (i) The independence of (U0 , UI ) and (X, Z). (ii) The
assumption that we can set

µI (X,Z)
σI

to be very small (so we get the marginal distribution

of Y0 and hence µ0 (X)). (iii) The assumption that

µI (X,Z)
σI

can be varied independently of


µ0 (X). This enables us to trace out the joint distribution of U0 , UσII .

Appendix 2

Combining data sets to estimate a life cycle model

A serious empirical problem plagues most life cycle analyses. It is a rare data set that includes
the full life cycle earnings experiences of persons along with their test scores, measurements,
schooling choices, and background variables. Many data sets like the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY 79) have partial information up to some age. A few other data
sets (e.g., the Panel Survey on Income Dynamics or PSID) have full information on some
life cycle variables but lack the detail of the richer data which provide information only on
truncated life cycles. This section considers two issues: (i) What can be identified from
the truncated life cycle data and (ii) What can be learned from combining the truncated
data with a data set with fewer variables but with information on schooling and earnings on
entire life cycles? Our factor model provides a natural framework for combining samples to
59

produce identification even when the model is not identified in each sample.
To fix ideas and motivate the empirical work, suppress the individual i subscripts and
write

Ys,t = Xβ s,t + θ1 αs,t,1 + θ2 αs,t,2 + θ3 αs,t,3 + εs,t ,

t = 0, . . . , 4,

s = 0, 1,

(17)

where αs,t,3 = 0 for t = 0, 1. An individual picks S = 1 if
4
X
t=0

1
E (Y1,t − Y0,t | I0 ) − E (Cost | I0 ) > 0,
(1 + r)t−1

that is S = 1 if

4
X
t=0

"
#
3
 X
1
E (X | I0 ) β 1,t − β 0,t +
E (θj | I0 ) (α1,t,j − α0,t,j ) + E (ε1,t − ε0,t | I0 )
(1 + r)t−1
j=1
−E (Z | I0 ) γ −

3
X

E (θj | I0 ) (αC,j ) − E (εC | I0 ) ≥ 0,

j=1

where Z may include elements in common with X. It will prove convenient to write the
choice equation in reduced form letting Q combine X and Z:

I = Qγ I + θ1 αI,1 + θ2 αI,2 + θ3 αI,3 + εI ,

(18)

where εI is the composite of the errors from the choice equation. Finally, the external

60

measurements are written as

Mk = X M β M,k + θ1 αM,k,1 + εM,k ,

k = 1, . . . , K,

where K is the number of measurements (test scores in our application). For the case in
which we have access to full life cycle data, the contribution to the likelihood of an individual
who chooses S = s, is given by

Z Y
4 Y
1

1(S=s)

{f (Ys,t |θ, X) P r (S = s|Z, θ)}

Θ t=0 s=0

K
Y

f (Mk |θ, X M ) dF (θ) ,

(19)

k=1

where it is assumed that the (X, Z) are independent of θ and the ε and Θ is the support of
θ. Identification follows from the analysis of Carneiro et al. (2003).
Now, suppose that we only have access to a sample A in which we only observe some of
the variables at early stages of the life cycle. In particular, assume that sample A does not
include observations on {Ys,t }4t=2 as is the case with the NLSY, which contains no information
on earnings after age 43.
The contribution to the likelihood of an individual who chooses, for example, S = 1 is
Z "Y
1
Θ

=

f (Y1,t |θ, X) [P r (I ≥ 0|Z, θ)]

t=0

Z "Y
1
Θ

#

t=0

#

f (Y1,t |θ, X) P r (I ≥ 0|Z, θ)

K
Y

f (Mk |θ, X M )

k=1
K
Y

( 4 Z
Y

f (Y1,t |θ, X) dF (Y1,t ) dF (θ)

t=2

f (Mk |θ, X M ) dF (θ) .36

k=1

We integrate out earnings for the periods in which we do not observe them. Using the first
36

If she had chosen S = 0 then we would write P r (I < 0|Z, θ) instead.

61

)

(20)

two periods of data, we can identify a model in which we have K external measurements, 2
time periods for earnings, and a reduced form schooling equation that combines parameters
of earnings with cost parameters. For K ≥ 3, from the measurements conditional on X we
can form

Cov (Mk , Mk0 | X M ) = αM,k αM,k0 σ 2θ1 .

37

Taking ratios of these covariances, we can identify the factor loadings up to one normalization.38 We can identify the distributions of the error terms for measurements. From these,
we can identify the distributions of θ1 , {εk }K
k=1 nonparametrically by using Kotlarski’s theorem. Then, under the support assumptions in Carneiro et al. (2003), and noting that we
have identified σ 2θ1 , we can form

Cov (Mk , Ys,t | X M , X) = αM,k αs,t,1 σ 2θ1 ,

s = 0, 1, t = 0, 1,

and identify the loadings on the first factor for each s for t = 0, 1.39 From the covariances of
I
σI

with either M or Ys,t , we can identify the factor loadings associated with (18) up to scale

σI .
Once we identify all of the parameters related to θ1 we can, for each schooling level s
37

Or if K ≥ 2 and we use either the choice equation or one of the earnings equations. See Carneiro et al.
(2003).
38
The means of the functions (and so the β k ) are trivially identified from E (θ1 ) = E (θ2 ) = E (εs,t ) = 0.
39
As before, given the support conditions the means are identified from the mean zero assumptions on the
error term.

62

(remember that αs,t,3 = 0 for t = 0, 1), form

Cov (Ys,0 , Ys,1 | X) − αs,0,1 αs,1,1 σ 2θ1 = αs,0,2 αs,1,2 σ 2θ2
Cov (Ys,t , I | X, Z) − αs,t,1 αI,1 σ 2θ1 = αs,t,2 αI,2 σ 2θ2 ,

t = 0, 1,

where the left hand side is known and the loadings on factor 1 are identified up to scale
from earnings and choice. Recall that the third factor does not enter the earnings equations
for t = 0, 1. We can then solve for the loadings on θ2 in the earnings and choice equations.

Proceeding as before, we can recover the distributions of θ2 , and {εs,t }1s=0

1
t=0

provided we

have at least one exclusion (one continuous element of Z not in X). Notice that, since we
are not able to identify any of the parameters of earnings for t > 1, we cannot identify all
of the structural parameters in the choice equation so we cannot separate the effect of costs
from the effect of future earnings.
Now, suppose that we have access to a second independent sample B that is generated
by the same process that generates sample A.40 In this second sample, we do not observe
{Mk }K
k=1 but we do observe earnings and schooling choices (and X and Z) for all time
periods. For sample B, an individual with S = 1 has a contribution to the likelihood that
would be given by integrating out the test scores from the likelihood (19):
Z "Y
4
Θ

=

Z
Θ

t=0
" 4
Y

#

f (Y1,t |θ, X) P r (I ≥ 0|Z, θ)

(

K Z
Y

)

f (Mk |θ, X M ) dF (Mk ) dF (θ)

k=1

#

f (Y1,t |θ, X) P r (I ≥ 0|Z, θ) dF (θ) .

(21)

t=0

40
By this we mean that the parameters and distributions of the implied random variables of both samples
are the same.

63

From this sample alone we cannot recover the loadings or the marginal distributions of
θ1 , θ2 , {ε1,t }4t=0 , and εI , without additional assumptions.41
We combine both samples so that a person’s contribution to likelihood is given by (20) if
an individual comes from sample A and is given by (21) if he comes from sample B. In this
case, we would be able to recover all of the elements of the model. To see why, notice that
from sample A alone the only unidentified parameters are the coefficients and distributions
for earnings in t > 1. In sample B we can form the left hand sides of

Cov (Ys,t , Ys,0 | X) = αs,t,1 αs,0,1 σ 2θ1 + αs,t,2 αs,0,2 σ 2θ2
Cov (Ys,t , Ys,1 | X) = αs,t,1 αs,1,1 σ 2θ1 + αs,t,2 αs,1,2 σ 2θ2 ,

t = {2, 3, 4} ,

where all parameters except αs,t,1 and αs,t,2 for t = 2, 3, 4 are identified from data on sample
A. These covariances form a system of two linear equations in two unknowns that, under
a standard rank condition, we can solve for the unknowns αs,t,1 and αs,t,2 for t > 1 and
s = 0, 1. A similar argument allows us to recover the parameters associated with θ3 using
the covariances of the outcomes Ys,t after period 1. Since we have identified all of the
parameters of the earnings equations, we can solve for the structural parameters of the
choice equation and separate costs from future earnings. More generally, we can obtain
more efficient estimates for the overidentified parameters by pooling samples.
This procedure abstracts from cohort effects for the coefficients and factor loadings, and
cohort effects for the distributions of θ. With additional structure (e.g., additivity), we can
41
It is clear we will never recover any of the parameters of the measurement equations in this sample. If we
changed our normalizations on the rest of the system however, so that θ2 does not enter the earnings equation
at t = 0, 1 for example, and there was no third factor, we could recover all of the remaining parameters of
the model.

64

identify such effects, but we acknowledge that general cohort effects can dramatically bias
estimates based on pooling the data.

65

References
[1] Aiyagari, S.R. (1994). ‘Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 659–84.
[2] Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L., and Preston, I. (2004). ‘Consumption inequality and
partial insurance,’ IFS Working Paper, October 2004 WP04/28, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, London, England.
[3] Blundell, R. and Preston, I. (1998). ‘Consumption inequality and income uncertainty.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 603–40.
[4] Browning, M., Hansen, L., and Heckman, J. (1999). ‘Micro data and general
equilibrium models,’ in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, (eds) Handbook of Macroeconomics,North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1A, 543-633.
[5] Card, D. (2001). ‘Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent
econometric problems.’ Econometrica, 69, 1127–60.
[6] Carneiro, P., Hansen, K., and Heckman, J. (2001). ‘Removing the veil of ignorance in assessing the distributional impacts of social policies.’ Swedish Economic Policy
Review, 8, 273–301.
[7] Carneiro, P., Hansen, K., and Heckman, J. (2003). ‘Estimating distributions of
treatment effects with an application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the
effects of uncertainty on college choice.’ International Economic Review, 44, 361–422.

66

[8] Carneiro, P., Heckman, J., and Vytlacil, E. (2004). ‘Estimating the return to
education when it varies among individuals.’ Unpublished manuscript, University of
Chicago Department of Economics.
[9] Chernozhukov, V. and Hansen, C. (2005) ‘An IV model of quantile treatment
effects.’ forthcoming, Econometrica.
[10] Cosslett, S.R. (1983). ‘Distribution-free maximum likelihood estimator of the binary
choice model.’ Econometrica, 51, 765–82.
[11] Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Navarro, S. (2004). ‘Separating heterogeneity from
uncertainty an Aiyagari-Laitner economy,’ Paper presented at the Goldwater Conference
on Labor Markets in Arizona, March, 2004.
[12] Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Navarro, S. (2005). ‘Counterfactual analysis of inequality and social mobility,’ in G. Fields et al. (eds), Mobility and Inequality: Frontiers
of Research from Sociology and Economics, Stanford University Press, Palo Alto.
[13] Ferguson, T.S. (1983). ‘Bayesian density estimation by mixtures of normal distributions,’ in M. Rizvi, J. Rustagi, and D. Siegmund (eds), Recent Advances in Statistics,
Academic Press, New York, 287–302.
[14] Flavin, M. (1981). ‘The adjustment of consumption to changing expectations about
future income.’ Journal of Political Economy, 89, 974–1009.
[15] Hartog, J. and Vijverberg, W. (2002). ‘Do wages really compensate for risk aversion
and skewness affection?,’ IZA Working Paper DP 426, IZA, Bonn.

67

[16] Hause, J. (1978). ‘The fine structure of earnings and the on-the-job training hypothesis.’ Econometrica, 48, 1013–29.
[17] Heckman, J. (1990), ‘Varieties of selection bias.’ American Economic Review, 80(2),
313–18.
[18] Heckman, J. (2001). ‘Micro data, heterogeneity, and the evaluation of public policy:
Nobel lecture.’ Journal of Political Economy, 109, 673–748.
[19] Heckman, J. and Honoré, B. (1990). ‘The empirical content of the Roy model.’
Econometrica, 58, 1121–49.
[20] Heckman, J., Lochner, L., and Todd, P. (2004). ‘Earnings functions and rates
of return: the Mincer equation and beyond.’ unpublished manuscript, University of
Chicago, 2004.
[21] Heckman, J., Matzkin, R., Navarro, S., and Urzua, S. (2004). ‘Nonseparable
factor analysis,’ Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, July.
[22] Heckman, J. and Navarro, S. (2004). ‘Using matching, instrumental variables and
control functions to estimate economic choice models.’ The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86, 30–57.
[23] Heckman, J. and Robb, R. (1986, reprinted 2000). ‘Alternative methods for solving
the problem of selection bias in evaluating the impact of treatments on outcomes,’ in
H. Wainer (ed.), Drawing Inferences from Self-Selected Samples, Springer-Verlag, New
York, 63–107.

68

[24] Heckman, J. and Scheinkman, J. (1987). ‘The importance of bundling in a GormanLancaster model of earnings.’ Review of Economic Studies, 54, 243–55.
[25] Heckman, J. and Smith, J. (1998). ‘Evaluating the welfare state,’ in S. Strom (ed.),
Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centennial, Econometric Society Monograph Series, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[26] Heckman, J., Smith, J., and Clements, N. (1997). ‘Making the most out of programme evaluations and social experiments: accounting for heterogeneity in programme
impacts.’ Review of Economic Studies, 64, 487–535.
[27] Heckman, J. and Vytlacil, E. (1999). ‘Local instrumental variables and latent variable models for identifying and bounding treatment effects.’ Proceedings of the National
Academy of the Sciences, 96, 4730–4.
[28] Heckman, J. and Vytlacil, E. (2005). ‘Structural equations, treatment effects and
econometric policy evaluation.’ forthcoming, Econometrica.
[29] Hicks, J. (1946). Value and Capital (2nd ed.), Clarendon Press, Oxford.
[30] Jencks, C.S., Smith, M., Acland, H., Bane, M.J., Cohen, D., Gintis, H.,
Heyns, B., and Michelson, S. (1972). Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of
Family and Schooling in America, Basic Books, New York.
[31] Jöreskog, K. (1977). ‘Structural equations models in the social sciences: Specification, estimation and testing,’ in P.R. Krishnaih (ed.) Applications of Statistics, NorthHolland, Amsterdam, 265–87.

69

[32] Jöreskog, K. and Goldberger, A.S. (1975). ‘Estimation of a model with multiple
indicators and multiple causes of a single latent variable.’ Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 70, 631–39.
[33] Kotlarski, I. (1967). ‘On characterizing the gamma and normal distribution.’ Pacific
Journal of Mathematics, 20, 729–38.
[34] Laitner, J. (1992). ‘Random earnings differences, lifetime liquidity constraints, and
altruistic intergenerational transfers.’ Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 135–70.
[35] Lillard, L. and Willis, R. (1978). ‘Dynamic aspects of earning mobility.’ Econometrica, 46, 985–1012.
[36] MaCurdy, T. (1982). ‘The use of time series processes to model the error structure of
earnings in a longitudinal data analysis.’ Journal of Econometrics, 18, 83–114.
[37] Manski, C. (1988). ‘Identification of binary response models.’ Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 83, 729–38.
[38] Matzkin, R. (1992). ‘Nonparametric and distribution-free estimation of the binary
threshold crossing and the binary choice models.’ Econometrica, 60, 239–70.
[39] Navarro, S. (2004). ‘Understanding schooling: using observed choices to infer agent’s
information in a dynamic model of schooling choice when consumption allocation is
subject to borrowing constraints.’ Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Department of Economics.

70

[40] Pistaferri, L. (2001), ‘Superior information, income shocks, and the permanent income
hypothesis.’ Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 465–76.
[41] Roy, A. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings.’ Oxford Economic
Papers, 3, 135–46.
[42] Shaikh, A. M. and Vytlacil, E. (2004). ‘Threshold crossing models and bounds on
treatment effects: A nonparametric analysis’ forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.
[43] Sims, C.A. (1972). ‘Money, income, and causality.’ American Economic Review, 62,
540–52.

71

Figure 1.1
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 19 to 28 for overall sample

−3

5

x 10

Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

50

100

150

200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Thousands of Dollars
Present value of earnings from age 19 to 28 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. L et (Y 0,Y 1) denote

potential outcomes in high school and college sectors, respectively. L et S=0 denote choice of the high
school sector, and S=1 denote choice of the college sector. Define observed earnings as Y =SY1+(1- S)Y 0.
Finally, let f(y) denote the density function of observed earnings. Here we plot the density functions f
generated from the data (the dashed line), and that predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel
density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

3.5

x 10

Figure 1.2
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 29 to 38 for overall sample
Fitted
Actual

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

100

200

300
400
Thousands of Dollars

500

600

700

Present value of earnings from age 29 to 38 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. L et (Y 0,Y 1) denote
potential outcomes in high school and college sectors, respectively. L et S=0 denote choice of the high
school sector, and S=1 denote choice of the college sector. Define observed earnings as Y =SY1+(1 - S)Y0.
Finally, let f(y) denote the density function of observed earnings. Here we plot the density functions f
generated from the data (the dashed line), and that predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel
density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

4

x 10

Figure 1.3
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 39 to 48 for overall sample
Fitted
Actual

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

100

200

300
400
500
Thousands of Dollars

600

700

800

Present value of earnings from age 39 to 48 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. L et (Y 0,Y 1) denote
potential outcomes in high school and college sectors, respectively. L et S=0 denote choice of the high
school sector, and S=1 denote choice of the college sector. Define observed earnings as Y =SY1+(1- S)Y 0.
Finally, let f(y) denote the density function of observed earnings. Here we plot the density functions f
generated from the data (the dashed line), and that predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel
density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

5

x 10

Figure 1.4
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 49 to 58 for overall sample
Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

100

200

300
Thousands of Dollars

400

500

600

Present value of earnings from age 49 to 58 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. L et (Y 0,Y 1) denote
potential outcomes in high school and college sectors, respectively. L et S=0 denote choice of the high
school sector, and S=1 denote choice of the college sector. Define observed earnings as Y =SY1+(1- S)Y 0.
Finally, let f(y) denote the density function of observed earnings. Here we plot the density functions f
generated from the data (the dashed line), and that predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel
density estimation to smooth these functions.

Figure 1.5
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 59 to 65 for overall sample

0.01

Fitted
Actual

0.009
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0

0

50

100

150
200
250
Thousands of Dollars

300

350

400

Present value of earnings from age 59 to 65 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. L et (Y 0,Y 1) denote
potential outcomes in high school and college sectors, respectively. L et S=0 denote choice of the high
school sector, and S=1 denote choice of the college sector. Define observed earnings as Y =SY1+(1 - S)Y0.
Finally, let f(y) denote the density function of observed earnings. Here we plot the density functions f
generated from the data (the dashed line), and that predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel
density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

5

x 10

Figure 2.1
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 19 to 28 for people who choose to graduate high school
Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Thousands of Dollars

350

400

450

500

Present value of earnings from age 19 to 28 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. Earnings here are Y0.
Here we plot the density functions f(y0| S=0) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

Figure 2.2
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
−3
x 10 from age 29 to 38 for people who choose to graduate high school
5

Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Thousands of Dollars
Present value of earnings from age 29 to 38 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. Earnings here are Y0.
Here we plot the density functions f(y0| S=0) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

Figure 2.3
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
−3
x 10 from age 39 to 48 for people who choose to graduate high school
6

Fitted
Actual

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Thousands of Dollars
Present value of earnings from age 39 to 48 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. Earnings here are Y0.
Here we plot the density functions f(y0| S=0) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

7

Figure 2.4
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
−3
x 10 from age 49 to 58 for people who choose to graduate high school
Fitted
Actual

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Thousands of Dollars
Present value of earnings from age 49 to 58 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. Earnings here are Y0.
Here we plot the density functions f(y0| S=0) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

Figure 2.5
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 59 to 65 for people who choose to graduate high school

0.012

Fitted
Actual

0.01

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

0

0

50

100

150
200
250
Thousands of Dollars

300

350

400

Present value of earnings from age 59 to 65 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. Earnings here are Y0.
Here we plot the density functions f(y0|S=0) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

5

x 10

Figure 3.1
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 19 to 28 for people who choose to graduate college
Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

50

100

150

200
250
300
Thousands of Dollars

350

400

450

500

Present value of earnings from age 19 to 28 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. This plot is for Y1.
Here we plot the density functions f(y | S=1) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
1

predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

3

x 10

Figure 3.2
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 29 to 38 for people who choose to graduate college
Fitted
Actual

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

100

200

300
400
Thousands of Dollars

500

600

700

Present value of earnings from age 29 to 38 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. This plot is for Y1.
Here we plot the density functions f(y | S=1) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
1

predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

3.5

x 10

Figure 3.3
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 39 to 48 for people who choose to graduate college
Fitted
Actual

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

100

200

300
400
500
Thousands of Dollars

600

700

800

Present value of earnings from age 39 to 48 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. This plot is for Y1.
Here we plot the density functions f(y | S=1) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
1

predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

5

x 10

Figure 3.4
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 49 to 58 for people who choose to graduate college
Fitted
Actual

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

100

200

300
Thousands of Dollars

400

500

600

Present value of earnings from age 49 to 58 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. This plot is for Y1.
Here we plot the density functions f(y | S=1) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
1

predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

−3

8

x 10

Figure 3.5
Densities of fitted and actual present value of earnings
from age 59 to 65 for people who choose to graduate college
Fitted
Actual

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0

50

100

150
200
250
Thousands of Dollars

300

350

400

Present value of earnings from age 59 to 65 discounted using an interest rate of 3%. This plot is for Y1.
Here we plot the density functions f(y | S=1) generated from the data (the dashed line), and that
1

predicted by the model (the solid line). We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.

1.4

Figure 4
Densities of estimated factors and their normal equivalents
Factor 1
Normal version of factor 1
Factor 2
Normal version of factor 2
Factor 3
Normal version of factor 3

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0
Factor

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Let f(θ1) denote the probability density function of factor θ1. We allow f(θ1) to be a mixture
of normals. Assume µ =E(θ ) and σ =Var(θ ). Let φ(µ ,σ ) denote the density of a normal random variable
1
1
1
1
1 1
with mean µ1 and variance σ1. The solid curve is the actual density of factor θ1, f(θ1), while the dashed
curve is the density of a normal random variable with mean µ and variance σ . We proceed similarly for
1
1
factors 2 and 3 using the notation in the legend.

Figure 5.1
Densities of "ability" (factor 1) by schooling level

1

High School
College

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0
Factor 1

0.5

1

1.5

2

Let f(θ1) denote the probability density function of factor θ1. We allow f(θ1) to be a mixture

2.5

of normals. The solid line plots the density of factor 1 conditional on choosing the high school sector,
that is, f(θ |choice=high school). The dashed line plots the density of factor 1 conditional on choosing
1
the college sector, that is, f(θ |choice=college).
1

Figure 5.2
Densities of factor 2 by schooling level

0.9

High School
College

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0
Factor 2

0.5

1

1.5

2

Let f(θ2) denote the probability density function of factor θ2. We allow f(θ2) to be a mixture

2.5

of normals. The solid line plots the density of factor 2 conditional on choosing the high school sector,
that is, f(θ |choice=high school). The dashed line plots the density of factor 2 conditional on choosing
2
the college sector, that is, f(θ |choice=college).
2

Figure 5.3
Densities of factor 3 by schooling level

1.4

High School
College

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0
Factor 3

0.5

1

1.5

2

Let f(θ3) denote the probability density function of factor θ3. We allow f(θ3) to be a mixture

2.5

of normals. The solid line plots the density of factor 3 conditional on choosing the high school sector,
that is, f(θ |choice=high school). The dashed line plots the density of factor 3 conditional on choosing
3
the college sector, that is, f(θ |choice=college).
3

2.5

Figure 6.1
Densities of ex post present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings
−3
from age 19 to 65 in the high school sector
x 10
HS (fitted)
Col (counterfactual)

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

500

1000
1500
2000
2500
Thousands of Dollars
Let Y0 denote the present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the high school sector (discounted at a 3%
interest rate). Let f(Y ) denote its density function. The solid line plots the predicted Y density
0
0
conditional on choosing high school, that is, f(Y | S=0), while the dashed line shows the counterfactual
0
density function of Y for those agents who are actually college graduates, that is, f(Y | S=1). This
0
0
assumes that the agent chooses schooling without knowing θ and ε=(ε , ε , t=0,...T)
3
0,t 1,t

1.4

Figure 6.2
Densities of ex post present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings
−3
from age 19 to 65 in the college sector
x 10
HS (counterfactual)
Col (fitted)

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

500

1000
1500
2000
2500
Thousands of Dollars
Let Y1 denote the present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the college sector (discounted at a 3%
interest rate). Let f(Y ) denote its density function. The dashed line plots the predicted Y density
1
1
conditional on choosing college, that is, f(Y |S=1), while the solid line shows the counterfactual
1
density function of Y for those agents who are actually high school graduates, that is, f(Y |S=0). This
1
1
assumes that the agent chooses schooling without knowing θ and ε=(ε , ε , t=0,...T)
3
0,t 1,t

1.6

Figure 6.3
Densities of ex ante present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings
−3
from age 19 to 65 in the high school sector
x 10
HS
Col

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

500

1000
1500
Thousands of Dollars

2000

2500

L et e=(e0,t, e1,t, t=0,...T ). L et E q ,e(Y 0) denote the ex ante present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the
3

high school sector (discounted at a 3% interest rate). L et f(Eq ,e(Y 0) denote its density function. The solid
3

curve plots the predicted Y 0 density conditional on choosing high school, that is, f(E q ,e(Y 0)|S=0), while the
3

dashed line shows the counterfactual density function of E q ,e(Y ) for those agents who are actually college
0
3

graduates, that is, f(E q ,e(Y 0)|S=1). T his is constructed assuming that the agent chooses schooling without
knowing q3 and e.

3

1.2

Figure 6.4
Densities of ex ante present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings
−3
from age 19 to 65 in the college sector
x 10
HS
Col

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

500

1000
1500
Thousands of Dollars

2000

2500

L et e={ e 0,t ,e 1,t ,t=0,...,T }. L et E q ,e (Y 1 ) denote the ex ante present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the
3

college sector (discounted at a 3% interest rate). Let f(E q ,e (Y 1)) denote its density function. T he solid line
3

plots the counterfactual Y1 density conditional on choosing high school, that is, f(E q ,e (Y 1)| S=0), while the
dashed line shows the predicted density function of E

q ,e(Y 1 )
3

3

for those agents who are actually college graduates,

that is, f(E q ,e (Y 1)| S=0). T his is constructed assuming that the agent chooses schooling without knowing q3 and e.
3

Figure 6.5
Densities of present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings from age 19 to 65
−3
assuming perfect certainty in the high school sector
x 10
1.5

HS
Col

1

0.5

0

0

500

1000
1500
Thousands of Dollars

2000

2500

Let Y0 denote the present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the high school sector (discounted at a 3%
interest rate). Let f(Y ) denote its density function. The solid curve plots the predicted Y density
0
0
conditional on choosing high school, that is, f(Y |S=0), while the dashed line shows the counterfactual
0
density function of Y for those agents who are actually college graduates, that is, f(Y |S=1). This
0
0
assumes that the agent chooses schooling with complete knowledge of future earnings.

Figure 6.6
Densities of present value of counterfactual and fitted earnings from age 19 to 65
−3
assuming perfect certainty in the college sector
x 10
1

HS
Col

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

500

1000
1500
Thousands of Dollars

2000

2500

Let Y1 denote the present value of earnings from age 19 to 65 in the college sector (discounted at a 3%
interest rate). Let f(Y ) denote its density function. The solid curve plots the counterfactual Y density
1
1
conditional on choosing high school, that is, f(Y |S=0), while the dashed line shows the predicted
1
density function of Y for those agents who are actually college graduates, that is, f(Y |S=1). This
1
1
assumes that the agent chooses schooling with complete knowledge of future earnings.

0.5

Figure 7.1
Densities of ex post returns to college by level of schooling chosen
High School
College

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
2
3
4
5
6
Fraction of the Base State
Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings in the high school and college sectors, respectively.
Define ex post returns to college as the ratio R=(Y −Y )/Y . Let f(r) denote the density function of
1
0
0
the random variable R. The solid line is the density of ex post returns to college for high school
graduates, that is f(r|S=0). The dashed line is the density of ex post returns to college for college
graduates, that is, f(r|S=1). This assumes that the agent chooses schooling without knowing θ and
3
ε=(ε , ε , t=0,...T)
0,t 1,t

0.7

Figure 7.2
Densities of ex ante returns to college by level of schooling chosen
High School
College

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
2
3
4
5
6
Fraction of the Base State
Let ε=(ε0,t, ε1,t, t=0,...T). Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings in the high school and college
sectors, respectively. Define ex ante returns to college as the ratio Eθ ,ε(R)=Eθ ,ε((Y1−Y0)/Y0). Let f(r)
3

denote the density function of the random variable E

3

(R). The solid line is the density of ex post returns

θ ,ε
3

to college for high school graduates, that is f(r|S=0). The dashed line is the density of ex post returns to
college for college graduates, that is, f(r|S=1). This assumes that the agent chooses schooling without
knowing θ3 and ε.

Figure 7.3
Densities of returns to college by schooling level chosen assuming perfect certainty
0.7

High School
College

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
2
3
4
5
Fraction of the Base State
Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings in the high school and college sectors, respectively
(discounted at a 3% interest rate). Define returns to college as the ratio R=(Y −Y )/Y . Let f(r)
1
0
0

6

denote the density function of the random variable R. The solid line is the density of returns to college
for high school graduates, that is f(r|S=0). The dashed line is the density of returns to college for college
graduates, that is, f(r|S=1). This assumes that the agent chooses schooling with complete knowledge of
future earnings.

Figure 8
Densities of monetary value of psychic cost
both overall and by schooling level

−4

8

x 10

Overall
High school
College

6

4

2

0
−1000

−500

0

500
Thousands of Dollars

1000

1500

2000

Let C denote the monetary value of psychic costs. Let f(c) denote the density function of psychic costs
in monetary terms. The dashed line shows the density of psychic costs for high school graduates, that
is f(c|S=0). The dotted line shows the density of psychic costs for college graduates, that is, f(c|S=1).
The solid line is the unconditional density of the monetary value of psychic costs, f(c).

4

x 10

Figure 9.1
Densities of present value of high school earnings
under different information sets for the agent calculated
for the entire population regardless of schooling choice
Θ=∅
Θ = (θ1)
Θ = (θ ,θ )
1 2
Θ = (θ ,θ ,θ )

3.5

1 2 3

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

200

400

600

800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Thousands of Dollars
Let Θ denote the agent's information set. Let Y0 denote the present value of earnings in the high school
sector (discounted at a 3% interest rate). Let f(y |Θ) denote the density of the present value of earnings
0

in high school conditioned on the information set Θ. Then:
The solid line plots f(y0|Θ) under no information, i.e. Θ=∅.
The dashed line plots f(y0|Θ) when only factor 1 is in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1).
The dashed-dotted line plots f(y0|Θ) when factors 1 and 2 are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2).
The crossed line plots f(y0|Θ) when all factors are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2,θ3).
The X are put at the mean and are assumed to be known. The θ, when known, are set at their mean of zero.

3

x 10

Figure 9.2
Densities of present value of college earnings
under different information sets for the agent calculated
for the entire population regardless of schooling choice
Θ=∅
Θ = (θ1)
Θ = (θ ,θ )
1 2
Θ = (θ ,θ ,θ )

2.5

1 2 3

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

500

1000
1500
2000
Thousands of Dollars
Let Θ denote the agent's information set. Let Y1 denote the present value of earnings in the college
sector (discounted at a 3% interest rate). Let f(y |Θ) denote the density of the present value of earnings
1

in high school conditioned on the information set Θ. Then:
The solid line plots f(y1|Θ) under no information, i.e. Θ=∅.
The dashed line plots f(y1|Θ) when only factor 1 is in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1).
The dashed-dotted line plots f(y1|Θ) when factors 1 and 2 are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2).
The crossed line plots f(y1|Θ) when all factors are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2,θ3).
The X are put at the mean and are assumed to be known. The θ, when known, are set at their mean of zero.

2.5

x 10

Figure 9.3
Densities of returns college vs high school
under different information sets for the agent calculated
for the entire population regardless of schooling choice
Θ=∅
Θ = (θ1)
Θ = (θ ,θ )
1 2
Θ = (θ ,θ ,θ )
1 2 3

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

-400

-200

0

200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Thousands of Dollars
Let Θ denote the agent's information set. Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings in the high school
and college sectors, respectively (discounted at a 3% interest rate). Let D=Y0-Y1 be the difference of the present

value of earnings in the college and high school sector. f(d|Θ) denote the density of the difference of present
value of earnings conditioned on the information set Θ. Then:
The solid line plots f(d|Θ) under no information, i.e. Θ=∅.
The dashed line plots f(d|Θ) when only factor 1 is in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1).
The dashed-dotted line plots f(d|Θ) when factors 1 and 2 are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2).
The crossed line plots f(d|Θ) when all factors are in the information set, i.e. Θ=(θ1,θ2,θ3).
The X are put at the mean and are assumed to be known The θ when known are set at their mean of zero

Table 1
Estimated Effects of Ex Post Returns to Schooling on Schooling
Choice using OLS and IV To Estimate The Ex Post Returns To
Schooling
Log Earnings Regression*
Variable
School (High School vs. College)
School*ASVAB
School
School*ASVAB

OLS
Coefficient
Std. Error
0.2735
0.0344
0.0279
0.0063
Instrumental Variables†
0.2573
0.0451
0.0153
0.0083

Schooling Choice Probit Equation‡
Using OLS Results
Variable
Coefficient
Std. Error
12.6244
0.7284
bSchool + bSchool*ASVAB*ASVAB
Marginal Effect
4.8333
0.2654
Using IV Coefficients
bSchool + bSchool*ASVAB*ASVAB
22.9150
1.3221
Marginal Effect
8.7731
0.4817
*Includes controls for Mincer experience (age - years of schooling - 6), experience squared, cohort dummies, and
ASVAB scores.
†We use parental education, family income, broken home, number of siblings, distance to college, local tuition,
cohort dummies, South at age 14 and urban at age 14 to instrument for schooling and schooling interacted with
ASVAB scores.
‡We use the predicted return to school to test whether future earnings affect current schooling choices. We include
controls for family background, cohort dummies, distance to college, and local tuition.

Table 2.1
Descriptive Statistics from the Pooled NLSY/1979 and PSID (white males)
Variable Name
Asvab AR*
Asvab PC*
Asvab WK*
Asvab MK*
Asvab CS*
Urban at age 14
Parents Divorced
Number of Siblings
Father's Education
Mother's Education
Born between 1906 and 1915
Born between 1916 and 1925
Born between 1926 and 1935
Born between 1936 and 1945
Born between 1946 and 1955
Born between 1956 and 1965
Born between 1966 and 1975
Education
Age in 1980
Grade Completed 1980
Enrolled in 1980
PV of Earnings†
Tuition at age 17
*Note:
AR=Arithmetic Reasoning
PC=Paragraph Composition
WK= Word Knowledge
MK=Math Knowledge
CS=Coding Speed
†In thousands of Dollars

Obs
1362
1362
1362
1362
1362
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
3695
1362
1362
7152
3695

Mean
0.72
0.42
0.52
0.62
0.21
0.79
0.15
2.86
4.31
4.21
0.01
0.04
0.07
0.09
0.20
0.55
0.04
1.47
26.87
12.06
0.57
2.38
1.80

Full Sample
Std. Dev
0.95
0.80
0.72
1.03
0.85
0.40
0.36
1.96
1.94
1.55
0.10
0.19
0.25
0.29
0.40
0.50
0.21
0.50
12.32
1.66
0.50
1.64
0.72

Min
-1.78
-2.68
-2.29
-1.62
-2.52
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
5.00
8.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Max
1.96
1.36
1.34
2.11
2.49
1.00
1.00
17.00
8.00
8.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
68.00
18.00
1.00
18.59
5.55

Obs
747
747
747
747
747
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
1953
747
747
3708
1953

High School Sample
Mean
Std. Dev
Min
0.26
0.89
-1.78
0.07
0.86
-2.68
0.20
0.76
-2.29
0.00
0.81
-1.62
-0.08
0.79
-2.52
0.75
0.44
0.00
0.18
0.38
0.00
3.19
2.08
0.00
3.56
1.51
1.00
3.68
1.26
1.00
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.04
0.21
0.00
0.07
0.26
0.00
0.07
0.26
0.00
0.17
0.37
0.00
0.56
0.50
0.00
0.07
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
26.53
13.10
5.00
11.44
0.92
8.00
0.33
0.47
0.00
1.95
1.14
0.00
1.82
0.74
0.00

Max
1.96
1.36
1.34
2.11
2.08
1.00
1.00
14.00
8.00
8.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
68.00
12.00
1.00
11.52
5.55

Obs
615
615
615
615
615
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
1742
615
615
3444
1742

Mean
1.27
0.84
0.92
1.38
0.56
0.85
0.13
2.49
5.15
4.79
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.11
0.24
0.53
0.02
2.00
27.25
12.80
0.86
2.83
1.76

College Sample
Std. Dev
Min
0.70
-1.36
0.44
-1.06
0.41
-1.36
0.73
-1.46
0.77
-2.52
0.36
0.00
0.34
0.00
1.74
0.00
2.03
1.00
1.63
1.00
0.06
0.00
0.18
0.00
0.24
0.00
0.31
0.00
0.43
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.14
0.00
0.00
2.00
11.39
9.00
2.03
9.00
0.35
0.00
1.95
0.00
0.70
0.00

Max
1.96
1.36
1.34
2.11
2.49
1.00
1.00
17.00
8.00
8.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
68.00
18.00
1.00
18.59
5.55

Table 2.2
List of Variables Included and Excluded in Each System
Cost Function (Z ) Test System (X M )
Earnings (X )
Variable Name
Urban at age 14
Yes
Yes
No
Parents Divorced
Yes
Yes
No
Number of Siblings
Yes
Yes
No
Father's Education
Yes
Yes
No
Mother's Education
Yes
Yes
No
Born between 1906 and 1915
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1916 and 1925
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1926 and 1935
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1936 and 1945
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1946 and 1955
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1956 and 1965
Yes
No
Yes
Born between 1966 and 1975
Yes
No
Yes
Age in 1980
No
Yes
No
Grade Completed 1980
No
Yes
No
Enrolled in 1980
No
Yes
No
Tuition at age 17
Yes
No
No

Table 2.3
Estimated Coefficients in Schooling Choice Equation
Coefficients
Constant
Mother's Education
Father's Education
Parents Divorced
Number of Siblings
Urban Residence at age 14
Dummy birth 1916-1925
Dummy birth 1926-1935
Dummy birth 1936-1945
Dummy birth 1946-1955
Dummy birth 1956-1965
Dummy birth 1966-1975
Tuition at 4-year college
Loading Factor 1
Loading Factor 2
Loading Factor 3

Mean
-2.2504
0.2250
0.3386
-0.1976
-0.1012
0.1998
0.6076
0.5553
0.7050
0.4160
-0.2064
-1.4159
-0.0953
1.3523
0.4785
-0.0624

Standard Deviation
0.3587
0.0274
0.0246
0.0845
0.0163
0.0755
0.3582
0.3471
0.3417
0.3355
0.3346
0.3703
0.0447
0.1315
0.1335
0.1274

Coefficients
Dummy birth 1916-1925
Dummy birth 1926-1935
Dummy birth 1936-1945
Dummy birth 1946-1955
Dummy birth 1956-1965
Dummy birth 1966-1975
Constant
Loading Factor 1
Loading Factor 2
Loading Factor 3

Table 2.4
Estimated Coefficients for High School Earnings Equation
Period Zero
Period One
Period Two
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
-0.1105
0.1034
-0.1779
0.0987
-0.2636
0.0917
-0.7107
0.0637
-0.2936
0.0883
-0.0757
0.1385
-0.6730
0.0960
-0.2360
0.2267
2.6276
0.0658
2.4021
0.0935
1.8880
0.0870
0.1636
0.0433
0.1059
0.0485
0.0164
0.0949
-1.2138
0.0903
-1.6282
0.1142
-1.4415
0.1172
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2428
0.1684

Period Three
Mean Std Dev
-0.0225 0.0974
-0.0201 0.0989
0.1657 0.1973
1.2819 0.0870
0.0466 0.1122
-1.1225 0.1056
0.2791 0.1510

Period 4
Mean Std Dev
-0.1054 0.0829
-0.1443 0.0809
0.0616 0.1276
0.6147 0.0746
-0.0077 0.0775
-0.3924 0.0763
0.1327 0.1013

Coefficients
Dummy birth 1916-1925
Dummy birth 1926-1935
Dummy birth 1936-1945
Dummy birth 1946-1955
Dummy birth 1956-1965
Dummy birth 1966-1975
Constant
Loading Factor 1
Loading Factor 2
Loading Factor 3

Estimated Coefficients for College Earnings Equation
Period Zero
Period One
Period Two
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
-0.0059
0.1710
-0.1944
0.1262
-0.0512
0.1568
-0.7375
0.0686
-0.2340
0.1182
-0.1081
0.2910
-0.3459
0.1736
1.3144
0.7365
2.2802
0.0670
3.5270
0.1191
3.1859
0.1720
0.2225
0.0853
0.3137
0.1296
-0.2870
0.2415
1.0000
0.0000
2.3887
0.1573
2.3194
0.1715
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.0000

Period Three
Mean Std Dev
-0.0881 0.1846
0.0384 0.1696
0.2122 0.2238
2.4843 0.1914
-0.2676 0.2656
1.7102 0.1806
1.5354 0.1627

Period 4
Mean Std Dev
-0.2976 0.3218
-0.3743 0.3147
-0.2256 0.3457
1.3632 0.3367
-0.0144 0.2300
0.7481 0.1231
0.8876 0.1665

Table 2.5
Estimated Coefficients of Test Equations
Paragraph
Arithmetic Reasoning
Composition
Word Knowledge
Coefficients
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
Constant
-1.1198
0.2256
-1.0262
0.1719
-0.5180
0.2032
Mother's Education
0.0735
0.0177
0.0529
0.0136
0.0614
0.0158
Father's Education
0.0494
0.0136
0.0593
0.0105
0.0461
0.0121
Family Income in 1979
0.0008
0.0015
0.0009
0.0012
0.0000
0.0014
Parents Divorced
-0.0584
0.0564
-0.0514
0.0440
-0.0947
0.0508
Number of Siblings
-0.0193
0.0111
-0.0397
0.0086
-0.0143
0.0099
South Residence at age 14
-0.1278
0.0463
-0.0906
0.0358
-0.0064
0.0423
Urban Residence at age 14
0.0640
0.0461
-0.0243
0.0361
0.0117
0.0422
Enrolled at School at Test Date
0.0646
0.0528
-0.0036
0.0403
-0.0515
0.0471
Age at Test Date
0.0096
0.0164
0.0237
0.0128
-0.0170
0.0148
Highest Grade Completed at Test Date 0.0911
0.0198
0.0604
0.0155
0.0721
0.0179
Loading Factor 1
1.0000
0.0000
0.6801
0.0321
0.8069
0.0377
Loading Factor 2
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Loading Factor 3
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Math Knowledge
Mean
Std Dev
-1.4751
0.2265
0.0469
0.0178
0.0168
0.0139
0.0038
0.0016
0.0458
0.0569
-0.0273
0.0115
-0.1418
0.0475
0.0258
0.0468
0.0074
0.0527
0.0048
0.0165
0.1082
0.0201
0.5648
0.0319
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Coding Speed
Mean
Std Dev
-1.2706
0.2281
0.0561
0.0175
0.0870
0.0135
0.0021
0.0015
-0.0138
0.0560
-0.0313
0.0110
-0.1365
0.0464
0.0529
0.0466
0.3122
0.0529
-0.0510
0.0166
0.1732
0.0198
0.9562
0.0293
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Table 3a
Goodness of Fit Tests: Predicted Earnings Densities vs. Actual Densities
The Three-Factor Model
High School
College
Overall
2
χ Statistic
91.9681
74.2503
204.3823
Period 1
Critical Value*
107.5217
82.5287
178.4854
2
χ Statistic
86.6649
107.6417
207.6152
Period 2
Critical Value*
116.5110
116.5110
218.8205
2
χ Statistic
26.2658
45.5301
106.5721
Period 3
Critical Value*
43.7730
55.7585
91.6702
2
χ Statistic
35.3846
29.7218
55.5758
Period 4
Critical Value*
31.4104
30.1435
55.7585
2
χ Statistic
23.2193
14.9131
41.8657
Period 5
Critical Value*
23.6848
16.9190
35.1725
* 95% Confidence, equiprobable bins with approx. 15 people per bin

Table 3b
Goodness of Fit Tests: Predicted Earnings Densities vs Actual Earnings Densities
The Two-Factor Model
High School
College
Overall
2
χ Statistic
109.5702
132.3027
267.4894
Period 1
Critical Value*
107.5217
82.5287
178.4854
2
χ Statistic
104.1649
150.5556
247.6732
Period 2
Critical Value*
116.5110
116.5110
218.8205
2
χ Statistic
40.7028
61.7322
114.1692
Period 3
Critical Value*
43.7730
55.7585
91.6702
2
χ Statistic
39.7253
47.5559
64.2503
Period 4
Critical Value*
31.4104
30.1435
55.7585
2
χ Statistic
18.3217
26.5855
40.4078
Period 5
Critical Value*
23.6848
16.9190
35.1725
* 95% Confidence, equiprobable bins with approx. 15 people per bin

Table 4.1
Ex-Post Conditional Distributions (College Earnings Conditional on High School Earnings)
Pr(di<Yc≤di+1 |dj<Yh≤dj+1) where di is the ith decile of the College Lifetime Ex-Post Earnings Distribution and d j is the jth
decile of the High School Ex-Post Lifetime Earnings Distribution
Corrrelation(YC,YH) = -0.3899
College
High School
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.0326
0.0524
0.7538
0.1137
0.1557
0.2511
0.2808
1
0.0035
0.0109
0.0240
2
0.0098
0.0244
0.0419
0.0631
0.0894
0.1122
0.1391
0.1747
0.2048
0.1407
3
0.0160
0.0466
0.0741
0.0877
0.1041
0.1213
0.1441
0.1549
0.1581
0.0931
0.0603
0.0911
0.1062
0.1220
0.1298
0.1348
0.1372
0.1266
0.0683
4
0.0236
5
0.0439
0.0848
0.1108
0.1227
0.1303
0.1309
0.1211
0.1139
0.0928
0.0489
6
0.0627
0.1074
0.1214
0.1304
0.1330
0.1218
0.1168
0.0954
0.0695
0.0415
0.1340
0.1334
0.1200
0.1200
0.0937
0.0784
0.0554
0.0433
7
0.0963
0.1256
0.1659
0.1529
0.1396
0.1114
0.0925
0.0740
0.0561
0.0296
0.0402
8
0.1378
9
0.1939
0.1970
0.1498
0.1180
0.1002
0.0771
0.0534
0.0362
0.0200
0.0543
0.1983
0.1167
0.0812
0.0515
0.0351
0.0266
0.0152
0.0130
0.1271
10
0.3354

Table 4.2
Ex-Ante Conditional Distribution (College Earnings Conditional on High School Earnings)
Pr(di<Yc≤di+1 |dj<Yh≤dj+1) where di is the ith decile of the College Lifetime Ex-Ante Earnings Distribution and dj is the jth decile
of the High School Ex-Ante Lifetime Earnings Distribution
Individual expects out θ 3 and εs,t for t=0, … , 4, which are unknown by the agent at the time of the schooling choice.
Corrrelation(YC,YH) = -0.6993
College
High School
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
0.0002
0.0079
0.0108
0.0226
0.0421
0.0594
0.0909
0.1447
0.2236
0.3978
2
0.0044
0.0180
0.0286
0.0530
0.0720
0.1010
0.1362
0.1686
0.2114
0.2068
3
0.0106
0.0362
0.0578
0.0786
0.1062
0.1152
0.1498
0.1618
0.1692
0.1146
4
0.0200
0.0546
0.0786
0.1024
0.1204
0.1266
0.1376
0.1406
0.1290
0.0902
5
0.0390
0.0740
0.1004
0.1130
0.1291
0.1387
0.1295
0.1206
0.1010
0.0546
6
0.0454
0.1017
0.1253
0.1353
0.1333
0.1323
0.1189
0.1011
0.0754
0.0314
7
0.0873
0.1299
0.1437
0.1451
0.1299
0.1199
0.0965
0.0777
0.0519
0.0180
8
0.1336
0.1603
0.1613
0.1431
0.1160
0.0974
0.0793
0.0589
0.0389
0.0112
9
0.2063
0.2016
0.1651
0.1293
0.1056
0.0840
0.0540
0.0317
0.0155
0.0068
10
0.4123
0.2318
0.1393
0.0868
0.0556
0.0365
0.0210
0.0110
0.0049
0.0006

Table 5.1
Average present value of earnings* for high school graduates
Fitted and Counterfactual†
White males from NLSY79

Average Present Value of Earnings

605.92

College
(counterfactual)
969.34

Std. Err.

13.719

67.164

High School (Fitted)

Average returns§ to college for high school graduates
Average returns
Std. Err.

1.17
0.1350

*

Thousands of dollars. Discounted using a 3% interest rate.

†

The counterfactual is constructed using the estimated college outcome equation applied to the population
of persons selecting high school

§

As a fraction of the base state, i.e. (PVearnings(Col)-PVearnings(HS))/PVearnings(HS).

Table 5.2
*
Average present value of earnings for college graduates
Fitted and Counterfactual†
White males from NLSY79
High School
(Counterfactual)
Average Present Value of Earnings
536.43
Std. Err.

College (fitted)
1007.64

26.187

35.113

Average returns§ to college for college graduates
Average returns
Std. Err.
*

1.33
0.0958

Thousands of dollars. Discounted using a 3% interest rate.

†

The counterfactual is constructed using the estimated high school outcome equation applied to the
population of persons selecting college

§

As a fraction of the base state, i.e. (PVearnings(Col)-PVearnings(HS))/PVearnings(HS).

Table 5.3
Average present value of earnings* for population of persons
indifferent between high school and college
Conditional on education level
White males from NLSY79
High School
Average Present Value of Earnings
571.33
Std. Err.

College
975.16

37.066

70.557

Average returns† to college for people indifferent between high school and college
High School vs Some College
Average returns
1.26
Std. Err.

0.3691

§

Thousands of dollars. Discounted using a 3% interest rate.

†

As a fraction of the base state, i.e. (PVearnings(Col)-PVearnings(HS))/PVearnings(HS).

Table 5.4
Average ex-post, ex-ante and perfect certainty returns∗
White males from NLSY79
For people who choose high school
ex-post† ex-ante‡
perfect certainty§
Average
1.1594
1.1594
0.9337
Std. Err.
0.1362
0.1362
0.1154
For people who choose college
ex-post† ex-ante‡
perfect certainty§
Average
1.3398
1.3398
1.6121
Std. Err.
0.1083
0.1083
0.1082
For people indifferent between high school and college
perfect certainty§
ex-post† ex-ante‡
Average
1.2585
1.2585
1.2418
Std. Err.
0.3868
0.3868
0.1067
∗
Let Y0 , Y1 denote the present value of earnings in high school and
college, respectively. The return to college R is defined as


Y1 − Y0
R=
Y0
†

Let I denote the schooling choice index. Let Θ0 denote the information set of the agent at the time of the schooling choice. Let R denote
the return to college. The ex-post mean return to college for a highschool graduate is E (R | E0 (I) < 0) , where E0 (I) = E (I | Θ0 ) .
Similarly, the ex-post mean return to college for a college graduate is
E (R | E0 (I) ≥ 0) . The ex-post mean return to an agent just indifferent between college and high-school is E (R | E0 (I) = 0) .
‡
Let I denote the schooling index. Let Θ0 denote the information
set of the agent at the time of the schooling choice. Let R denote the
return to college. The ex-ante mean return to college for a high-school
graduate is E (E0 (R) | E0 (I) < 0) . Similarly, the ex-ante mean return
to college for a college graduate is E (E0 (R) | E0 (I) ≥ 0) . The ex-ante
mean return to an agent just indifferent between college and high-school
is E (E0 (R) | E0 (I) = 0) . By a property of means, the mean ex-ante
and the mean ex-post returns must be equal for the same conditioning
set, i.e. E (E0 (R) | E0 (I) ≥ 0) = E (R | E0 (I) ≥ 0) .
§
Let I denote the schooling index. Let R denote the return to college. The return to college under perfect certainty for a high-school
graduate is E (R | I < 0) . Note that now the agent makes his schooling
choice under perfect certainty (that is why we condition on I ). Similarly, the return to college under perfect certainty for a college graduate
is E (R | I ≥ 0) . The return to college under perfect certainty for an
agent just indifferent between college and high-school is E (R | I = 0) .

Table 6.1

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Present Value of Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
156402.14
73827.89
267796.38
Θ = {θ1 }
0.95%
0.27%
0.44%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
29.10%
29.43%
47.42%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 }
68.03%
32.27%
62.65%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
The variance of the unpredictable component of period 1 college earnings
Θ = {θ1 } is (1-0.0095)*156402.14
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 19 and 65
as predicted at age 19.

†

1

Table 6.2

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Period Zero Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
13086.24
14303.35
33910.17
Θ = {θ1 }
1.90%
0.91%
0.05%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
23.58%
30.08%
41.02%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
The variance of the unpredictable component of period 1 college earnings
Θ = {θ1 } is (1-0.0190)*13086.24
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 19 and 28
as predicted at age 19.

†

2

Table 6.3

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Period One Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
26618.64
17545.90
65804.89
Θ = {θ1 }
1.90%
0.31%
0.34%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
62.43%
43.00%
69.60%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
So we would say that the variance of the unpredictable component of period 1
college earnings × = {θ1 } is (1-0.0190)*26618.64
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 29 and 38
as predicted at age 19.
†

3

Table 6.4

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Period Two Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
40406.20
16716.50
68918.36
Θ = {θ1 }
0.95%
0.00%
0.63%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
38.66%
35.02%
58.63%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 }
75.25%
40.17%
70.98%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
The variance of the unpredictable component of period 1 college earnings
Θ = {θ1 } is (1-0.0095)*40406.20
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 39 and 48
as predicted at age 19.

†

4

Table 6.5

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Period Three Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
53194.23
14605.29
66926.12
Θ = {θ1 }
0.65%
0.08%
0.73%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
16.18%
24.55%
34.65%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 }
81.20%
31.53%
70.11%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
The variance of the unpredictable component of period 1 college earnings
Θ = {θ1 } is (1-0.0065)*53194.23
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 49 and 58
as predicted at age 19.

†

5

Table 6.6

Agent’s Forecast Variance of Period Four of Earnings∗
Under Different Information Sets
(fraction of the variance explained by Θ)†
The Calculation is for the Entire Population Regardless of Schooling Choice.
Var(Yc )
Var (Yh )
Var(Yc -Yh )
For lifetime:‡
Variance when Θ = ∅
23096.81
10656.83
32236.82
Θ = {θ1 }
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 }
6.84%
4.10%
11.41%
Θ = {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 }
56.70%
6.16%
37.95%
∗

We use an interest rate of 3% to calculate the present value of earnings.
The variance of the unpredictable component of period 1 college earnings
Θ = {θ1 } is (1-0.00)*23096.81
‡
Variance of the unpredictable component of earnings between age 59 and 65
as predicted at age 19.

†

6

