NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXES AND LABOR SUPPLY

Jerry A. Hausnian

Working Paper No. 1102

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

March 1983

This paper is to appear in Auerbach and Feldstein (editors),
Handbook of Public Finance. The National Science Foundation and
the National Bureau of Economic Research provided research support.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Labor Studies, Thxation, and project in Government Budget. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1102
March 1983

Taxes and Labor Supply

ABSTRACT

Over 75% of Federal tax revenue is raised through the income tax and

FICA taxes. The potential effects on labor supply and economic welfare
are important because of the large and increasing reliance on direct

taxation. Over the past few years significant legislative changes have
occurred with respect to taxation of labor: the 25% tax cuts, indexation,
the tax credit for working spouses, and likely increases in FICA taxation.
I review

recent econometric work which measures the effect of taxes on labor

supply and which analyzes the likely effects of tax law changes on labor
supply

and economic welfare.

Sections

1 and 2 develop the theory and econometric techniques for

models of labor supply with taxes. Section
systems

3 discusses

the various tax

in the U.S. In Section 4, I present empirical estimates for husbands'

and wives' labor supply functions. The economic cost of the tax system is
also estimated. In Section 5 the individual questionnaire data for

high

income individuals is reviewed. Lastly, in Section 6 evidence from the
negative income tax experiments and for social security beneficiaries is

considered. These latter

groups face extremely high marginal tax rates

so that evidence beyond that contained in other surveys of labor supply
is provided.
Jerry A. Hausman
Department of Economics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E52—27lA

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
(617) 253—3644

Introduction

The effect of taxes on labor supply introduces interesting questions in

economic theory, econometrics, and public finance. Since the greatest share of
federal tax revenue, approximately 50 percent in 1980, is raised by the
individual income tax, we are certainly interested in its effects on economic

activity. The federal income tax is based on the notion of 'ability to pay'
and its progressive structure has received wide acceptance. The income tax has
not been thought to induce large economic distortions so that it has been
generally accepted as probably the best way to raise revenue where an unequal

distribution of income exists. At the same time we finance social security by
PICA which is a proportional tax with an upper limit. As both the tax rate and
limit have grown rapidly in recent years, PICA taxes have become the subject of

much controversy. In 1980 FICA taxes represented 28% of total Federal tax
revenue. In Table 1 the income tax and payroll tax revenues are given for the
period 1960—1980. It is interesting to note over that same period while the
marginal income tax rate of the median taxpayer remained constant-, the FICA tax

•rate more than doubled. - At the same time the earnings limit rose about 220% in
constant dollars. Over the same 20 year period the corporate income tax has
decreased from 24% to 13% of Federal tax revenues. Likewise, excise taxes have

decreased from 13% to 5%. must taxes on labor supply currently amount to about
3/4 of Federal taxes raised.1 Their potential effects on labor supply and

10f course, not all income tax revenue is a tax on labor supply because of the
taxation of capital income which was about 12% of adjusted gross incorne in 1980.
Also, a portion of the incidence of FICA taxes fall on the employer although the
amount is likely to be small.

$ 40.7

48.8

90.4

122.4

244.1

Year

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980
139.3

75.6

39.5

17.6

$ 11.3

Payroll Tart
Revenues

49

45

47

43

45%

Income Tar %
of Federal
Revenues

28

28

21

15

12%

Tax %
of Federal
Revenues

Payroll
Median

20

20

20

20

20%

Marginal
Tax Rate2

6.05

5.85

4.8

3.625

3.0%

Tar Rate for
Payroll Tax

old—age, survivors, disability, hospital insurance, and railroad retirement
taxes
2From Steverle and Hartzmark (1981) with
interpolation to have years match up.

Includes

rncome Tar
Revenues

1

Revenues from Income and Payroll Taxes
(billions)

TABLE

25900

14100

7800

4800

$ 4800

Earnings Limit
for Payroll
Tax

3

welfare are important because of the

large and increasing reliance on direct

taxation.

To measure empirically the effect of taxes on labor supply, problems in
economic theory and econometrics need to be treated. First, the effect of
progressive taxation is to create a

convex, nonlinear budget set where the net,

after tax wage depends on hours worked.

on constant market prices which are

Since most of consumer theory is based

independent of quantity purchased,

theoretical notions such as the Slutsky equation need to be modified to
assess

the effect of a change in the tax

rate. Theoretical problems increase in

complexity when we realize that other provisions of the tax code such as the
earned income credit, the standard

deduction, and FICA together with transfer

programs such as AFDC create important nonconvexities

in the budget set. Then

certain portions of the budget set cannot correspond to utility maximizing

points. Little definite knowledge
effect of taxation. In fact,

can be gained by a theoretical analysis of the

we cannot usually tell whether an increase in tax

rates will increase or decrease hours worked. Nor can we decide how an increase

in exemptions or other similar changes will effect hours worked. Thus,
only
empirical investigation can

determine

the sign and magnitude of the effect of

taxation.

Appropriate econometric techniques to measure the effect of taxation also
need to treat the nonlinearity of the

budget sets which taxation creates. Other

problems such as components of the stochastic specification, litited dependent
variables, and unobserved wages for nonworkers arise.
handle these problems,

Econometric procedures to

many of which have only recently been developed, have been

used to estimate labor supply functions.

We review these results and discuss the

4

possible effects on labor supply. of various tax reform proposals which have been

enacted or have been discussed in the U.S.
The other important aspect of the taxation of labor supply is the effect on

economic welfare. If Hicksian deadweight loss (excess burden) is accepted as the
appropriate efficiency measure of the distortion created by taxation, we know

that the deadweight loss is proportional to the square of the tax rate.' The
ratio of deadweight loss to tax revenue raised rises approximately with the tax

rate. In Table 1 it can be seen that the marginal tax rate for the median
taxpayer is 26% while the top marginal tax rate on labor supply is 50%. If
compensated labor supply elasticities are non—zero, even though small, the

deadweight loss from the income tax is likely to be substantial. The important
redistributive aspect of the income tax must not be lost sight of, but the cost
of the current means of doing so is an important consideration.

Again, we will

consider various tax reform proposals and their possible effect on economic
welfare.

The plan of the paper is as foj.lows. Section 1 considers the theory of

labor supply with taxes. The effect of the nonlinearity of the budget sets
complicates the analysis so few definite conclusions can be reached. In Section
2 we develop an econometric model of labor supply so that the problems created by

convex and nonconvex budget sets can be solved. Section 3 discusses the various
tax systems in the United States. The federal income tax, FICA tax, and state
income taxes all are used to develop the appropriate budget sets. Ye also
discuss AFDC, social security benefits, and a negative income tax to determine

how they affect labor supply budget sets. In Section 4 we present empirical
estimates for husbands and wives labor supply functions. We also calculate

'See Auerbach (this volume) for a discussion of appropriate welfare measures in
the presence of taxation.

5

the economic cost of the tax system for certain individuals.

Because of small

numbers in crass section samples, and mesurenient problems, high income

individuals are difficult to treat within the context of a labor supply model.
Thus, in Section 5 we review the individual questionnaire data for high income

people. It is interesting to note that it agrees broadly with the econometric
evidence. In Section 6 we review the evidence from the negative income tax
experiments and from samples of social security beneficiaries. These individuals
face extremely high marginal tax rates so that interesting evidence of the ffect
of taxes is produced in these situations.

6
1.

The Theory of Labor Supply with Taxes

In a world without taxes, the theory of labor supply is characterized by the

same conditions which characterize the theory of consumer demaM.

That is, the

Slutsky conditions completely exhaust the theoretical restrictions on consum.er
response to a price change. Thus, in most previous work Ofi the effect of

taxation on labor supply, the authors consider taxes as lowering the net, after

tax wage. Using the Slutsky equation

(1.1)

dhbh
dw

Ow

u=u

hbh

ày

we decompose the change in hours into the substitution effect and the income

effect. Since labor is supplied while leisure is demanded, the sign of the
substitution effect is positive, while the sign of the income effect is negative

if leisure is a normal good. We can conclude that the sign of the sum of the
effects is indeterminate. It might then be considered the goal of empirical
analysis to determine the sign and magnitude of the effect of taxation.
'However, this approach is seriously misleading in all cases except one.

Consider the two good diagram of Figure 1.1. The composite good is used as
numeraire so consumption is measured on the vertical axis with hours supplied on

the horizontal axis. Non—labor income is denoted by y. The original pre—tax
market wage is w and preferred hours of labor are h*. The effect of a
proportional tax is then to lower the net, after tax wage to wt= w(l—t).
Depending on the individual's preferences, desired hours of work, h* can either

7

S

w0

9r

-H

V
Figure

increase

a

1.1

or decrease according to equation (1.1). Thus, in the case of

proportional taxation, the traditional analysis is correct.

But, only for

proportional taxes is the analysis so simple. What makes the proportional tax
case so special is that non—labor income

y is unaffected by the tax which is

implicitly assumed to be only a tax on labor income.

If y were also subject to

taxation at rate t, we would have to take account of another income effect which

would cause h* to rise. Equation (i.i) would then need to be modified to account
for taxation of y to

(1.2)

4i=Ji
_4hohohdy
dt àw u=udt
ày àydt

When we consider the effect of taxation, the

income and substitution effect of a

change in the wage as well as the change in non-labor income must be accounted

for. This equation becomes the key device in analyzing the effect of taxation on

8

desired hours of work. The total effect of taxation is still indeterminate but a
complication has been added since changes in both w and y must be considered. In
cases of progressive taxation or government tax and transfer programs, both w and

y are affected. The traditional analysis has neglected to account for the effect
on y of the tax system. We now consider how the analysis changes when nonproportional tax systems are considered.
Let us first analyze the simplest case, that of a progressive tax on labor

income so that the marginal tax rate is non—decreasing. In figure 1.2 three
marginal tax rates are considered, t1 ,t2,t3, which lead to three after—tax net

wages, w1 ,w21w3, where w. w(1—tj. H1 and H2 correspond to kink point hours
which occur at the intersection of two tax brackets. But an ithportant addition
to

the diagram are the "virtual" incomes

y2 and y3, which follow from extension

of a given budget segment to the vertical axis. They are denoted as virtual
income because if

lit.

Figure 1.2

a

9

the individual faced the linear budget set

B2= (w2,y2), he would still choose

hours of work h* as in Figure 1.2. In assessing the effect of taxation on labor
supply, two questions arise. How does h* in Figure 1.2 differ from the no—tax
situation of Figure 1.1? And how is h* in Figure 1.2 affected by a change in the
market wage w or the tar rates,

t?

To consider the first question in Figure 1.3 we combine Figures 1.1 and 1.2.

We see that no general effect can be identified. If the individual's h* falls on
the first budget segment B1= (w1 ,y1) we are back in the case of Figure 1.1 with

offsetting income and substitition effects. Alternatively, if h* falls on either
B2 or B3 then the net wage is lower than w which leads to an income and

'1

L53

3'

—'4

0
Figure 1.3

substitution effect, while virtual income y2 or y3 exceeds

and a further

income effect from equation (1.1) is created which would reduce labor supply.1

10

One result which does follow is that on the budget segment
is less than it would be if the analysis were based on

B2 or B3 labor supply

(w,y1) or (w3,y1); that

is, if the effect of the virtual income were ignored.

To answer the second question we initially consider an increase in the

market wage from w to w'. In Figure 1.4 we see that this wage change leads to a
clockwise rotation of the budget set. The effect of the rotation is to raise the
w. ,

1

but

income

it also leaves the virtual incomes imchanged. For instance, the virtual

t

—t

is y2= Ei(i2 1) —

1—t

y1(1

where

is the earnings limit for the

first tax bracket. Thus, the virtual incomes depend only on the tax system and
nonlabor income, y1 .

Therefore,

so long as the individual's preferred hours of

work h* remain on the same budget segment B., the effect of a wage change can be
analyzed using the traditional local analysis which is contained in the Slutsky

'a'

Figure 1)4

0

11

eqn (1.2).

The effect of a change in a tax rate t. depends on which
t changes. To
take the simplest case, suppose t3 rises so that in Figure 1.2 the

segment

rotates counterclocIc-rise. The virtual income y3 also rises. We have the
same

effect as before where the change in wage alone induces both an income and
substitution effect and the change in virtual income induces more labor supply

from equation (1.2). It is important to note that a person whose preferred hours
were previously on the third budget segment

B3 so that h* > H2 may now shift doim

to the second budget segment B5 so that H1 < h* < H if the substitution effect

is large enough. Individuals whose preferred hours were less than
H2 before the
change will not be affected. However, if the tax rate were to decrease we could
again have people shifting from the second segment to the third segment because

of the substitution effect. For these

casee, we need "global' information on the

individual's preferences, since the local information in the Slutsky equation is

not sufficient to analyze the possible changes. Now if either t1 or
t2 were to
change, the situation is more complicated since all

later budget segments are

also affected. However, the later budget segments are affected only by a change
in their virtual income since the net wage remains the same. Thus, if t1 rises,
for those individuals with h* > H1, the effect of the tax change is to cause

their preferred hours to rise. For people dwhose h C H1 initially only
changes (although y1 may change also) so that the Slutalcy equation can be used.
Lastly suppose one of the tax bracket limits E1 changes. If
virtual incomes on later budget segments fall.

is lowered, all

Therefore if initially h* > H1 we

have a similar qualitative effect to a rise in t1. Preferred hours of work will

rise. FQr an individual whose initial h* C
H1

but with

analysis is more complicated. They may switch to
B2

have H' < h* the

12

with its lower net wage, and higher virtual income

desired hours of work so that h* <

or they may decrease their

and they remain on the first segment.

From the analysis of the progressive tax case we see that very few general
propositions can be deduced about. the effect of taxes on labor supply. The

piecewise linear progressive tax system is defined by a sequence of budget
segments B.= (w.,y.) of net wages and virtual incomes for the individual over a

set of hours (H.,H.1). Some litnited results are possible for changes in t. and
E. for individuals whose initial hours of work are on a subsequent budget segment

B.., j > 0. But to assess the effect of taxation
adequately we really need to
know the individual's preferences or equivalently, his
utility function. Ye will
show how knowledge of his utility function arises in the process of estimating

his labor supply function so that numerical computations of the effect of
taxation can be carried out.

When we do not have a progressive tax system, matters become more complex

since the budget set is no longer convex.2 Non—convex budget sets arise from the
presence of government transfer programs. The three most important programs of
this type are AFDC, Social Security benefits, and a negative income tax (NIT)

program. In Figures 1,5 and 1.6 we show the two most common tyupes of non—convex

—p.

•0

Figure 1.5

13

I,

a

Figure i.6

budget sets.3 In the first type of budget set used in the NIT experiments,
and in the majority of AFDC programs, non-labor income

is raised by the amount of

the government transfer. The individual then faces a high marginal tax rate,
usually .4 or higher, until he reaches H, the breakeven point at which all

benefits have been taxed away. Beyond the breakeven point, the individual
rejoins the federal tar system, here taken to be convex.

Figure 1.6 has one

additional complication which arises as an earnings disregard in Social Security

benefits or as a maximum payment amount in some AEDO progras.4

Hours up to H1

are taxed only at FICA rates where H. is determined by E1. Beyond this point,
the individual faces the high marginal rates until breakeven hours are again

reached. On a priori grounds, almost nothing can be said about the effect of

taxation in the non—convex budget case. The added complication arises from the
possibility of multiple tangencies between indifference curves and the budget

14

set.
Figures 1.7 and 1.8 demonstrate two cases of multiple tangencies although

actual cases may be even more complex due to the possibility of skipping entire

budget segments. The possibility exists of having multiple optima as in

5

Wi

0

14

a

—w

A

Figure 1.7

Figure 1 .7 because w1 < w3 while y2 K

Figure 1.8

In the convex case this possibility

does not arise because as w1 falls y is rising. To determine the global optimum

we need to have lmowledge of the utility funttion. Figure 1.8 demonstrates the
case

of a joint tangency the possibility of which arises with each non—convex

segment.

Small changes in the wage or any parameter of the tax system can then

lead to large changes in desired hours of work.
In the convex budget case, we must always have a tangency which is unique

and which represents the global optimum if desired hours are positive. For if we

15

had two tangencies we could connect the two points, and the
connecting lines
which would lie inside the original

budget set would represent preferred points

by the assumed concavity of preferences.S

Furthermore, the effect of h* of a
-

change in the market wage, taxes, or the
earnings limits is "smooth" in an
appropriate mathematical sense that the change is continuous and differentiable.

For the non—convex case, this

reasoning no longer follows since the line

connecting the multiple tangencies no longer lies within the budget set. Thus,

multiple tangencies may occur. Likewise, the effect of changes in the budget set
are no longer smooth, since a small change

may cause a jump in desired hours from

an initial tangency to the neighborhood of another

initial tangency. Thus, it

seems that no general propositions hold. The extended
not usable since the possibility of a

Slutsky equation (1.2) is

jump from one budget segment to another is

always present.

Ye briefly consider the cases where

convex case: a rise in t1 or a drop in

we could say something definite in the
for individuals not on the first

segment. For individuals who remain on the convex budget segments like
w2 and
in Figure 1.7 virtual incomes again fall while
w1 remains constant so that the
local efect is again a rise in desired hours of work. But one cannot rule out
the possibility of a non—local jump down to the first segment or even withdrawal

from the labor force entirely. Similar

possibilities exist if F1 is decreased.

Thus, the analysis of the non—convex case cannot

proceed without knowledge about

the form of the individual's utility function.

potential shortcomings exist in this theory of labor supply which
discuss briefly. Future work on an econometric models will need to

Important

we now

incorporate

these problems into the theory and estimation.

First, individuals

16
may face quantity restrictions in labor supply. That is, h* may not be possible
for systematic reasons. Certainly "involuntary" unemployment falls into this
category. In principle, even if quantity restrictions exist we can estimate the
underlying demand function or preference structure and

analyze

the effect of

taxes. But a more difficult problem is to ascertain if individuals are actually
constrained. Endless debates on the possibility of involuntary

unemployment

highlight this problem. Furthermore, survey questions on the ability of a person
to work more hours are very untrustworthy. To date, only limited progress has
been made on this problem.7 Better data seems to be required to put quantity
constraints into an empirical model in a totally satisfactory

Inantler.

This type of labor supply theory also does not adequately treat the type of

jobs people take or their intensity of work while on the job.8 An effect of
taxes is to make nonpecuniary rewards more attractive so that a measure of
earnings may seriously misrepresent the preference comparisons being made among

jobs. Academics need hardly be reminded of this fact in the present world of
falling real academic wages. Yet it is doubtful that this problem will ever be
completely solved. "Perks" from a job could be evaluated monetarily and included
in earnings. But we cannot hope to measure adequately certain types of non—
monetary rewards to jobs.

A last consideration is intertemporal aspects of the model. We have
considered a static world devoid of human capital considerations and

intertemporal factors such as savings. But intertempora]. issues may be quite
important for new entrants into the labor market and for individuals close to

retirement. The eighty—hour weeks put in by young lawyers will be rewarded in
the

not-too-distant future so that current compensation is an inadequate measure

17

of earnings. Furthermore, ussues of on—the—job training may be important. To
date, research on issues of intertemporal labor

supply have indicated only

limited empirical importance of this problem.9 But further empirical research
based on less restrictive models may find a more important role for intertemporal
considerations.

In this section we have considered from

a theoretical point of view the

effect of taxes on labor supply. The Slutsky equation which has been
traditionally used to analyze the problem is inadequate except for the case of a

proportional tax. Progressive taxation results in a convex budget constraint
which leads to a multiplicity of net wages and virtual incomes. We see that
except for a few cases the effect of a change in the tax rate cannot be
determined
leisure

on a priori grounds even if

being

reasonable assumptions are made such as

a normal good. Government tax and transfer programs result in non—

convex budget sets which are even more difficult to analyze

theoretically. thus,

we now turn to the econometrics of the problem so that models can be estimated.
From the estimated models we can assess the effect of taxation. However, as with
all models we discuss certain aspects of the problem which have not been

included. The results should be interpreted with this limitations in mind.

18
NOTES

1

It may well be this latter income effect which creates the appearance of
a backward bending labor supply curve which has been found in many empirical
studies. The important point here is that no only do we have a income effect
from the change in wage, but virtual income also rises due to the

tax system.

effect of the

2

As we will discuss subsequently, even the federal tax system is not truly
convex because of the effect of Social Security payments, the earned income
credit, and the standard deduction. However, it may well be the case that

treating taxes in a convex budget set is a sufficiently good approximation for
empirical work.

A non—convexity may also arise, not from the tax system, but due to fixed
costs to working, e.g., }{ausman (igeo). We will discuss fired costs in the next
section.

See Hanoch and Honig (1978) for a theoretical analysis of the Social
Security case. Burtless and Moffitt (1982) discuss the Social Security budget
set within a model of labor supply and retirement. See also
Wise (1980) for a treatment of intertemporal considerations. Blinder, Gordon, and
See Hausman (1979) for further analysis and implications of this case.
6

The necessity of paying benefits, except for Social Security payments, is
not a sufficient reason when total compensation is taken into account. Of
course, most studies use the gross wage and neglect benefits due to lack of data.
Ham (1982) has introduced quantity constraints into a labor supply model
without taxes. See Deaton (1981) and Deaton and Muellbauer (1981) for further
research on quantity restrictions. Brown et al. (1982) have attempted to
incorporate quantity restrictions in a short term labor supply model which does
incorporate taxation.
8

To the extent that wages reflect intensity of work, this problem mAy not
be too serious. However, for many jobs wages may be only loosely related to
current effort with longer—run goals important. ¶e,discuss this issue
subsequently. See Rosen (1960) for a discussion of these problems.
MacCurdy (1981) has estimated an interteinporal model of labor supply.
However, he did not consider the effect of taxation within the model.

19
2.

Tax Systems

In the previous section we have discussed the theory of labor
supply with
taxes. We will now describe the
type of tax systems which exist in the United

States. To give a historical

perspective on the problem, we will outline the

evolution of the income tax rate

over the century. We will also provide data on

actual marginal tax rates since 1960 when
discuss federal and state income taxes
basic federal income tax is

the data becomes available. We shall

first. It turns out that even though the

progressive, the resulting budget set that an

individual faces is not convex. FICA
earned income credit all introduce

payments, the standard deduction, and the

nonconvexities. These additions to the basic

progressive tax system will be explained. Next we discuss AFDC

each state. Lastly we briefly discuss tax

systems

tax

systems for

for social security

beneficiaries and negative income tax (NIT) recipients. All of these tax
systems
have very large nonconvexities

togewther with quite high marginal tax

We first outline the basic federal

rates.

income tax system in 1980 by 12

brackets.1 The first bracket is $1,000 wide with succeeding brackets
falling at
intervals of $4,000. Since we are interested in the effect of taxes on labor
supply, we consider only taxes on earned income.

Table 3.1 lists the brackets

along with the marginal tax rates and average tax rates at the nidpoint of the

bracket. It is interesting to note that the average tax rate renains
significantly below the marginal tax rate until quite high levels of earned

income are reached. Thus a theory which stated that individuals react to
average
after tax income when making marginal
decisions might cce up with rather
different results. However, the theory of individual behavior with respect to

20
Table 2.1

Basic Federal Tax Rates for 1980 on Earned Income for Married Coup1es

Taxable Income

progressive

Marginal Rate

Average Rate
at Midpoint

0—2,000

.14

.14

2,000-4,000

.16

.147

4,000-8,000

.18

.160

8,000—12,000

.21

.174

12,000—16,000

.24

.189

16,000-20,000

.28

.204

20,000-24,000

.32

.222

24,000-32,000

.37

.250

32,000-42,000

.43

.287

42,000—56,000

.49

.331

56,000+

.50

—-

taxation contains both the marginal net wage and the appropriate

virtual income which reflects average tax rates up to the current tax bracket.
In a certain sense, the entire characteristics of the tax system are accounted
for in this way.

In determining taxable income personal exemptions need to be accounted for.
An exemption of $1000 per person was allowed in 1980. The standard deduction, or
zero bracket amount, was $3,400 for married couples in 1980. Itemized deductions

in excess of $3,400 could also be subtracted from gross income. They were

approximately 9% of adjusted gross income in 1980. The standard deduction i.e.,
no itemized deductions, was used on approximately 70% of all tax returns in 1980.

21

Next, the earned income credit grants a credit of io% below $5,000 of gross

income. Prom $6,000 to $10,000 the credit is reduced by 12.5% so that the
brerakeven point is reached at $10,000 when the credit has been completely

exhausted. A nonconvexity is created at $10,000 because the tax rate falls by
the 12.5 payment when the breakeven point is reached.

Lastly PICA contributions

were 6.05% up to a limit of $25,900 in 19a0. Thus, in the appropriate bracket
when the PICA limit is reached, the marginal tax rate falls from about .38 to

about .32 which also creates a nonconvexity.3 We provide some historical data on
tax rates and actual marginal rates to provide a historical perspective on the
income tax system.4

In Table 2.2 we provide a summary of marginal tax rates for the period 1950—

1984, according to current legislation.5 These rates are for single taxpayers

with no exemptions or deductions accounted for. We also give the CPI and median
family income so that valid comparisons across different yours can be made.

First, note that the tax system between 1950 and 1980 was only imperfectly

indexed for inflation. The median income faced a marginal tax rate of 22% in
1950, but multiplied by the change in the CPI, this amount faced a mrginal rate

of 26% in 1960. Similarly $10,000 of earned income in 1950 had a marginal tax
rate of 38% in 1950, but adjusted for inflation, this marginal tax rate increased

to 43% in 1980. Similar increases in marginal tax rates occurred over th&
periods 1960—1980 and 1970—1980. Of course, this imperfect indexation
corresponds to greater progressivity which may have been the intent of Congress

over the period. However, note that under the tax reform of 1981, marginal rates
will drop substantially by 1984 due to the 25% tar reduction, with the exact

amount depending on inflation over the 1982-1984 period. Much of the 'bracket

22

creep' of the past decade will be eliminated. Under current legislation, the tax
system will then be indexed after 1964. Another interesting finding which
emerges from Table 2.2 is the significantly higher marginal tax rates faced by

the median earner over the period. Besides the effect of inflation and imperfect
indexation, real wage growth also led to higher marginal taxes. Lastly, note
the remarkable decline in maxinjura taxes or earned income which arose with the Tax

Reform Act of 1969. To determine the effect of these tax changes we now consider
the actual marginal rates faced by given segments of the population.
We now present marginal tax rates from a sample of returns in Table 2.3

calculated by Steverle and Hartzmark (1981) in a very useful paper. Of course,
the tax rates correspond to total income rather than just labor income which was

considered in Table 2.2. The significant rise in the progressivity of the

Table 2.2

Federal Income Tax: Selected Marginal Rates
Taxable
Income
(1000's)

2—4

6—8
10—12
16-18
20—22
26—32
38—44
50—60
60—70
70-80
80—90
90-100
100-150
150—200

150
(1.0,3.3)

1960
(1.23,5.6)

22

22

30

30

38
50

38

50

197

1980
(3.42,21.0)

j9542

19
26

16

12
16

33
43
49

26
40
43
50*

(1.61,9.8)

21

20
30
23
38
42
46
48
48

56

56

62
69
75
78

62
69
75
76

81

81

84
87
89
90

84
87

70

50
50

71

50

50

89

72
72

50
50

50

90

54

59
64
66
68

50
50

50

49

50

Table

23

2.2 (Continued)

1lncludes 2.5% surtax.
2The 1984 rates reflect the entire 25%
tax reduction passed by Congress in 1981.
The tax will then be indexed.
tMaximum tax on earned (labor) income was 50% beginning in 1972 imder the mx
Reform Act of 1969.
3First entry is CPI in 1950 dollars and
second entry is median family income in
thousands of current dollars.

income tax in the 1960-1980 period is evident in Table 2.3. Note that for those

Table 2.3

Marginal Rates of Taxation on Personal Income
Marginal Rates
Percentile
of
Returns

Average Marginal Tax Rates

-

Payroll
1961

1969*

1974

1979

Year

Rate

Tax
Included

1%

.00

.oo

.00

.00

5%

.00

15.2

.00

25%

.15

1955
1960

16.3

.18

.00
.00

--

10%

.00
.00

1950

—-

.00

.15

16.4

.14
.20
.24

19.4

1965
1970
1975

14.0
17.2
17.4

17.6
22.0
23.3

.00

50%
75%

.18

.23

.20

90%
95%
99%

.22
.26

.25
.28
.32

.28

.22
.38

.47

.22
.32
.47

.32
.38

.50

lncludes an approximation for surtax changed in 1969.
**From Seater (1982).

households which paid tax, the marginal rate was between .18 and .26 up through

the 95% percentile. In fact 59% of all taxpayers who had a non zero marginal
rate, had a rate of 18%. While the marginal rate for the median return increased
by 10% between 1961 and 1979, the difference in rates on the interquantile
increased

by 33%. This

considerable increase in the progressj.rity of the

range

24

marginal tax rates will significantly decrease by the tax legislation changes of
1981.

Another historical comparison of marginal tax rates is provided by Seater
(1982) who based his estimates on the Statistics of Income rather than a sample

of individual returns. Except for the years ¶964—6? when the Kennedy cut lowered
tax rates the movement of the average marginal tax rate has

increased over the

period 1950—1980. When the effects of the payroll tax are included the increase
is from an average marginal tax rate of about 15% in 1950 to an average rat.e of
over 23% in 1975 which is an increase of 43% in the 25

year period. Therefore,

the increases in the payroll tax over the period have a large effect on the
marginal tax rates.

State income taxes (including the District of Columbia) should also be
briefly mentioned. In 1980 nine states did not tax earned incorue but the other

42 states have either progressive of proportional tax systems. Sixteen states

permit deduction of federal income taxes. Among the states with progressive tax
systems Delaware has the highest overall marginal tax rate of 19.8%. However, at
$15,000 after personal exemptions the marginal rate in California is 10%, in
Hawaii it is 10%, in Minnesota it is 14%, in New York state it is 10%, in Oregon
the marginal tax rate is 10% above $15,000, and in Wisconsin the marginal rate is

11.4% at$l5,000. Nebraska, Rhode Island and Vermont are the only states which
take a constant percentage from the federal taxes paid. Rhode Island takes the

highest proportion, 17%. Among states with proportional rates after personal
exemptions Illinois has a rate of 2.5%, Massachusetts has a rate of 5.4% and

Indiana and Pennsylvania have rates of 2%. State governments have increasingly
turned to direct taxation as a source of revenue over the past 20 years.

25

Beside the operation of the Federal tax system, another

potentially more

important influence on labor supply of female heads of household is the AFDC tar
and transfer system. It has often been contended that A}'DC presents a
significant disincentive to labor supply, and its replaceme;t by NIT could

significantly decrease the work disincentive. The basic design of AFDC programs
is a transfer payment which depends on family size accompanied by a tax rate of
67%

until the breakeven point is reached and the person returns

tax system.

to the federal

A sizeable nonconvexity is created because at the breakeven

point

the marginal tax rate decreases from .67 to approximately .16. Thus, the
potential discincentive effect is quite large.6
transfer payment and also

in the exact

States differ in the size of the

operation of the AFDC tax system. The

majority of the states permit $30 of earned income per month before starting to

levy the .67 tax. Thus, in Figure 2.1 we show the basic outline of the AFDC
budget set. Breakeven hours H may not be reached even by women who work full
time at the level of wages which AFDC recipients typically receive.

S

H1

Figure 2.1

26

The workings of NIT tar

systems resemble AFDC as in Figure 2.1 although no
earnings disregard exists. Major differences
are eligibility, since all families

would qualify, and benefit and tax
of the povery limit which

parameters. The NIT guarantee is a function

depends on family size and the local cost of living.

The guarantee has been set at

between .75 Sd 1.25 times the poverty limit in the

NIT experiments. For instance

in Indiana .75 times the poverty limit was 28

higher than the AFDC payment for

four. Thus the NIT guarantee

non-labor force participation for a family of

i typically more generous than the AFDC payment.

The marginal tax rate up to breakeven hours is also lowered from
.67 to a value
between .4 and .6.
The budget set has the nonconvex form of Figure 2.2 where
beyond breakeven hours, i{,

the individual returns to the federal
tar system. At

breakeven hours the marginal tax
federal taxes and PICA are

rate falls from .4 and .7 to around .25 when

accounted for. For male heads of households

jobs on the less generous plans of

with good

a low guarantee and high tax rate, breakeven

:9,

C.,-

—If

Figure 2.2

27
hours will be reached at about 120 hours per month of work. For males on very
generous plans or those with low wages, breakeven costs will not be reached even

for high hours of work. Likewise, for female heads of household the majority
will not reach breakeven hours because of their relatively low wages. Thus the

position of the first tax segment and the nonconventy created at 1 hours
may
have a significant influence on labor supply decisions.
The last tax system we consider is the operation of the social security
earnings test for individuals between 62 and 70 years old who are receiving.

social security benefits. The budget set has exactly the same form as the
operation of AFDC in Figure 2.1. A level of benefits and family composition. An
'earnings disregard' then exists up to an amount which determines
Beyond

H1 hours.

hours earnings are taxed at a rate of .5 until breakeven hours it

are

reached. Thus, we again seem to have a possibly large disincentive to working.7
But, this diagram leaves out a potentially important effect which Blinder,
Gordon, and Wise (1980) point out. The effect is that current

earnings will

replace lower previous earnings which are used to compute average monthly

earnings which the benefit level is partly based on. Especially with the low
levels of previous FICA amounts, current earnings could replace the $3,600 level

in force from 1951—1954 and for about 20% of near retirement workers replace
previous zero PICA earnings years. Thus, if individuals understand the
admittedly extremely complex social security benefit formulas, the work

disincentives can be greatly diminished. Blinder, Gordon, and Wise actually give
an example where the earnings test is more than compensated for as a work

incentive exists. Thus, empirical studies which use historical data may have

28

great difficulty in adequately representing the correct budget set. The indexing
provision of the 1977 Social Security Amendments greatly lowers the

quantitative

significance of earnings replacement. However, the disincentives effect of the
earnings test is still diminished. The intertemporal aspects of the interaction
of social security and the retirement decision probably require a more complex
model than our essentially one period representation of the budget set. While
the problem is quite difficult to represent in a model, social security may have
a significant effect on retirement.8
In this section we have discussed the effect of Federal and state tax

systems on the budget set. While federal tax rates are

uniformly progressive,

nonconvexities still exist in the budget set due to the presence of the standard

deducticn, earned income credit, and FICA contributions. State income tax and

AFDC programs are also discussed. Next the NIT tax system and its relation to
AFDC is considered. Lastly, the budget set for the social security earnings test
and the complex intertempora]. aspects of retirement are outlined. In this last

area further work seems required to extend the labor supply model to account for
intertemporal decisions.

29
NOTES

Here we discuss our procedure for
joint returns. We followed similar
procedures for single persons and heads of households but do not report the
details here.

2 Tables exclude the zero bracket amount
for the standard deduction.
However, empirical work by Hausman (igam) did not indicate that the
nonconvexjtjes created by the earned income credit and FICA had an important
influence on the econometric estimates.
L

Tax law changes in 1981 provide for

exclusion from taxation of 10% of the
secondary worker's earnings up to $30,000 beginning in 1983. This change
greatly
increase the neutrality of the tax system towards married persons.

The tax rates are taken from Tax

Foundation (1981).

6 Under current legislation in certain
cases the tax rate is 100%.

important

An
distinction exists between the statutory tax rate and the effective
tax
because of various allowable deductions.
Moffitt
(1981)
estimates
the
effective AFDC tax rates over a sample of recipients.

rate

If the individual is eligible
to receive benefits but continues
working
without receiving benefits, his future benefits are increased
by an approximately
actuarily fair amount between the ages of 62 and 65. The adjustment
for
ages 65—
70 is Considerably less.

8 The Blinder et al. conclusions have been

challenged by Burkhauser and
Turner (1981); a reply is given byBlinder et al.
(1981). For empirical
estimates of the effect of social
security or retirement see Gordon and Blinder
(1980), Boskin and liurd (1982),

Burtless and !1offitt (1982) and Diamond and
reviewed in the last section of the
paper.

Hausman (1982). These results are

30
3.

The Econometrics of Labor Supply with Taxes

The essential feature which distinguishes econometric models of labor supply

with taxes from traditional demand models is the non-constancy of the net, after

tax wage.' Except for the case of a proportional tax system, the net wage
depends on hours worked because of the operation of the tax system. Also the
marginal net wage depends on the specific budget segment that the individual's

indifference curve is tangent to. Thus, econometric techniques need to be -

devised which can treat the nonlinearity of the
budget set. However, it is
important to note at the outset that a simultaneous

equation problem does not

really exist, even though the net wage received depends on hours worked.
Given a market wage which is constant over hours worked and a tax system which is
given exogenously by the government, the nonlinear budget set faced by the
individual in deciding on his preferred hours of work is determined exogenously

to his choice.2 An econometric model needs to take the exogenous nonlinear
budget set and to explain the individual choice of desired hours. We first
describe such a model for convex and nonconvex budget sets. As expected, the
convex case is simpler to deal with. lie then consider other issues of model
specification such as variation in tastes, fixed costs to

working, and quantity

constraints on available labor supply.

Econometric estimation is quite straightforward in the case of a convex

budget set. Since a unique tangency or a corner solution at zero hours will
determine desired hours of work, we need only determine where the tangency

occurs. To do so we begin with a slight generalization of the usual type of
labor supply specification

31

(3.1)

h (w,y,z,)

= ht +

where w is a vector of net wages, y is a vector of virtual
income, z are
individual socioeconomic variables,

is the unknown

vector

of coefficients

assumed fixed over the population, and c is a stochastic term which represents
the divergence between desired hours h'

specification

and actual

hours. The typical

that has been used in ( ) is linear or log linear and scalar w and

y corresponding to the market wage and nonlabor income. The stochastic term is
assumed to have classical properties so that no quantity constrainta on hours

worked exist. However, 0 C ii (
We also assuuie that when the

satisfied so that (

B

where I-i is a physical maxinum to hours worked.

's are estimated that the Slutsky conditions are

) arises from concave preferences.

The problem to be solved is to find h* when the individual is faced with the
convex budget set, B1 for in,... ,m.3 To find h* we take the specification of
desired hours on a given budget segment B.
(3.2)

hi =

Calculate hi
then

g(w1,y.,z,)

and

if

0

h7 C H1 where

the Hi's are kink point hours in Figure 1.2

h! is feasible and represents the unique tangency of the indifference curves

and the budget set. However, if h lies outside the interval (0,H.) it is not
feasible so we move on to try the next budget segmçnt. If
would have the unique optimum.

H1 < h c H2 we again

If we have bracketed the kink point so that

) H and h < H1, then h* = B1 so that desired hours fall at the kink point.
Otherwise we go on and calculate h. By trying •out all the segments we will
either find a tangency or find that hi C H1 for all i in which case h* = 0 or
> Hr for all i in which case h*

H. Then a nonlinear least squares procedure

32
or Tobit procedure to take account of minimum hours at zero should be used to
compute the unimown

parameters. The statistical procedure would basically

N
minimize the sum of

(ha— h)2 where j represents individuals in the sample)4

j =1

Perhaps a better technique would be to use Tobit which enforces the constraint
that h.

0.

3

The case of the nonconvex budget set as in Figure 1.5 or Figure 1.6 is more
complicated because equation (2.2) can lead to more than one feasible tangency

which leads to many potential h!'s. How can we decide which of these feasible
h!'s is the global optimum? Burtless—Hausman (1978) initially demonstrated the
technique of working backwards from the labor supply specification of equation
(2.2) to the underlying preferences which can be represented by a utility

function.5 The basic idea to make use of Roy's identity which generated the
labor supply function from the indirect utility function v(w.,y.)

ov(w.,y.)
1

/

Ov(w.,y.)
1

= hI

=

g(w.,y.,z,p)

along a given budget segment. So long as the Slutsky condition holds then

v(w,y1) can always be recovered by solving the differential equation (2.3). In
fact, v( ) often has a quite simple closed form for comnonly used labor supply

specifications. For the linear supply specification
(3.4)

h7aw+py+vy

Hausman (1980) solved for the indirect utility function

(3.5)

v(w.,y.) ei (y

+

._. w

—

+

33

Given the indirect utility function, all of the feasible tangencies can be
compared, and the tangency with highest utility is chosen as the preferred hours

of work, h*.6 Then as with the convex budget set case, we can use either
nonlinear least squares or a Tobit procedure to estimate the unimown

coefficients.

While using a specific parameterization of the utility function

seems upsetting to some people, it should be realized that writing down a labor
supply function as jn equation (2.2) is equivalent to writing down a utility

function under the assumption of utility maximization. To the extent that the
labor supply specification yields a robust approrimation to the data, the

associated utility function will also provide a good approximation to the

underlying preferences. The utility function allows us to make the global

comparisons to determine the preferred hours of labor supply. Th convex case
needs only local comparisons, but the nonconvex case requires global comparisons
because of the possibility of multiple tangencies of indifference curves with the
budget set.

We next introduce the possibility of variation in tastes. In the labor
s,zpply specification of equation (2.1), all individuals are assumed to have

identical 'a so that the variation of observationally equivalent individuals
must arise solely from c .

However, empirical studies seemed to do an inadequate

job of explaining observed hours of work

under

the assumption of the

representative individual. Burtless-Hausman (1978) allowed for variation in
preferences by permitting

to be randomly distributed in the population. Their

results indicated that variation in

seemed more important than variation in a

34

They also found that variation in B represented approximately B times as much of

the unexplained variance as did variation in

.

Hausman (1981) also found

parameter variation to be an important part of his econometric specification.
Blomquist (1982) tests for and rejects the constant preference (no parameter

variation) model. However, his results on terms of policy interest are quite

similar whether or not preference variation is specified. An even more
satisfactory procedure would be to allow all the taste coefficients to vary in

the population. At present the requirement of evaluating multiple integrals over
nonrectangular regions for the more general specification has led to use of the

simple case of one or two taste coefficients varying. Further research is needed
to determine whether this more complex specification would be an important

improvement over current models. Hausman (19a2) uses panel data to allow for
general preference variation by conditioning on individual coefficients.

Estimates of separate coefficients for each individual can be accomplished using

the time series aspect of the data. The need for distributional assumptions or
the varying parameter is also eliminated.
Another consideration which can have an important effect on the budget set
for women's labor force participation is fixed costs to working.

Transportation

costs, the presence of young children, and search costs of finding a job all can

lead to a fixed cost element in the labor supply deéision. The basic effect of
fixed costs is to introduce a nonconvexity in the budget set at the
Thus, even if the original budget is convex as in Figure 1.2 the presence of

fixed costs leads to a minimum number of hours H0, which depends on the wage,
below which an individual will not choose to work. In Figure 3.1 nonlabor income
is y1 with the original convex budget set drawn by the dotted line.

However,

35

3'

-4
0

Figure

3.1

presence of fixed costs lowers the effective budget set to the point y1- 70. The
individual wou'd not choose to work less than H0 hours because she would be

better off at zero hours. This nonconvexity invalidates the simple reservation
wage theory of labor force participation since hours also need to be accounted

for. Hausman (1980),(1ge1) has found average fixed costs to be on the order of
$100 per month. The importance of fixed costs could explain the often noted
empirical fact that very few individuals are observed working less than ten or
fjfteen hours per week.9
Ye flow turn to the question of quantity constraints which seems to enter

labor supfly models in two possible ways. The first type of quantity constraint
might arise if an individual has the choice of working either full time, say 40

hours per week, or not working at all. We can still estimate the parameters of

36

his labor supply function by discrete choice models which allow a distribution of
preferences, e.g., Hausrzan—Wise (1978), Zabalza et.al. (1980).

For example,

suppose we begin with the linear labor supply specification h! = aw. + aw. +
Zr
along with the associated indirect utility function of equation (2.5). To
compare indirect utility at zero and forty hours we need to specify w.and y. that
would lead to the appropriate number of hours being chosen in an unconstrained

setting.10 But w. and y. can be solved for by using the desired hours supply
equation and the linear equation through the point that gives net, after tax,

earnings for that number of hours of work. For forty hours the equation is E40=
w.. 40 +

y.

where

arises from the budget set. We can solve the two equations

in two unknoms for w. and y aS use the values for the required comparison so

that a,, andy can be estimated. It turns out that this procedure is equivalent
to solving for the direct utility function where only quantities appear so that

quantity constraints enter in a straightforward manner. For instance, the direct
utility function for our example is

(3.6)

u(h,x) - (h -s-) exp [1-y(x +!LEflA
p

I

p

h)]

where x is consumption of the composite commodity. However, the direct
utility
function need not exist in closed form in which case the previous solution

procedure can be used with the indirect utility function, Of course,
specification of a direct utility function could be done ab initio, but it might

not be easily combined with the labor supply functions of unconstrained
individuals.

37

The other type of quantity constraints which people 8eem to have in mind is
the choice among jobs, each of which comes with a distinct market wage and hours

of work combination. However, if the individual takes a given job he is
constrained to work the given number of hours which come with the job. Again a

discrete choice framework seems apprpriate to model this situation. Use of
either the indirect or direct utility function would allow the appropriate

utility comparisons to be made. We would need to Imaw the range of choices which

a given individual faces. But the choice set might be either established by
survey questions or estimated from a data set of choices of similar individuals.
At this point we have strayed rather far front our original theory of flexible

hours of work. In our empirical estimation we have not accounted for the
possibility of quantity constraints. it seems unclear hot'i important an empirical

problem quantity constraints are. As we discuss later, even conditional on
working in a given week the standard deviation of hours

males is around 14 hours. Thus, the model of
costs may provide a reasonably good

worked for prime age

flexible labor supply with fixed

approximation, especially in the long run.11

A question of some interest might be what are the direction of biases in
estimated labor supply models which do not account for taxes? Given the
complexity of a model which incorporates taxes, the answer is

not

straightforward

although a partial solution is possible. Consider the linear labor supply

specification of equation (2.4). The net wage for individual i on budget segment
and the corresponding virtual income, y1., are determined simultaneously
with

the unknown coefficients a , , and y .

Suppose

that the market wage w. and

observed non—labor income, x., are used instead. If x is measured subject to

error, which it almost surely is in any survey, then the estimated coefficient

38
for

will be subject to errors in variables bias towards zero. As an

approximation assume that the contribution of virtual income, 'ij' is omitted so

that it enters the stochastic disturbance. Since the ne wage w1 and virtual
income

are positively correlated due to progressive taxes and

< 0 if

leisure is a normaJ. good, the estimate of the wage coefficient will have a
negative bias.

In fact, empirical studies of males which do not account for

taxes typically estimate a to be negative and substantial.12

On the other hand,

estimates which accoaunt for taxes, e.g., Burtless—Hausnian (1978), Wales—Woodland
(1979), Hausman (1981), Ashworth—Ulph (1981), Blomquist (1982), Hausman (1982),

estimate a to be much nearer to zero. These latter studies also find
considerably more evidence in support of economic theory than do studies which
ignore taxes and after find compensated demand curves which

slope in the wrong

direction.

For labor supply estimates for wives, the husband's before tax income is
often used for

in equation (2.4). Then two counteracting biases as present in

estimates of the wage parameter a. If the wife's wage is positively correlated
with husband's income then a negative bias of the estimate of a is created.

However, the bias from the income term turns out to be positive so that the net

effect cannot be determined. To the extent that husband's before tax income is
fairly close to the wive's virtual income the effect of the bias should not be as

itnortant as in the husband's case. The empirical evidence to date supports this
tentative conclusion.

In this section we have demonstrated how the

nonlinearity of the budget set

which taxes create can be accounted for in an econometric model. The labor
supply (leisure demand) curves are still the focus of model specification. For

the convex budget set case the only new complication is to search for the budget

39

segment on which h* falls. When the budget set is nonconvex, we need to solve
for the indirect utility function which is associated with the labor supply

specification. Then the multiple tangencies of the budget set and indifference
curves can be compared to find the h*

which corresponds to maxinum

utility.

We

also

emphasized the potential importance of allowing for variation in preferences
and fixed costs to working. Previous empirical studies indicate the potential
importance

of both considerations. Lastly, we discuss techniques to handle

quantity constraints within the context of our approach. However, unless on a
priori grounds we know who in the sample is quantity constrained, it is not clear

that these procedures can be applied in a given sample.

40
NOTES
1

Nonconstan-t prices do exist in the demand for other
goods, e.g.,
electricity with a declining block rate. A general treatment of econometric
techniques for nonlinear budget sets is given by Hausruan (1982).

An initial work on introducing taxes into labor supply mode]s, Hall
(1973) used the observed after tax wage which creates simultaneous eouation bias
in the estimated coefficients. Wales (1973), Hausman and Wise (1976) and
Rose
(1976)

introduced instrumental variable techniques to take account of this

problem.
2

since

If the market wage depends on hours worked the same reasoning holds

the budget set is still exogenous.

The technique used here is more fully explained in Hausrnan (1979b). See
also Hausman (1981) and Hausman (1982).
A potential problem does exist in the asymptotic expansions used to
compute the standard errors of the coefficients.
Their work was done in the framework of labor supply and a composite
consumption good. The technique can also be used in the many good case although
it is more difficult to apply.
Alternatiuvely, one can begin with a utility
function specification and derive the labor supply function as Wales—Woodland
(1979), Ashworth—Ulph (1981), and Ruffell (1981) did.
The indirect utility function can be used to evaluate tangencies on both
budget segments and at kink points so that the direct utility function is
unnecessary. See Hausman (1980) or Deaton-Muellbauer (1981) for techniques to be
used here. As Figure 1.8 shows a tangency will not occur at a nonconvex kink
point, but it may occur later on a convex portion of the budget set.
For many linear regression specifications where the effect of taxes are
not accounted for, variations in preferences leads only to an efficiency issue
for the econometric estimator. However, taxes create an essential nonlinearity
in the problem so that variation in preferences can he quite important. A
similar issue arises in the specification of discrete
choice models, e.g.,
Hausman—Wise (1978). Greenberg and Kosters (1973) seemed to be the first paper
that allowed for a dispersion of preferences to affect their model in an
important way.
-

It is interesting to note that Greenberg—Kosters had a similar type of
variation in preferences. However, they did not allow for the effect of taxes so
that the results cannot be compared.
Similar results in a model without taxes
were found by Cogan (1981).
Hanoch (1980) and Nakarnura and Nakamura (i9ai) have also included fixed costs mb
models of female labor supply.
Neary and Roberts (1980) and Deaton and Nuellbauer (isso) discuss this
technique in a general demand setting. However, they do not consider the effect
of taxes.

41

Ham (1981), in a model without taxes, attempts to provide evidence on
quantity constraints by considering the response to a survey question on the
possibility of additional work. Deaton (1981) considers quantity constraints by
a rationing model of the consumption function.
12 }!eckman—Borjes (1979) present a range of estimates. Despite its title
the paper should not be used for policy purposes since all the studies reviewed
ignore taxes in their models of labor supply.

42

Results

4.

In this section we summarize the results of studies of labor supply which

take account of taxes. The effect of taxes on both labor supply and economic
welfare is considered. However, difficulties arise in providing convenient
summary measures for the effect of taxes. Elasticity measures for labor

supply,

which are most often used as summary measures in demand studies, are not fully
adequate to assess the effect of taxation for the following reasons:

(1)

Nonlinearity of the budget sets can lead to large changes in labor supply with

small changes in taxes. The nonconvexity of many of the budget sets leads to
this result. (2) About 1/2 of all women are not labor force participants.
Because of the non—tangency of their utility functions with the budget sets at

zero hours, small changes in taxes will not effect most non—workers. (3) When
taxes

are changed both the change in the net after tax

incomes must be taken account of. Equation (1 .2)

relationship.

wages and the virtual

demonstrates the correct

(4) If variation in preferences are specified, e.g., Burtless—

Hausman (1978), Hausman (1981,19a2), and Blomuist (1982), behavior of 'mean'
individual may differ from the mean population response.1

This difference arises

the nonlinearity of the budget set. To some extent problems which arise
with the first and last reason are decreased by aggregation from individual
from

responses

A.

to the population. However, the middle two problems remain..

Prime Age Males: These individuals are usually taken to be from 25

either 35

to

or 60 years old. Labor force participation among this group is nearly

100%, especially when disabled individuals are not considered. Unemployment is

typically low among this group in a non-recession year. Most studies

therefore

43

do not account specifically for unemployment or constraints
on labor market
activity.2 An integration of behavior when unemployed and hours of work should
be a goal of future research, but theoretical advances as well as better data

would be required.3 Another needed advance is an integrated model of family
labor supply with taxesd to take account of wives labor market activity and its
possible effect on husband's labor market
The most natural interpretation of the labor supply results estimated on
cross section data is an equilibrium model where actual hours differ from desired

hours because of stochastic reasons. One should not maintain the incorrect image
of the prime age male labor free uniformly at work for40 hours per week and 2000
hours per year. On the company,- significant variation exists in both normal

hours per week and weeks worked per year. Hours per week of work, conditional on
being employed, typically have a mean of about 42 hours with a standard deviation

of 10—15 hours in typical cross section date.5 Men presumably choose jobs which
have the number of hours which most closely correspond to their desired hours
taking account of over time and possible layoffs. However, for a significant
proportion of the prime age male population, changes between employers is fairly

rare, see Hall (1982). How much of the year to year variation in labor

supply

for this group arises from fluctuations in their market wage is problematical.
Therefore, the models of labor supply and empirical results presented here are
probably less relevant for short term labor supply response to business cycle
conditions.

We consider from sets of results for prime age males: Wales—Woodland
(1979), Ashworth and Ulph (1981), Hausman (1981), Blomquist (1982), and Hausman

(1982).6 The results are given in Table 4.1. First, note that the

44
TABLE 4.1

Prime Age Male

Authors

1. Wales—Woodland
2. Ashworth—Ulph
}1aueman'
3.

4. Blomquist*
5.

Hausman

Data

PSID
UK

PSID
Sweden
PSID

Labor Supply Results
Wage
Model

CES
Generalized CES
Linear
Linear
Linear

Elasticity

.09**
-.13
.00
.08
.03

Income
Elasticity

_.1I**
—.05

-.1?
—.04
-.14

*Specification permits variation in preferences. Mean results are given.
'Results are approximate since means of data were not given.
uncompensated labor supply elasticity is much closer to zero than is typically

found in labor supply studies which ignore taxes. This result concurs with the
econometric bias arguments given in the last section. The next difference is
that the income elasticities vary from —.04 to —.17 which imply that leisure is a
normal good in contrast to many studies which ignore taxes and find the opposite

sign. Given the magnitude of virtual income with progressive taxation, the clear
implication is that taxes will affect the labor supply decision. The combination
of these two results leads to the last result, which is perhaps the most

satisfying. All five studies imply a positive compensated wage elasticity so
that the compensated labor supply curve is upward sloping. These results are in
stark contrast to models which ignore taxation, and very often estimate a

compensated elasticity of the wrong sign. This finding is difficult, if not
impossible, to justify even when more general models of labor supply are

considered. Since a non—negative compensated elasticity is the only implication
of economic theory for models of labor supply, it is satisfying to find that the

45

results become acceptable to the theory when the effect of taxes is taken into
account.

We now turn to the effect of taxes on labor

supply. As equations (i.i) and

(1.2) demonstrate, the theoretical effect is indeterminate.

Nost models for

prime age males which ignore taxes estimate a backward bending labor supply

curve.7 Therefore, a reduction in tax rates which has recently occurred in the
U.S. and U.K. would lead to a reduction in hours of work. A
contrary view has

been put forward by 'supply side' advocates in the U.S. who have argued that a
reduction in tax rates will lead to such a large increase in labor supply that
government revenue would actually increase.
We first present some results of Hausman (1981a,1981b) for the U.S. He

found using 1975 data that compared to a no tax situation, desired labor supply
was 8.2% lower because of the U.S. tax system, including PICA taxes and state

income taxes. In Table 4.2 the results are given by wage quintiles from the PSID
sample. In the second row the change from the no tax situation is given. Note
that the effect of the progressiveness of the tax

system

is to cause high wage

individuals to reduce their labor supply more from the no tax situation than do

TABLE 4.2

The Effect of Taxes on Prime Age Male Labor Supply in the U.S.

Narket Wage

$3.15

$4.72

$5.87

$7.06

$10.01

Change in
Labor Supply

-4.5%

—6.5%

-8.5%

-10.1%

-12.8%

10% Tax Cut

+ .4%

+

,%

+ .9%

+ 1.7%

+1.47%

30% Tax Cut

+1.3%

÷1.6%

+2.7%

+

+4.6%

3.1%

46

low tax individuals. The higher marginal tax rates lead to higher virtual income

and a greater reduction in desired labor supply. Of course, this pattern of
labor supply has an adverse effect on tax revenues because of the higher tax

rates that high income individuals pay tax at. In the second and third rows of
Table 4.2 we present the expected change in labor supply for tax cuts of 10% and

30%. Note that desired labor supply increases with a tax reduction. We find the
expected pattern that the effect on high wage individuals is greatest since the
linear labor supply model used has an increasing elasticity with virtual income.

The effect of a 30% tax cut is roughly three times as large as a 10% cut, but the

ratios are not exact. However, neither of the two tax cuts is nearly self—
financing as Hausman's (1981b) results indicate.

Lastly, we consider two types of radical tax reform. We consider a
progressive linear income tax with all current deductions removed, e.g., interest

deductability. Therefore, we have broadened the tax base considerably and then
determined the tax rate which would raise the same amount of tax revenue as the

current U.S. tax system using 1975 data. With a zero exemption level so that a

flat tax results, the required tax rate is 14.6%. Desired labor supply for the
prime age males rises about 8.1%. For a progressive tax with an exemption level

of $4000 (1975 dollars), the required tax rate rises to 20%. Desired labor
supply increases by about 7.7%. Therefore, a decrease in marginal tax rates does
lead to an increase in desired labor supply of significant amounts although much
of the progressivity of the tax system is lost with such a proposed tax reform.

Ashworth and Ulph (1981) also considered the effect of tax changes on labor

supply. They considered changing the standard rate of tax in the U.K. from its
present value of 30% to 4 other rates representing changes of plus or minus 7%

47

and 15%. The standard rate of tax is the marginal tax rate for almost 90% of
prime age males in the U.K. In Table 4.3 the percentage change in labor supply
is given for the entire sample as well as for each quintile of the income (not
wage) distribution.8

TABLE 4.3

The Effect of Tax Rate Changes on Prime Age Male Labor Supply in the U.K.
Income

Quintjle

Tax Cut

15%

Tax Cut
Tax Rise
Tax Rise

7%
7%

15%

1

2

3

4

5

Total

— .3%
— .1%

+ .7%
+ .3%

+1.8%

+ .1%

+1.6%
+ .9%

+2.1%

— .5%
—1.1%

+ .8%
+ .3%

+

-1.0%

- .9%

+ .9%

- .g%

—2.3%

—2.6%

—2.1%

—1.2%
—2.9%

+ •3%

Note the qualitative similarity betveen the Ashworth-Ulph results and the Hausman

results. A much larger change in labor supply is forecast from the higher income
.quintiles. The magnitude of the predicted changes also do not differ too much,
although Ashworth—Tilph find that the income effect dominates in the lowest

quintile, leading to a small decrease in labor supply when taxes are lowered.
The labor supply changes given in Table 4.3 are not sufficient to make a tax cut

The rise in labor supply would offset about 10% of the fall in
revenues from the tax cut which is again fairly close to what Hausman (1981b)
self—financing.

found.

The last set of results which we consider are Blomquist's
(1982) estimates
for Sweden. Using 1973 data, he calculates the effect of taxes on labor supply
for the mean individual at wage rates of 10.0 skr, 20.3 skr, and 40.0 skr which
correspond to a low wage, the average wage rate in the sample, and a higher wage

48
rate, respectively.
-

TABLE 4.4

The Effect of Taxes on Prime Age Males in Sweden

Market Wage (Skr)

Change in Labor Supply
Proportional Tax

10.0

20.3

40.0

Total Sample

—4.7%
—1.9%

—13.6%
+ 6.2%

-27.1%
+11.4%

-13.1%

In Table 4.4 the first row estimates the change in labor

+

6.9%

supply from the no tax

situation. Note that the results are almost twice as large as the estimates for
the U.S. in Table 4.2. Much of this difference arises from the

considerably

higher level of taxation in Sweden. In the second row of Table 4.4 an equal
yield proportional tax is considered for each of the 'representative' males. The
corresponding tax rates are 27.8%, 39.1%, and 47.8% respectively. For the entire
sample the equal yield proportional tax is 34% with desired labor supply

increasing 6.9% from its current level. Blonquists' estimates indicate a
substantial effect of taxes on labor supply in Sweden.

B.

Economic Welfare: The welfare cost of the distortion created by the

composition of a tax is measured by use of deadweight loss (excess burden): We
briefly sketch the theory of the deadweight loss measure, and then we present

estimates which arise from labor supply studies.9 The first component of a
welfare measure is the effect of the tax on individual utility. Here the
measure long used by economists has been some form of consumers' surplus.
Consumers' surplus corresponds to the concept of how much money each individual
would need to be given, after imposition of the tax, to be made as well off as

49
he was

in

the no tar situation. Measurement of consumers' surplus often is done

by the size of a trapezoid under the individual's demand curve or here it would

be the labor supply curve. But Hausman (1981c) has demonstrated that in the case
of labor supply this method is very inaccurate, Instead the

theoretically

correct notion of either the compensating variation or equivalent variation must

be used.1° These measures, set forth by Sir John Hicks, are probably best
defined in terms of the expenditure function. The expenditure function
determines the minimum amount of money an individual needs to attain a given

level of utility at given levels of wagges and prices.11 Its form is determined
by either the direct utility function U(H,Y) or the labor supply function.

Consider the simple example of the wage tax for which the compensating variation
equals
(4.1)

C.V.(w,w',U) =

e(w',tJ)

—

e(w,U)

Equation (4.1) states that the welfare loss to the individual, measured in

dollars of the consumption good, equals the minimum amount of non—labor income
needed to keep the individual at his original utility level U minus his non—labor
income in the no tar situation, y.

Since utility is kept at the pre—tax level U,

the compensating variation arises solely from the subtitution effect in the

Slutsky equation (1.1). The income effect is eliminated because the individual
is

kept on

his initial indifference curve. In the more complicated case of

progressive

in

taxes, the only difference is

that

we use virtual non—labor incomes

equation (4.1) rather than actual non—labor income.12
We need one more ingredient to complete the measure of the welfare loss from

taxation. The government has raised tax revenue, and we need to measure the

50

contribution
tax

revenue.

to individual welfare which arises from the

governnerit snending the

The assumption commonly used is that the government returns the tax

U

y

U'

y

3,,

-H

Ht H'

0

Figure 4.1

revenue to the individual via an income transfer. Here it
increasing

would correspond to

the individual's non—labor income by the amount of tax revenue raised.

Then the total economic cost of the tax is given by the deadweiht loss (or
excess burden) as

(4.2)

DWL(w,w',U) = C.V.(w,w',ij)
=

e(w',U)

—

—

T(w,w',U)

e(w,U)

—

T(w,w',U)

Equation (4.2) states that the deadweight loss of a tax equals the amount the

individual needs to be given to be as well off after the tax as he was before the
tax minus the tax revenue raised T(w,w',TJ).l3 Deadweight loss is greater than or
equal to zero which makes sense given that we expect taxation always to have an

economic cost. Of course, if no tax revenue is returned the compensating

51

variation gives the welfare loss to the individual. In Figure 4.1 the
compensating variation and deadweight loss are shown in terms of our simple wage

tax example of Figure 1.2. Here the effect of the tax is to reduce labor supply
from H* to H'. The compensating variation is measured by the line segment yy'.
We then decompose the compensating variation into its two parts. The line
segment CD measures tax revenue collected while the line CE measures the

deadweight loss of the tax. Since the taxpayer has been made worse off but no
one has benefited from the amount of the deadweight loss, it represents tIe
economic cost of raising the tax revenue.
In Table 4.5 we present Hausman's results from deadweight loss of taxation

TABLE 4.5

Deadweight Loss Estimates for Prime Age Male in the U.S.

Market Wage

$3.15

$4.72

$5.87

$7.06

$10.02

Total

DWL/Tax Revenue
10% Tax Cut
30% TAx Cut

9.4%

14.4%
13.3%
10.9%

19.0%
17.4%
14.5%

23.7%
21.8%
17.9%

39.5%
36.1%

22.1%
19.0%

29.5

15.4%

8.5%
6.8%

of labor supply in the U.S. The first row gives the deadweight loss in each of
the wage quntiles. Note that the deadweight loss to tax revenue ratio rises
sharply because of the progressivity of the income tax. The 'triangle formula'
for deadweight loss demonstrates that the loss is proportional to the square of
the tax rate so that higher wage individuals face a higher economic distortion.
Overall, Hausman estimates the mean ratio of deadweight loss tb tax revenue to be
22.1% which has important implications given the large proportion of the U.S. tax

revenues which are raised via the income tax. The next two rows of Table 4.5
calculate the deadweight loss under two tax cut proposals to given

52

an indication of the size of the marginal change. Lastly, we consider the
deadweight loss under an equal yield proportional tax. With no exemption and a
tax rate of 14.6% the deadweight loss to tax revenue ratio decline to 7.1%.

A

progressive linear income tax of 20.7% with an exemption level of $4000 leads to

a ratio of 14.5%. Both sets of calculations indicate the size of the welfare
cost which arises from the progressivity of the U.S. tax system.

Blomquist (1982) does similar deadweight loss calculations for Sweden. For
the average individual in his sample who earns 20.3 51cr he calculates the

deadweight loss to tax ratio to be 14Z. The marginal tax rate faced by this
individual is 62%. An equal yield proportional tax would be 39% and the
deadweight loss to tax ratio would decline to 5.5%. Over the entire sample
Blomquist calculates that the deadweight loss ratio is 19%. An equal yield
proportional tax of 33.7% would lower the ratio to 4%.
Increased attention in the U.S. and European nations has focused on the

incentive effects of the tax systems. Most of the attention has been on output
effects. The labor supply results for prime age males reviewed here do
demonstrate that income taxes reduce desired labor supply. The answer to the
question of whether taxes increase or decrease desired labor supply is what most

policy makers worry about. Yet, the deadweight loss effects may be core
important from an economists' viewpoint. Since deadweight loss is a measure of
the economic cost or efficiency effect of the income tax, it provides the
appropriate measure within which to have frame questions about the 'optimal'
progressivity of the tax system or the cost of marginal government expenditure.15

Also, deadweight loss calculations are central to proposals for tax reform

measures. And the deadweight loss question stands apart from labor supply

53

effects

since large deadweight loss exists even when counteracting income and

substitution effects lead to small labor supply changes. The size of the
deadweight loss associated with the income tax is perhaps the most important
finding of the recent labor supply literature which considers

the effect of

taxes. Deadweight loss calculations are likely to influence future discussions
on tax changes among economists and perhaps policy makers as well.

C.

Wives: Income taxation is generally thought to have important effects-on

wives labor force behavior. Wives labor force

participation in the U.S. is

approximately 50%. When the labor force participation decision is made by a
-

woman whose husband is employed, the tax rate which
enters her decision is

calculated from the husband's earnings.16 Since this marginal tax rate is around
25% on average, taxes should be expected to be important in wives labor supply

decisions.17 Since relatively large uncompensated wages elasticities are often
estimated for wives, the effect of various tax reform proposals may have

important effects. However, it is important to remember that since 50% of wives
do not work, their reaction to marginal changes in tares will be zero to a great

extent. Wives already at work will change their desired hours and some wives
will decide to enter the labor force in response to a tax cut, but most
nonparticipants will remai.n so. Therefore, elasticity estimates should be used
with caution in considering tax changes.
We consider four sets of estimates for wives'

labor supply behavior which

consider the effect of taxation: Ashworth & LTlph (1981) for Great Britain,
Hausman (1981) for the U.S., Nakamura and Nakamura (1981) for Canada and

the

U.S., and }osen (1976) for the U.S. The results are given in Table 4.6. The

54
TABLE 4.6

Wives Labor Supply Results

Authors

Data

1. Ashworth—Ulph
Hausman
3. Nakamura—Nakapiura
2.

3a. Nakamura-.Nakaniura
4.

Rosen

Model

UK
PSID
US Census
Canada Census

Panes (NLS)

Generalized CES
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear

Wage
Elasticity

Income
Elasticity

.19

-.14

.91

-. 50t

_.16*
_.30*
2.3

-.

42-*

tEvalatd for mean women who works full time at virtual income which includes
husband's earnings.
*For the age group 35—39 Younger age groups have larger elasticities while older
age groups have smaller elasticities.
**Eatimated from results given in the paper.
estimates

vary widely with the Ashworth-Ulph and Hausman results in the range of

studies which do not account for taxes. Rosen's estimated wage elasticity of 2.3
seems quite high.
virtual

Econometric problems which include incorrect treatment of

income and an inconsistent

divergence.

elasticity

estimation technique may explain the

In subsequent analysis Feenberg—Rosen (1983)

estimates of 1.0. The most

have used wage

surprising result is that of Nakamura-

Nakamura (1981) who find significant negative uncompensated wage elasticities

which range from -.39

for the 25—29

age group to —.06 for the 50-54 age group.

Almost no other econometric study of wives labor supply, whether or not taxes are
considered, estimates a negative wage elasticity. The Naka;nura-Nakamura paper

has an incorrect treatment of virtual income together with other econometric

problems. Yet their finding that higher wages lead to lower labor supply for
wives together with the implication that the effect of income taxation is to

55

increase

wives labor supply is so at odds with previous studies that it should

perhaps be disregarded unless further studies provide additional confirmation.

estimated income elasticities are all negative so that taxation has two
counteracting effects: by decreasing husbands not earnings its increases wives
labor supply but by its effect on virtual income it decreases labor
supply. The
The

overal

effect of the income tax seems quite clearly (apart from the Nakamura

results) to decrease wives labor supply because of the sizeable uncompensated
wage elasticity which is typically found.
In Table 4.7 we present results of }iausman (1981) for a
sample of wives by

quintiles. Mote that the effect of taxation is to increase labor supply for the
lowest wage quintile but to decrease labor supply for the other cuintile. The
overall effect compared to the no tax case is a reduction in

labor supply by 18%.

Hausman also found substantial deadweight loss to tax revenues with the

TABLE

4.7

The Effect of Taxes on Wives Labor Supply in the U.S.
Market Wage

Change in

Labor Supply

DWL/Tax Revenue

$2.11

$2.50

$3.03

$3.63

$5.79

Total

+31.2%

—14.2%

20.3%

—23.8%

-22.9%

—18.2%

4.6%

15.3%

15.9%

16.5%

35.7%

18.4%

ratio about 18%. Given the magnitude of the estimated elasticities the
deadweight loss estimate might seem small. However, when the fact that
nonparticipants in the absence of taxation will generally remain

nonparticipants

when taxes are levied and remain at the sane utility level is taken into account,

the finding is reasonable. The deadweight loss ratio would more than double,

56

i.e., exceed 40%, for labor force

participants. Hausrnan (1981b) considers a 10%

tax cut and estimates that wives labor

tax

supply would increase by 4.1%. For a 30%

cut he estimates the increase in labor

supply to be 9.4%. Deadweight loss is

decreased significantly. Hausruans results demonstrate an important influence of
taxes on wives labor force behavior together with a substantial economic cost of
the current tax system.

Feenberg-Rosen (1983) simulate the effects of numerous proposed changes in

the tax law on wives labor force behavior. We

consider two cases: a tax credit

of 10% on the first $10,000 of earnings and taxation of wives as single

individuals. For the tax credit case they find only a very small effect on hours

of work. The impact of the lower marginal tax rate on some individual is just
about cancelled by the income effect it has on other workers. However, the
effect of the tax change on current

nonparticipants is not treated altogether

correctly. Income splitting leads to predicted increase in labor supply of about

5.5% for wives. Thus, the effect of lower marginal tax rates leads to increased
labor supply although some of the progressivity of the income tax is lost when it
is judged at the family level.
The results for wives demonstrate that income taxation has an important

effect on wives labor supply decisions. The economic cost of the tax system is
also substantial. Because of the joint treatment ol family income, wives
typically face substantial marginal tax rates on their earnings. No consensus

has bewen reached on the proper tax treatment of the fanily in the presence of

progressive taxation. Further econometric work will focus on more of a joint
decision framework for husband and wives, yet it is unlikely that the major
findings of an important effect of taxes will change drastically. Various tax

57

reform proposals such as tax credits reduce the effect of progressivity on wives.
However, important issues will remain unless a tax system rate with constant

marginal tax rates is adopted.

58

NOT
Hausman (1983) investigates this issue.

2 Hausman (1981) does account for zero hours considerations. Ham (1981)
considers constraints on further work at the given wage.
Moffitt and Nicholson (1982) consider this problem for a special sample
of individuals for which data are available.

Ashworth and Ulph (1981) estimate household models of labor supply. See
also Hausman and I?uud (1983).
This variation is calculated after the self—employed and farmers have
been eliminated from the sample.
6

We do not use the earlier result of Hall (1973) and Wales (1973) and
Brown—Levin—Ulph (1976) because of difficulties of interpretation and
econometric technique.

males.

Some models find a backward banding curve only for medium and high wage

8

Note that a distribution ordered by wages is probably better, since labor
supply choice enters the income measure.

loss.

Auerbach (this volume) contains a more detailed discussion of deadweight

10 These measures correspond to the area under the ccmpensated demand curve
which is determined by the substitution effect in the Slutsky equation. For
further discussion see Hausman (1981c) or Diewert (1982).
For a more formal treatment see Varian (1978) or Diewert (1982).

12 The alternative measure of the equivalent variatrion uses post-tax
utility U' as the basis for measuring welfare loss. For labor supply in the two

set—up the equivalent variation typically gives a higher measure of welfare
loss than does the compensating variation.
good

13

Here we follow Diamond and McFadden (1974) and use taxes raised at the
compensated point. Kay (1980) has recently argued in favor of using the
uncompensated point. As with C.V. and E.V. measures the problem is essentially
one of which is the better index number basis.

As a historical note it is interesting to point out that Harberger's
(1964) seminal calculation of the dead'eight loss from the income tax used an
income elasticity quite close to the estimate of Hausman (1981). However, he
took the uncompensated wage elasticity to be large and negative. Therefore, the
Slutsky equation ].ed to a near zero compensated wage elasticity so that
Harberger's estimate of the deadweight loss was very small. On the contrary,
Hausman (1981) finds the uncompensated wage elasticity to be near zero.

59
Of course problems still exist due to the necessity f interpersonal
comparisons, c.f. Atkinson—Stiglitz (1976) and Stiglits (1952). The optimal
income tax literature begins with Mirrlees (1971). For surveys of the literature
see Mirrlees (1932) and Atkinson—Stiglitz (1980).

16 The child care credit reduces the tax rate but its effect on the
participation decision is decreased because of fixed costs. Also note that
beginning in 1983 the apprpriate marginal tax rate will decrease because of a
credit included in the 1981 tax reform legislation.

17 Given these facts it is a surprising that labor economists who work on
female labor supply have largely ignored taxes. The recent book edited by Smith
(1980) has only one mention of taxes in all of the papers. This omission is even
more surprising in light of the substantial estimated labor supply elasticities.
18 The large negative elasticity estimates are incompatible with economic
theory because they imply a downward sloping compensated labor supply curve.
19 These estimates take into account the labor supply response of husbands
and their change in net, after tax, income.

60

5.

High Income Groups

Considerable

interest has arisen over potentially large work disincentive

effects on two economic groups:

very low income and very high income groups.

Both groups face high marginal tax rates on earned income; usually the marginal

rate is .5 or higher. Our knowledge of the effect of the high marginal tax rates
on low income groups has been increased considerably by government—conruce
cross section data sets and most importantly by the four negative income tax

experiments. The results of these NIT experiments will be considered in the next

section. Yet very little reform of the tax system and its treatment of low
income individuals has been accomplished. On the other hand, our knowledge of
the effect of high marginal tax rates on high income groups has advanced little
in the past decade.1

Yet significant changes in the tax systems as they affect

earned income for high income groups has taken place. The United States lowered
the maximum marginal tax rate on earned income from .7 to .5 in 1969, and the
Thatcher government in England has also significantly reduced the highest

marginal rates in 1979. Furthermore, earnings at which the maximum tax level is
reached have increased dramatically in the U.S. under the tax reform legislation

of 1981. In 1983 the 50% rate will be reached at $109,000 on a joint return; in
1984 the maximum rate will be reached at $162,000. 'The change in rates from

Table 2.2 is remarkable. While high income
about

groups certainly complain loudly

taxes, none of the surveys which we will sumnarize have found a significant

disincentive effect of the high tax rates. Thus we might conclude that a
convincing

efficiency argument does not exist for lowering the marginal rates of

high income groups, but vertical equity considerations have probably been
foremost in legislators' deliberations.2

Almost all of our empirical Imowledge of the effect of taxation on the labor

61

supply of high income groups arises from interview surveys. An important sample
selection problem exists which has remained almost unnoticed, Holland (1976).
Since we would expect on average high income groups work more, those individuals
who are led to work less by the disincentive effect of the tax system are less

likely to be surveyed. Thus, a sample selection bias exists for the finding of a
small disincentive effect. And a small disincentive effect has been the
overwhelming finding of the interview surveys. Yet the empirical, results have

been so striking, that is probably safe to conclude that the sample bias is not

giving a spurious result. For instance, it does not appear that within the
surveys that the highest income groups are affected to a lesser extent than lower

income groups. Thus, the primary finding of the survey literature is that while
a disincentive does exist, its likely magnitude is not especially large.

The classic study in disincentive effects on high income groups is Break's
(1957) survey of lawyers and accountants in Great Britain. Break conducted 306
interviews on a group of individuals both familiar with and having the ability to
react to the disincentive effect of the high marginal tax rates which existed in

Great Britain at that time. Break found that the majority of the respondents
were not significantly affected by the tax system on their work effort. Of the
49% who reported an effect, only 18% cited disincentive effects while 31% &ited

an incentive effect from the tax system. Thus, the overall incore effect
dominated the substitution effect for these individuals.3 Using a much more
stringent criterion where the interpretation of the sample responses was

clearest, Break concluded that 14% of the sample were significantly affected by

taxation. The tax incentive effect still predominated with 8% of the original
sample working harder because of the tax effect. Still, Break concluded that a

62
a small net disincentive effect might exist because the 6% who reported a

significant disincentive effect had higher earnings than the s% who reported an
incentive effect.
Break's original study has been repeated by Fields and Stanbury (1970,1971).
Fields and Stanbury find a significantly higher percentage of respondents report

a disincentive effect than did Break. They concluded that the disincentive
effects had become more important over time as individuals had adjusted their

labor supply slowly to the continued high marginal tax rates. But, on the other
hand, the 6% who showed significant disincentive effects in Break's survey had
fallen to only 2% which those individuals with significant incentive effects had

also declined markedly. Both studies do find that disinbentive effects increase
with income yet we might well conclude that this finding primarily arises from

an income effect, not a substitution effect. The tingle important quantitiative
finding in the Fields and Stanbury survey is that no significant difference
exists between average number of hours worked among groups of individuals who
reported disincentive effects, incentive effects, or no significant tax effects.
Thus, whatever net effect may exist its likely empirical magnitude is small.
Similar interview survey of American business executives have been conducted

by Sanders (1951) and by Holland (1969). From his interviews of 135 business
executives and 25 professional men, Sanders found the effects of taxation to be

quite small. Sanders concluded that important non-financial incentives more than
outweigh the change in financial incentives that taxation creates. Probably the
most

in

important effect of' taxation that Sanders found was the amount of time used

creating responses to taxation through investment and tax avoidance programs.

The economic cost of this type of response is probably substantial and has

63
undoubtedly increased in magnitude since Sanders' survey.4
Holland (1969) conducted interviews of 125 business executives in which he

attempted to isolate the substitution effect by considering a hypothetical tax on

potential income. The amount of the tax would be about the same as the tax paid
currently. However, it appears to me that the effort is not totally successful
because of the nonlinearity of the budget set discussed in Section 1. There we
pointed out that the Slutsky equation does not adequately describe the tax
response because of the presence of virtual incomes different from nonlabor

income. Thus, Holland's technique would seem to be exactly correctonly in the
case of a proportional tax system.5 Bollandts findings are much in line with
previous results. The hypothetidal change in the tax system would have no effect
on 80% of the sample. Fifteen percent of the sample indicated they would work
harder while one individual claimed he would work less hard. Holland seems to
conclude that on average a tax incentive effect exists, at least in the

substitution effect. But he concludes also that the magnitude is likely to be
small. Thus, his results accord well with the Break results and Sanders results.
The last sample interview we consider is Barlow, Brazer, and Morgan (1966).
They conducted 957 interviews with individuals who had income exceeding $10,000

in 1961. They also attempted to include a disproportionately large number of
very high income people in the sample. Their results are again very similar to
previous findings. Approximately 88% of the sample individuals responded that
the income tax did not effect their work effort. Among the 1/8 of the sample

which reported disincentive effects. Barlow, et al. concluded that the actual
magnitude of the disincentive isd likely to be very small. In fact, they
estimated the total effect on the economy to be of the order of .3% in 1963.

64

Given the rather different sample coverage the Barlow results seem quite similar
to the results found in the other studies.

From these results we should not reach the too sanguine conclusion that high

marginal tax rates may not have a significant economic cost. We have

already

mentioned the large amount of effort that goes into shifting ordinary income into

capital gains which are taxed at a much lower rate. Evidence of considerable
economic waste appears periodically from these schemes.

But, the important point

to note here is that these machinations seem to have very little effect on work

effort. Presumably, for most people it is very difficult if not impossible to
shift compensation from working directly into capital gains.

Furthermore, the

sensitivity of their work response is low to a given marginal tax rate.

Perhaps

these results are not too surprising. For non—high income individuals, the
(uncompensated) work disincentive effects is found to be small in econometric

studies. Previous findings that, if anything, the income effect predominates is
in accordance with Break's findings. Recent econometric studies have found the
income effect to be the most important determinant in behavior toward taxation.
Thus, in terms of work response it does not appear that the rich are different

thai the rest of us. But, they do have more money.

65
NOTES

1

The last significant survey is Holland (1969). Also, the most recent
extensive survey of the literature is Holland (1976).

2 Certainly large amounts of economic resources are used to lessen the
burden of taxation by using the capital gains provisions and other tax preference
provisions of the tax laws. But this observation has little bearing on the work
effort of the high income groups themselves.
From a social welfare analysis point of view, little comfort arises from
these findings. It is important to remember that only the substitution effect
creates deadireight loss. Thus, even if the income effect is large enough to
outweigh the substitution effect, considerable deadweight loss may still exist.
1

Executive compensation through stock options and other non—wage

compensation become an effective and important method to partly avoiding the high
marginal rates. But the combined effect of the .5 tax limit on earned income in
the 1969 Tax Reform Act and the 1976 Tax Reform Act provision for stock option
plans decrease the importance of non—wage compensation. The ta-x legislation of

1951 increased the attractiveness of stock options to their pre-1976 status.

It

is the case that Holland will find the sign of the substitution
effect. However, his work cannot be used to estimate empirical magnitudes.

66

6.

Evidence from NIT's and Social Security Effects

Four negative income tax (NIT) experiments have been conducted by the
government to produce information about the likely effects on labor supply of

the current welfare system by an NIT. Three urban experiments took
place in New Jersey, Gary, Indiana, and Seattle—Denver. A rural experiment also
replacing

took

place in Iowa and North Carolina. We review only the urban experiments

since we have excluded farmers from our previous analysis.1

In principle, the

NIT experiments might seem to be an ideal laboratory in which to determine the

effect of taxes on the labor supply response of low inceme workers.2
Observations were recorded on individuals before the

experiment began, and during

the three year period of the experiments two groups were observed. The
experimental group was subject to an NIT plan while a control group received

nominal payments to participate in the experiments. Yet the initial results were

not clear cut. Analysts found the results disappointing. A. Rees, in his
summary of the New Jersey results, concluded that 'the differences in work

behavior between experimentals and controls for male heads

ere, as we

expected, very small. Contrary to our expectations, all do not show a clear and
significant pattern; indeed they show a discernable pattern only after a great

deal of refined analysis."3 Unforeseen problems did arise which, in retrospect,
is not surprising since the New Jersey NIT experiment was the first social

experiment ever conducted. Statistical problems which arise in conducting
experiments with human subjects over time had not been accounted for.1' For
instance, the attrition problem in the New Jersey experiment almost certainly
accounts

for the anomalous results found for black and hispanic males.

67

Subsequent analysis of the New
Jersey and other two urban NIT experiments has led to more definite conclusions

about the labor supply response. We will give a brief review of the evidence.

We first consider the evidence for male heads of households. Two important
differences from the non—NIT framework arise for the analysis. Contrary to the
usual case of analyzing the effect of taxes on labor supply where the
substitution effect is considered to be much more important than the income

effect, both the income and substitution effect are important for an NIT. The
expected additional cost of an NIT program over the existing welfare program is a

crucial consideration. Thus, we are very interested in the overall labor supply
response rather than just the diâtortion created by taxation. The second
difference is that for males both the income and substitution effect work to
reduce labor supply.

In Figure 6.1 we show how the NIT alters the budget set.

U3

1
Cr

—14

g

Figure 6.1

b

68

Non—labor income y is replaced by the NIT guarantee G which will havew the effect
of reducing labor supply for an individual who was initially on the first budget

segment so long as leisure is a normal good. At the sane time the net wage
which was subject only to PICA contributions now is lowered to '

which is subject

to approximately a .5 tax rate. Thus, labor supply will be reduced since the NIT
budget segment lies uniformly above the first non—NIT budget segment.5 For
individuals initially on the second segment but below breakeven ii the same

reasoning holds. Non—labor income has risen from y2 to 0 and R

is

less than

w2.

Lastly, many individuals above breakeven hours 11 will not change their labor

supply at all, but others will shift down below H because of the income effeot of
the guarantee.

In fact, the findings agree with this economic theory. The labor supply

reduction in hours worked for

white

males in New Jersey was about 4 uncorrected

for attrition. In Gary for black males it was about 6% uncorrected for attrition
and 10% when corrected for attrition, and in Seattle-Denver
the response was 5%

uncorrected

for attrition. While these overall results are of interest, they are

not sufficient for policy

purposes. They are an average response over the many

NIP plans used in each experiment.6

To obtain reliable cost estimates, it

is

necessary to construct a model which permits determination of income and

substitution effects. Then the cost of different plans can be forecast from the
estimated parameters.7

Hausman—Wise (1976) was the first paper which took explicit account of the
form of the NIT budget set in constructing an empirical model. They used an
instrumental variable procedure to predict the net wage and virtual income along

69

with

a budget segment and

estimated

a log linear labor supply specification for

white males in the New Jersey experiment.

They found an uncoctpensated wage

elasticity of .14 and an income elasticity of — .023.
Figure

for a
the

Thus both effects in

6.1 have significant effects in reducing labor supply. The poverty level
four person in New Jersey was

$3,300. Thus for an individual who received

poverty limit as the guarantee and faced a 5 marginal

uncompensated

tax rate the

wage effect would lead to an expected labor supply reduction of

about 8% while the income response would lead to

an expected reduction of between

10—16% if the person had initially been on the first budget segment. Taking

midpoints we would have an overall expected response of 21% in labcr supply. For
an individual initially on the second segment he might have no response to an NIT

at all. For those initially below breakeven hours 1 on the second segment the
wage effect is 6% with the income effect leads to a reduction of 1% so that the

overall response is about 7%. Taking weighted averages of the two responses
leads to an expected labor supply reduction for those individuals below breakeven

hours of 16.5%. It is very important to note that the model predicts only 17.6%
of the population will fall below breakeven so that the overall population

response is about 4%.8 Some confusion has arisen over the response condItioned
on being below breakeven hours and the overall population response. The latter
response is appropriate for cost estimates of an NIT.
Burtless—}jausman (1978) analyze the labor supply response among black males

in the Gary NIT experiment. They use a procedure to treat taxes very similar to
the technique used in Section 4 except for the choice of a log linear labor

supply surve. In particular,

using an ad hoc

they treat the budget set as exogenous rather than

instrumental variable procedure and they also allow for a

70

distribution of tastes in the population. Here in Table 6.1 we present their
results for both control individual3 and for

experimental individuals on a weekly

basis for the mean individual in the sample. We first note that breakeven hours
are quite high for some of the plans so that the individual will almost certainly

be below breakeven. Also note that a significant dispersion exists in the
expected response —

it

is about 13% for low wage groups. Perhaps even more

importantly the distribution of tastes parameter indicated that most of the
response takes place via the income effect for a small number of individuals.
The great majority of individuals do not significantly alter their work response

so that the effect of the NIT leads to a very skewed response in the population.
On the other hand, the uncompensated wage change has very little effect. We can
see the income and substitution effect by comparing the rows which correspond to
a $2.25 wage since the individuals will always be on the first budget. No
difference in responsde at all is found for the .4 or .6 tax rate while the high

guarantee leads to a 9% greater response than does the low guarantee. At higher
wage rates the amount of the tax does play a role, but only because it changes

the amount of breakeven hours and thus the probability of being above breakeven.
The find that the income effect is the major determinant of labor supply
reduction among males was also found by Moffitt (1978) who used a quite different

different probit type of model. The results differ markedly from the HausmanWise findings for New jersey where the income effect explained about 68% of the

change in hours. It would be interesting to determine if this result occurs
because of different model specification or because of a fundamentally different
response pattern aoong the two populations.9

The final labor supply results for males that we review are the findings of

1.70
2.50

.90

-3.75

6.25

60% tax/high
guarantee
2.25
4.25
6.25

1.35
2.53

0.90
1.70
2.50

4.25

2.25

40% high/tax
guarantee:

tax/low
guarantee:
2.25
4.25
6.25

60

1.35
2.53
3.75

40% tax/low
guarantee:
2.25
4.25
6.25

(5)

w1

2.07
3.92
5.76

Cs)

Control:
2.25
4.25
6.25

Gross Wage/Hr

Financial Plan and

78.09
78.09
78.09

78.63
78.63
78.63

2.72
2.72
2.72

Cs)

y1

1.67 101.09
7.15 102.09
4.63 102.09

1.67 102.63
3.15 102.63
4.63 102.63

1.67
3.15
4.63

1.67
3.15
4.63

1.67
3.15
4.63

(s)

w2

TABLE
6.1

27.82
27.82
27.82

27.82
27.82
27.82

27.82
27.82
27.82

27.82
27.82
27.82

27.82
27.82
27.82

(5)

y2

96.66
51.17
34.86

234.97
120.39
84.59

65.42
34.63
23.55

159.59
81.77
57.45

43.16
22.85
27.82

Kink Point

Hours at

38.29
38.29
39.38

38.27
38.27
38.27

38.69
39.62
40.23

38.68
38.68
38.68

43.55
40.37
40.34

Expected
Hours

-

Location of 15 Budget Lines In Gary

•

—12.9
—5.3
—2.4

—12.9
—5.3
—5.3

—11.8
—1.9
—.3

—11.8
—4.3
4.2

(%)

•

Change
from Control

Experiment

45.38

45.38
45.38

33.50, 44.84
33.50, 44.84
33.50, 45.38

33.50, 44.85
33.50, 44.85
33.50, 44.85

34.17, 44.96
34.16, 43.48
34.16, 45.38

34.15, 44.95
34.15. 44.95
34.15, 44.95

36.8,
36.8,

36.8,

Expected Hours

95% Confidence
Range of

1.0
.23

1.0

1.0

1.0
1.0

.02

1.0
.21

1.0

1.0
1.0

Point

Probability
of Below
Break-even

72
Keeley, et al. (1978) for the Seattle-Denver experiment. While the SeattleDenver experiment is superior in certain respects from the other urban
experiments, the ad hoc method used by the authors to treat the budget set is not

entirely satisfactory. They use a first difference specification where the
change in income is done at pre—experimental hours of work for the individual as

is the change in the net wage rate. Since pre-exterimental hours are an
endogenous variable, an important simultaneous equation bias may be introducedj°

However, the magnitude of the bias is difficult to estimate. At the mean of the
sample Keeley et al. found the income effect to explain 46% of the reduction in

hours while the change in the wage explained the other 54%. These results differ
maikedly from the results in the New Jersey and Gary sample where the change in
non—labor income is the more determinant of the reduction In labor supply.
Again, it would be interesting to ascertain whether the different results arise
because of the model used.
The other group whose labor supply might be markedly affected by

introduction of a NIT is working wives. Neither the New Jersey nor the Gary
experiments had sufficient number of working wives to allow model estimation.
Keeley, et al. find an average response elasticity about four times as large for

wives as for husbands. The mean labor force reduction is 22%. Mere the change
in income accounted for 75% of the total effect. Since most of these women
presumably had working husbands, such a large scale withdrawal from the labor
force could be an important effect of an NIT.

The last group to be considered is female headed households. Most of the
affected population qualifies for AFDC so that introduction of an NIT leads to a
substantially higher guarantee and somewhat lower tax rate under most NIT plans.

73

Keeley, et al. found the female heads response to be about twice

as large as the

male response. The mean labor force reduction is 11%. Here they found the
income effect to explain about 66% of the total response. Hausan (1980) in a
study of labor force participation among black females who headed households in
Gary again found the level of the guarantee to be much more important than the

NIT tar rate. For instance he finds that the change from a .4 to .6 NIT tat rate
reduces the probability of participation by about 2.5% while a change in the NIT
guarantee from .75 of the poverty limit to the poverty limit reduces the
probability of participation 6.5%.

In terms of comparing the expected effort to

that of AFDC it seems likely that a reduction in labor.supply would result. Even

if the marginal tar rate fell from the AFDC level of .67to an NIT level of .4
the accompanying higher benefits would create a net disincentive effect. The net
result would be a significant increase in the cost of family support for female

headed households. At the same time the extra income which would go to the
lowest income group in the economy might well lead to a net gain in social
welfare.
-

The other literature which we review is the effect of the social
security
earnings test on retirement behavior and labor supply. We discussed the social
security beneficiary budget set in Section 3 where we emphasized the

intertemporal aspects of the model. An important empirical fact does appear with
respect to social security. Labor force participation has decreased among the

elderly over the postwar period in the United States. From

74

1960 to 1975 labor force participation for males. over 65 fell from 33% to 22%.
Over the same period for men aged 62—64 it fell from 81% to 60%. 1961 is the
year in which Social Security eligibility for men 62—64 was introduced. An
important policy question is whether the decline in male labor force
participation is almost wholly a result of the early retirement provision of

Social Security and the rising real benefit level. Rising real income for
potential retirees during the period offers an alternative explanation for part

the observed behavior. Given recent policy proposals to extend the age of
early retirement from 62 to 65 years of age, the causes of early retirement
of

assume an important role in financial projections for the Social Security system.
Three recent papers consider the causes of retirement over the 1965—1975 period.
Baskin—Hurd (1982) ascribe almost all the decrease in labor force participation

to Social Security. Diamond—Hausman (l982a,1982h) find that Social Security is
the most important factor, yet if early retirement between ages 62—65 were
stopped, the retirement probability would decrease by about 1/2 so that a
significant number of men would still retire during that age period.11 Further
research is required here because of the complex interaction of non—retirement

labor supply and its effect on future social security benefits, c.f. Blinder et
al. (1980).

The other dimension of the effect of Social Security is the earnings test

for Social Security recipients. In 1982 earnings beyond $6,000 are subject to a
50% tax rate until all Social Security benefits are recovered, i.e., the

breakeven point H is reached in Figure 6.2. Burtless and Moffitt (1982) in a
recent study find that the earnings test has a major effect on retired males

labor supply decisions.12 Among retired men who are working the frequency

75

distribution of hours worked has a pronounced spike at the kink point H1 in
Figure 6.2 which provides strong evidence of the incentive effect of the earnings

test. This effect is to be expected given the pronounced kink at H1 hours where
the net wage is reduced for w to .5w. About 50% of working males were located at
the kink point and 90% worked hours either at or below the kink point
H1.

However, to analyze the overall effect of the earnings test non—participation

'V

-Il

H1

Figure 6.2

must be accounted for since upwards of 80% of the men in the Burtless—Moffitt

sample worked zero hours. Thus, overall the earnings test leads to a reduction
in expected hours of about 50 hours per year. However, for those men who are

76
working the removal of the earnings test would increase expected labor supply by

about 400 hours per year. Thus, the situation is very similar to the case of
wives discussed in Section 4 where tax changes have only a small expected effect

on non labor force participants. But considering the problem in this context,
Burtless—Moffitt may

have

overestimated the wage elasticity by their neglect of

fixed costs to working)-3 Still, they have provided strong evidence of the
effect of the earnings test on the labor supply behavior of Social Security
recipients.

In

-

this section we have considered the empirical evidence from the NIT

experiments. Although numerous statistical and econometric problems arise, I
feel we have learned much about labor supply behavior of low incoce workers. We
now return to our question of the last section. There, we decided that labor
supply behavior of high income persons was not too different than middle income

individuals. What about low income people? From the experimental results, I
-conclude that the income effect is probably larger than we previously had
thought.

NIT

Especially for male heads of households I feel that introduction of an

would have a significant impact on labor force supply reduction by a small

proportion

of

the population. I doubt that the NIT tax rate is nearly as

important as the level of the NIT guarantee. Thus, low income males do have low
wage elasticities as does the rest of the population; but their income
elasticities may have an important effect on labor supply behavior given the size

of the NIT guarantee. Similar results were found for female headed households
although they presently have AFDC so that the change might not be as large.
Lastly, the NIT results for wives seem quite different than the usual -results.

Their wages elasticities are much lower and income elasticities are much higher

77

than had been found for middle income wives. But, the evidence on wives is based
on only one sample and one estimation technique. More research needs to be done
on wives behavior under an NIT before we can be confident about the results.

Research of the effects of Social Security is still in an early stage of

development. Little doubt would seem to exist that Social Security benefits are

an important determinant of retirement decisions. Furthermore, the earnings test
does have an important effect on labor supply behavior of retirees. Further
research that accounts for the intertemporal aspects of the problem and the form
of the lifetime budget set is still needed.

78

NOTES

A further problem exists since the results from the rural experiment seem
extremely difficult to interpret.
2

All the experiments were designed basically to measure labor supply
elasticities. However, other interesting areas of research such as family
consumption patterns and family stability have been studied.
For a series of papers on the New Jersey experiment see the Spring 1974
volume of The Journal of Human Resources.

These problems are discussed in Rausman (1982b).
So long as the NIT segment lies uniformly above the previous budget
segment the net change in income must be positive. Thus, the income effect will
reinforce the substitution effect and cause a reduction in labor supply. Thus,
the level of the guarantee removes the usual interdeterminancy of the effect of a
change in the net wage.

6 Unfortunately, insufficient subjects were included in each cell of the
experiment ot use classical ANOVA techniques to compute an accurate estimate of
the response to each NIT plan. Statistical problems which arose during the
design and duration of the experiment may preclude use of these techniques
anyway. See Hausman—Wise (1977,l979a,l979b).
Two potential problems arise in using the experimental results to produce
cost estimates. First, the demand side of the market could change significantly
for a nationwide NIT. In particular, individuals could choose work patterns to
convexify their budget sets by working and not working in alternative accounting
periods.
Also, the limited duration of the experiment may miss important long
range effects on both the supply and demand sides of the labor market.

8 The low proportion below breakeven is due to the study of white males who
were relatively well off in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The finding that it is the income effect which creates almost the entire
labor supply response is corroborated further by the tesults of Hausman—Wise
(1979a) who consider a model which corrects for attrition.
A further problem exists since people initially above breakeven hours
will not have their net wage or income affected by the experiment. The authors
attempt to treat this problem by including a dummy variable which again would
create simultaneous equation bias.

These studies are
their study of retirement
irrelevant to retirement
of my knowledge, has come

in stark contrast to Gordon and Blinder (1980) who in
descisions" assume(s) that social security is
decisions." (p.279). No empirical study, to the best
close to verifying this assumption.

79

12 Burtless and ?loffitt go along way towards a complete model of the
lifetime budget set. However, Since their model is basically cross sectional,
they do not account for increases in future social security benefits
from extra
years of work in an entirely satisfactory manner.
13 Rausnian

(198la) found a lower wage elasticity for wivas when fixed costs
to working here accounted for. Cogan (1981) made a similar finding in a model
without taxes.

80
REFERENCES

1.

Ashenfelter, 0. and J. Heckman (1974), "The Estimation of Income and
Substitution Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply", Econometrics,
42..

2.

Ashworth, J.A. and D.T. Ulph (1981), "Estimating Labour Supply with
Piecewise Linear Budget Constraints", in C Brown (ed.), Taxation and
Labor Supply, (London, 1981).

3.

_____________, (1981), "Household Nodels", in C' Brown (ed.), Taxation and
Labour Supply, (London, igai).

4.

Atkinson, A. and J. Stiglitz (1976), "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct
Versus Indirect Taxation', Journal of Public Economics, 6.

5.

____________

6.

Atkinson, A. and N. Stern (1980), "On Labour Supply and Commodity Demand",
Journal of Public Economics, 14.

7.

Atkinson, A. et. al. (1980), "On the Switch from Direct to Indirect
Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, 14.

8.

Auerbach, A. (1982), "Measurement of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation",

, (iggo),

Lectures on Public Finance, (New York).

mimeo.
9.

Barlow, R., H. Brazer, and J. Morgan (1966), Economic Behavior of the
Affluent, (Washington).

10. Blinder, A. et. al. (1980), "Reéonsidering the Work Disincentive Effects of
Social Security", National Tax Journal, 33.
ii. Blomquist, S. (1982), "The Effect of Income Taxation on Male Labor Supply",
in Sweden, mimeo.
12. Blundell, R. and C. Walker (1982), "Modelling the Joint Determination of
Household Labor Supply and Commodity Demands", Economic Journal, 92.
13. Borjas, G. and J. Hecknan (1978), "Labor Supply Estimates for Public Policy
Evaluation", Proceedings of the IRRA.
14. Boskin, N. and 11. Hurd (1982), "The Effect of Social Security on Retirement
in the Early 1970's, rnimeo.

15. Break, G. (1957), "Taxes and Incentives to Work: An pirical Study",
American Economic Review, 48.
16. Brown, C. et. al. (1976), "Estimate of Laour Hours Supplied by Married Male
Workers in Great Britain", Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 23.

81

17.

(1982), "Preliminary Family Labour Supply Estimates", mimeo.

18. Burtless, C. and 3. Hausman (1978), "The Effect of Taxes on Labor Supply:
Evaluating the Gary NIT Experiment", J3urnal of Political Economy, 86.
19. Burtless, C. and R. Moffit-t (1982), "The Effect of Social Security on Labor
Supply of the Aged", mimeo.

20. Cain, C. and H. Watts (1973), Income Maintenance and Labor Supply,
(Chicago).

21. Cogan, J. (igeo), "Married Womens Labour Supply", in 3. Smith (ed.), Female
Labor Supply, (Princeton, 1980).
(1981), "Fixed Costs and Labor Supply", Econometrics, 49.

22. Deaton, A. (1981), "Theoretical and Empirical Approaches to Consumer Demand
Under Rationing", in A. Deaton (ed.), Essays in the Theory and
Measurement of Consumer Behavior, (Cambridge).
23. Deaton, A. and 3. Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior,
(Cambridge),
24.

(1981), "Functional Forms for Labor Supply and Commodity
Demand with and Without Quantity Rationing", Econornetrica, 49.

25. Diamond, P. and D. McFadden (1974), "Some Uses of the Expenditure Function
in Public Finance", Journal of Public Economics, 3.
26. Diamond, P. and 3. Hausman (1982a), "Individual Retirement and Savings
Behavior", mimeo.
27.

(1982b), "Retirement and Unemployment Behavjor of Older Men",
mimeo.

28. Diewert, B. (1971), "Choice on Labor Markets and the Theory of the
Allocation of Time", mimeo.
29.
14.

(1982), "Duality Approaches to Consumer Theory", in K. Arrow and
Intriligator, (eds.), Handbook of Nathematical Economics (Amsterdam,

1982).

30. Feenberg, D. and H. Rosen

(1983), "Alternative Tax Treatment of the Family:
I4ethodology and Results, in M. Feldstein (ed.), Tax Simulation
Models, (Chicago, 1983).

Simulation

31. Fields, D. and W. Stanbury (1970) "Disincentives and the Income Tax:
Further Empirical Evidence", Public Finance, 25.

82

32. Fields, D. and W. Stanbury (1971) "Income Taxes and Incentives to Work:
Some Additional Fnpirical Evidence", American Econoaic Review, 60.

33. Gordon, H. and Blinder, A. (1980), "Market Wages, Rearvatjon Wages, and
Retirement Decisions', Journal of Public Economics, 14.
34. Greenburg, D. and N. Kosters (1973), "Income Guarantees and the Working
Poor", in tam and Watts.
35. Hall, H. (1973), "Wages, Income and Hours of Work in the U.S. Labor Force",
in Cain and Watts.
36.

(1982), "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs
Economic_Review, 72.

American

in the U.S. Economy",

37. Ham, 3. (1982), "Estimation of a Labour Supply Model with Censoring due to
Unemployment and Underemployment", Review of Economic Studies, 49.
38. Hanoch, G. (1980), "A Multivariate Model of Labor Supply", in 3. Smith (ed.)
Female Labor Supply (Princeton),
39.

Harberger, A. (1964), "Taxation, Resource Allocation and ¶elfare, in The
Role of Direct and Indirect TAxes i.n the Federal Eevenuc- System", T1TEER,
1964).

40. Hanoch, G. and M. Hong (1978), "The labor Supply Curve under Income
Maintenance Programs", Journal cf Public Economics, 9.
41.

Hausman, 3. (1979), "The Econometrics of Labor Supply on Convex Budget

Sets", Economic Letters, 3.

42.
43.

(1980), "The Effect of Wages, Taxes, and Fixed Costs on Womens

labor Force Participation", Journal of Public Ecoctics, 14.

(1981a), "Labor Supply" in H. Aaron and 3. Pechrnan (eds,), How
Taxes Effect Economic Activity (Brookings, 1981).

44

(198th), "Exact Consumers' Surplus and Deadweight Loss", American

Economic Review, 71.
45.

(1981c), "Income and Payroll Tax Policy and Labor Supply, in L.H.
Meyer (ed.), The Supply—Side Effects of Economics Policy, (st. Louis,
1981).

46.

(1982), "The Econometrics of Non—Linear Budget Sets", mimeo.

47.

(1982b), "The Effect of Time in Economic Experiments", in W.
Hildebrand (ed.), Advances in Econometrics, (Cambridge).

48.

(1983), "Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply"
in M. Feldstein (ed,), Tax Simulation Models, (Chicago, 1933).

83
49'

Hausman, J. and D. Wise (1976), "The Evaluation of Results from Truncated
Samples", Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5.

50.

(1977), "Social Experimentation, Truncated
Distributions, and Efficient Estimation", Econometrica, 45.

51.

(1978), "A Conditional Probit Model for Qualitative Choice",
Econometrica, 46.

52.

(1979), "Attrition Bias in Experimental and Panel
Data", Econometrica, 47.

53.

(1981), "Stratification on Endogenous Variables and Estimation",
in C. Manski and D. McFadden, The Econometrics of Discrete Data (MIT
Press).

54. Hausman, J. and P. Ruud (1933), "Family Labor Supply with Taxes", mimec.

55. Holland, D. (1969), "The Effect of Taxation on Effort: The Results for
Business Executives", in S. J. Bowers, Proceedings of Ilational Tax
Association.
-

56.

Holland, D. (1976), "The Effect of Taxation on Incentives of Higher Income
Groups", in IFS, Fiscal Policy and Labour Supnly, No. 4.

57. Kay, .1. (1980), "The Deadweight Loss from Tax System", Journal of Public
Economics, 10.

58. Keeley, M. et. al. (1978), "The Estimation of Labor Supply Models Using
Experimental Data", American Economic Review, 68.

59. Killingsworth, M. (1982), Labor Supply, forthcoming.

60. Kosters, N. (1969), "Effects of an Income Tax on Labor Supply", in A.
Harberger and N. Bailey, eds., The Taxation of Income Capital
(Washington).
61. Lewis, G. (1956), "Hours of Work and Hours of Leisure", IRRA Proceedings, 9.
62.

63.

Nirrlees,

J. (1971), "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income
Taration", Review of Economic Studies, 38.
(1982), "The Theory of Optimal Taxation", in K. Arrow and N.
Intriligator (eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Economics (Amsterdam,
1982).

64. Moffitt, R. (1979), "A Note on the Effect of Taxes and Transfers on Labor
Supply", Southern Economic Journal.

84

65. Moufitt, R. and W. Nicholson (1982), "The effect of Unemployment Insurance
on Unemployment', Review of Economics and Statistics, 64.
66. Nakamura, A. and M. Nakamura (1981), "A Comparison of the Labor Force
Behavior of Married Women in the U.S. and Canada, with Special Attention
to the Impact of Income Taxes", Econometrica, 49.
67. Neary, J. and K. Roberts (1980), "The Theory of Household Behavior Under
Rationing", European Economic Review, 13.
68. Pechuan, J. (1976), Federal Tax Policy (3rd Ed.) (Washington).
69. Rosen, II. (1976), "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hours
Determination", Econometrica 44.
-

70.

Ruffell, R.J. (1981), "Direct Estimation of Labor Supply Functions with
Piecewise Linear Budget Constraints", in C. Brown (ad.) Taxation and
Labor Supply (London, 1981).

71. Sanders, T. (1951), Effects of Taxation on Executives (Boston).
72. Seater, J. (1982), "Marginal Federal Personal and Corporate Income Tax Rates
in the U.S. 1909l975', Journal of Monetary Economics, 10.
73. Smith, J. (ed.), (1980), Female Labor Supply, (Princeton).
74. Stiglitz, J. (1982), "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity", Journal of
Public Economics, 18.
75. Steverle, B. and H. Harbzmark (1981), "Individual Jacome Taxation, 1947—79',
National Tax Journal, 34,
76. Tax Foundation (1981), Facts and Figures on Government Finance, (Washington,
1981).

77. Varian, H. (1978), Microeconomic Theory, (New York, 1978).
78. Wales, T. (1973), "Estimation of a Labor Supply Curve for Self—Employed
Business Proprietors", International Economic Review, 14.
79. Wales, T. and A. Woodland (1979), "Labor Supply and Progressive Taxes",
Review of Economic Studies, 46.

80. Zabaiza, A. et. al. (1980), 'Social Security and the Choice between Full—
Time Work, Part—Time Work and Retirement, Journal of Public Economics,
14.

