                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INTERNATIONALIZATION AND THE EVOLUTION
                              OF CORPORATE VALUATION

                                                Ross Levine
                                            Sergio L. Schmukler

                                           Working Paper 11023
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w11023


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2005




Levine: University of Minnesota and the NBER (rlevine@csom.umn.edu). Schmukler: World Bank, visiting
the IMF Research Department during 2004-2005 (sschmukler@worldbank.org). We are indeed grateful to
Juan Carlos Gozzi Valdez for truly outstanding research assistance and for giving us very useful suggestions.
We are also grateful to Tatiana Didier, who also helped us at the initial stages of the paper. For helpful
comments, we thank seminar participants at the University of Minnesota, Paul Povel, Raj Singh, and David
Smith. We thank the World Bank Latin American Regional Studies Program and Research Support Budget
for ample financial support. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

 © 2005 by Ross Levine and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Internationalization and the Evolution of Corporate Valuation
Ross Levine and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 11023
January 2005
JEL No. G15, F36, F20

                                           ABSTRACT

By documenting the evolution of Tobin's “q” before, during, and after firms internationalize, this

paper provides evidence on the bonding, segmentation, and market timing theories of

internationalization. Using new data on 9,096 firms across 74 countries over the period 1989-2000,

we find that Tobin's “q” does not rise after internationalization, even relative to firms that do not

internationalize. Instead, “q” rises significantly one year before internationalization and during the

internationalization year. But, then “q” falls sharply in the year after internationalization,

relinquishing the increases of the previous two years. To account for these dynamics, we show that

market capitalization rises one year before internationalization and remains high, while corporate

assets increase during internationalization. The evidence supports models stressing that

internationalization facilitates corporate expansion, but challenges models stressing that

internationalization produces an enduring effect on “q” by bonding firms to a better corporate

governance system.

Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

Sergio L. Schmukler
Development Research Group
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
sschmukler@worldbank.org
I. Introduction

        A substantial literature examines the impact of international financial integration on

aggregate economic performance, such as economic growth, investment, the cost of capital, and

financial development (Bekaert and Harvey, 2000; Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad, 2001, 2004;

Chari and Henry, 2002, 2004; Henry, 2000a,b, 2003; and Levine and Zervos, 1998a,b).1

Research typically finds that integration has positive implications at the country level. To further

dissect the causes and consequences of international financial integration, an emerging body of

work exploits cross-firm variation in integration. In particular, researchers compare firms that

access international financial markets with firms from the same country that do not

internationalize (e.g., Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004 and Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002).2

        At the firm level, some researchers argue that corporations “internationalize” – by cross-

listing, issuing depositary receipts, or raising capital in major financial centers – in order to bond

themselves to a better corporate governance framework. Theories of the firm explain that

corporate insiders (managers and larger shareholders) may exploit their positions of control for

private gain, with adverse ramifications on the firm and small shareholders.3 The ability of small

shareholders to mitigate this agency problem depends on a multitude of factors, including the

laws and enforcement mechanisms governing minority shareholder rights. Consistent with this

prediction, La Porta et al. (2002) find that firms in countries with better investor protection laws

have higher Tobin’s q than comparable firms in countries with weaker governance systems. Put

succinctly, investors pay more for firms that face stronger investor protection laws. Extending



1
  Bekaert and Harvey (2003), Edison et al. (2002), and Karolyi and Stulz (2003) provide very helpful reviews of the
literature.
2
  Also see Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler (2003), Lang, Lins, and Miller (2003), Lang, Raedy, and Yetman
(2003), Levine and Schmukler (2003), Patro and Wald (2004), and Schmukler and Vesperoni (2003), among many
others.
3
  See, for instance, Coase (1937), Hart (1995), and Jensen and Meckling (1976).


                                                        1
this to internationalization, the bonding view argues that by listing in markets with stronger

investor protection mechanisms, firm insiders “bond” themselves to a better corporate

governance system with positive ramifications on q.4 Thus, the bonding – agency cost – view of

internationalization makes both a cross-section and a time-series prediction regarding corporate

valuation. By internationalizing in major financial centers with stronger investor protection

laws, (i) markets will value these firms more highly than purely domestic firms, and (ii) these

firms will experience an increase in q after internationalizing. Thus, a natural way to assess the

bonding view is to trace the time-series pattern of the Tobin’s q of firms that internationalize and

compare this to the pattern of qs of firms that do not internationalize.

        This paper documents the evolution of Tobin’s q and its components before, during, and

after firms internationalize and thereby provides evidence on the bonding view – as well as other

theories of internationalization that we describe below. We study the valuation of “international

firms” over time and compare it with that of “domestic firms” (firms that do not

internationalize). Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004) examine a cross-section of firms and find

that firms cross-listed in the U.S. have higher Tobin’s q than non-cross-listed firms. Since

theories of internationalization provide predictions about the time-series patterns of q and its

components, we trace the evolution of q, market capitalization, corporate assets, and debt during

the process of internationalization. Furthermore, endogeneity concerns are particularly acute

when examining q in a pure cross-section because highly valued firms may choose to

internationalize more frequently than low-valued ones. Adding the time-series dimension to

cross-firm comparisons of international integration provides valuable information on whether

and how internationalization influences q.


4
 See Benos and Weisbach (2004), Coffee (1999, 2002), and Stulz (1999). On disclosure standards, see Biddle and
Suadagaran (1992), Fuerst (1998), and Huddart, Hughes, and Brunnermeier (1999).


                                                      2
       To document the evolution of q – and its components – during the process of

internationalization, we construct a new database. The data cover up to 9,096 firms across 74

countries over the period 1989 to 2000.           The data include information on firms that

internationalize as well as a control group of firms that do not cross-list, issue depositary

receipts, nor raise capital abroad. Besides adding the time-series dimension, our sample is

broader than past work. Most papers focus only on the U.S. market, while we consider equity

capital raisings in all international markets. Although the focus is on q, we also examine the

evolution of each of the components of q to describe the internationalization process more fully.

       The major findings are as follows. First, on average, firms that internationalize at some

point in our sample have higher qs than firms that never internationalize, but this difference

exists years before firms actually access international equity markets. Second, when examining

firms before and after they internationalize, we find that (a) qs are not higher after

internationalization and (b) the q of firms that internationalize does not increase relative to that

of domestic firms after internationalization. Third, when tracing out the dynamics in more detail,

we find that q rises significantly one year before internationalization and then falls sharply in the

year after internationalization. Indeed, only one year after internationalization, the temporary

jump in q vanishes (at the five percent significance level). Fourth, in terms of the components of

q, market capitalization rises one year before internationalization and remains high thereafter,

while corporate assets increase during internationalization as corporations expand (consistent

with Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002). Thus, firms that internationalize grow relative to firms

that do not internationalize, but they do not enjoy higher q values after internationalization.

       These findings hold after controlling for several factors and after conducting an array of

sensitivity checks.   In evaluating corporate valuation, we control for firm-specific factors,




                                                  3
worldwide changes in industry-specific valuations, and national economic performance.

Specifically, we control for the sales growth of each firm, the average Tobin’s q (computed

globally) of each firm’s industry, and national economic growth in each country. Furthermore,

we use country and year dummy variables. We also sub-divide and confirm the analysis along a

number of dimensions. In particular, we consider separately (i) over-the-counter (OTC) and

private placements, (ii) exchange listings, (iii) internationalization that involves raising capital,

(iv) internationalization activity that does not involve raising capital, (v) private capital raisings,

(vi) public capital raisings, (vii) only U.S. listings, and (viii) Level III American Depositary

Receipts (ADRs) in the U.S. For each of these separate samples, we confirm the results. In

additional sensitivity analyses, we condition on an array of country specific information, such as

stock market liquidity, the legal protection of shareholder rights, international differences in

accounting standards, judicial efficiency, and legal heritage. We also assess the robustness by

controlling for price-earnings ratios, stock returns in the U.S., and equity returns in each firm’s

home market. The conclusions remain unaltered.

       Our findings directly relate to three strands of the literature. First, this paper adds to the

growing empirical debate about the agency cost – bonding – view of internationalization.

Besides the work by Doidge, Karoyli, and Stulz (2004) described above, Doidge (2004) finds

that cross-listed firms have lower voting premia, which is consistent with the bonding

hypothesis. Reese and Weisbach (2002) also argue that firms from high shareholder protection

countries list in the U.S. to raise capital, while those from weak shareholder protection countries

list in the U.S. to bind themselves to better corporate governance mechanisms. Others disagree.

Licht (2003, 2004) and Pinegar and Ravichandran (2003) argue that internationalization does not




                                                  4
effectively bond firms to improved governance standards.5 Siegel (2004) finds that cross-listing

in the U.S. did not deter Mexican firm insiders from expropriating corporate resources. In this

paper, we find no evidence that internationalization produces an enduring effect on q, and no

evidence that the q of international firms increases after internationalization relative to that of

domestic firms. This poses a challenge to models that predict that bonding to a better corporate

governance system increases q in the long run.

        Second, our findings are consistent with segmentation theories of internationalization.

When frictions, such as regulations, informational asymmetries, and transaction costs, impede

investors from holding internationally diversified portfolios, firms from segmented markets may

face a higher cost of capital because international investors are unable to purchase their shares as

part of an internationally diversified portfolio. By internationalizing, firms from segmented

markets may become part of the portfolios of international investors and thereby lower their cost

of capital.6 Also, internationalization may help firms access more liquid foreign markets. If a

firm’s shares are more liquid, this makes them more attractive to buyers with positive

ramifications on share prices.7 Internationalization can also make it easier for analysts and

potential investors to acquire information about firms, which may attract new investors, boost

demand for shares, and lower funding costs (Merton, 1987).8 Thus, these segmentation theories


5
  Also, Bauer, Clark, and Wójcik (2004) find that European firms that cross-list in the U.S. have higher corporate
governance standards even before cross-listing. This is consistent with, among others, the view that only companies
with high corporate governance standards are able to access international markets.
6
  Building on international asset pricing models by Black (1974), Solnik (1974), and Stulz (1981), Alexander, Eun,
and Janakiramanan (1987), Errunza and Losq (1985), and Stapleton and Subrahmanyam (1977) develop models of
the impact of internationalization on stock returns.
7
  See, for example, Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996). Chowdhry and Nanda
(1991), Madhavan (1995), and Pagano (1989) suggest that multi-market liquidity effects of internationalization are
ambiguous. Empirically, cross-listing in the U.S. market tends to lower bid-ask spreads and increase trading activity
(see, for example, Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan, 1998; Foerster and Karolyi, 1998; Smith and Sofianos, 1997;
and Werner and Kleidon, 1996).
8
  On information asymmetries as a motive for cross-listings, see models by Cantale (1996), Fuerst (1998), and Moel
(2000). On analysts, Baker, Nosfinger, and Weaver (2002) find that analyst coverage increases after cross-listing,
suggesting that internationalization increases information flow. Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004) and Ammer


                                                         5
predict that integration lowers firms’ cost of capital. But, these segmentation theories do not

predict that internationalization has lasting effects on q. Chari and Henry (2002) argue that by

accessing cheaper capital, firms expand their assets so that there is no long-term effect from

integration on q.9         Consistent with this work, we find that firms expand after they

internationalize, but q is not higher after internationalization.

         Third, this paper’s findings are connected to recent research on market timing. Firms

may decide to list abroad to exploit a temporarily “hot” market. Consistent with this hypothesis,

Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2004) find that firms raise capital in the U.S. and U.K. in

“boom” markets, before returns fall. Others, however, do not find consistent evidence of post-

listing underperformance by capital raising foreign firms, as the market timing hypothesis

predicts.10     Consistent with the market timing hypothesis, we find that q rises before

internationalization and then falls immediately afterwards. However, even after controlling for a

number of factors that are designed to measure market sentiment (e.g., price-earnings ratios, U.S.

stock returns, local stock returns, the global industry q of each firm, and capital flows), we

reproduce the same time-series pattern of q described above. This suggests that market timing is

not the only force underlying the results.




et al. (2004) show that firms that cross-list in the U.S. reduce the information costs for U.S. investors. Moreover,
several papers find that familiarity, as proxied by trade, common language, colonial ties, etc., influence investment
decisions, including cross-listing decisions (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001; Huberman, 2001; Kang and Stulz, 1997;
Pagano et al., 2001; and Sarkissian and Schill, 2004). There are countervailing views, however. Sarkissian and
Schill (2003) find that firms from markets with the highest pre-cross-listing return correlations achieve the greatest
cost of capital reduction, which is inconsistent with some market segmentation theories.
9
   Empirically, research finds that internationalization is accompanied by positive abnormal returns and then
abnormal returns turn negative or disappear after integration. See, Alexander, Eun, and Janakiramanan (1988),
Errunza and Losq (1985), Jayaraman, Shastri, and Tandon (1993), Lau, Diltz, and Apilado (1994), and Miller
(1999).
10
   See Errunza and Miller (2000) and Foerster and Karolyi (1999, 2000).


                                                          6
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the data.

Section III presents the basic results. Section IV presents several additional robustness tests. We

conclude and discuss the implications of our results in Section VI.



II. Data

       To analyze the evolution of corporate valuations before, during, and after firms access

international equity markets we need (i) data on the international activity of firms, including

dates of equity capital raisings in international markets, cross-listings, and depositary receipts

issuances, (ii) firm-level data on a range of firm attributes, both for international and domestic

firms, and (iii) country-specific data on macroeconomic, institutional, and financial conditions.

       One contribution of this paper is that we collect more data on the international equity

market activity of firms than past studies. Most papers focus only on the ADR market, and

exclude international financial markets beyond the U.S. We consider a much broader array of

international equity markets.

       The data for identifying and dating each firm’s international activities come from the

following sources.

       First, besides the Bank of New York’s standard database (the Complete Depositary

Receipt Directory) that contains information on current depositary receipt activities, the Bank of

New York gave us access to their historical databases and reports on (i) depositary receipt

program initiation dates, (ii) termination dates (if any), (iii) capital raisings, and (iv) trading

activity. These data form a comprehensive database on American and Global depositary receipt

programs. The historical data start in January 1956, but for the vast majority of programs, the

data begin after 1980.




                                                 7
       Second, Euromoney provides the dates when firms raise equity capital in international

markets, including cross-listings and issuance of Global Depositary Receipts (GDRs). Thus, the

Euromoney data substantively enhance the identification of international firms. The Euromoney

database covers 8,795 cross-border equity issuances and cross-listing operations from 5,665

firms in 86 countries over the period January 1983 - April 2001.

       Finally, information on dating the initiation of international equity market activities was

augmented with data from the London Stock Exchange (LSE), NASDAQ, and New York Stock

Exchange (NYSE) on listing dates by foreign corporations.

       Consistent with our objective of assembling a broad database on internationalization, we

classify firms as international if they (i) issue depositary receipts, (ii) cross-list, or (iii) raise

equity capital through private or public placements abroad. Our definition is thus more general

than listing in an international exchange alone, as we also include capital raisings without listing.

As presented below, we examine different sub-samples of international firms to assess whether

the evolution of Tobin’s q differs for different methods of internationalization.

       Besides determining whether a firm is international or not, we collect information on firm

characteristics, including balance sheet and income statement variables and data on market

capitalization, from several sources, including the Worldscope database (Thomson Financial

Company), Standard & Poor’s Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB), and Bloomberg.

       To measure firm valuation we use Tobin’s q. Given data availability, we calculate it as

the market value of equity plus the book value of debt (computed as book value of assets minus

the book value of equity) divided by the book value of assets. Our estimate of Tobin’s q does

not use the market value of debt in the numerator and does not attempt to use the replacement

cost of assets in the denominator. It is difficult to avoid these simplifications in a database that




                                                  8
covers over 9,000 firms from 74 countries.11 Similar definitions of Tobin’s q have been widely

used in the literature (see, for example, Chari and Henry, 2002; Claesssens and Laeven, 2003;

Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004; Klapper and Love, 2004; La Porta et al., 2002; and Shin and

Stulz, 2000).

         Worldscope provides firm-level data using local GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting

Principles). Although attempts are made to make data consistent across countries, these efforts

have limitations. Differences in accounting standards across countries could increase Tobin’s q

in some countries relative to others. To address concerns regarding possible biases introduced

by cross-country differences in accounting practices, we conduct two procedures. First, we

include country fixed effects in our regressions. Second, we use the relative q of international

firms (defined as the q of each international firm divided by the average q of all domestic firms

in the firm’s home country) as dependent variable in some specifications. Relative q focuses on

within country variation in corporate valuations and is unaffected by national differences in

accounting practices.12

         After removing financial firms, outliers, firms with missing values of q, and firms with

less than three observations, we are left with a sample of 9,096 firms from 74 countries covering

the period 1989 to 2000, totaling 66,963 firm-year observations. Appendix Table 1 lists the 74



11
   We did not attempt to calculate the replacement cost of assets in the denominator since the required data are
generally not available for our sample of firms and countries have different ways for accounting for depreciation of
physical assets. In addition, we did not want to impose a fixed depreciation formula, since the age of assets varies
by economy. We also did not attempt to calculate the market value of debt, as this would require us to use data on
corporate bond rates (see Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers 1993), which are not available for most countries in our
sample. Rather than making further assumptions, we follow the alternative convention of using the book value of
debt as a proxy for its market value and the book value of assets as a proxy for their replacement cost.
12
   A potential concern regarding our measure of Tobin’s q is related to the impact of inflation. In inflationary
economies, the use of book values could bias our estimates of q upwards as we might underestimate the numerator,
specially when assets are reported using historical costs. In order to address this concern, we estimated regressions
including inflation as a control variable, but this did not alter the results. Also, by using the relative q as a
dependent variable we avoid problems with inflation, since the q of all firms within the same country is affected in a
similar way by inflation.


                                                          9
countries covered in the study and the number of domestic and international firms per country, as

well as the period analyzed for each country and summary statistics of Tobin’s q.13

        As controls we include firm-specific variables commonly used in studies of firm value.

Specifically, we use the average sales growth over the last two years as a proxy for firms’ growth

prospects. We use sales rather than earnings in order to avoid the problems generated by the

volatility and manipulability of earnings. We also control for industry-level effects by including

the average Tobin’s q of the global industry to which a firm belongs as an independent variable.

        Finally, we also collect country-level information. In the basic specifications we control

for real GDP growth, which comes form the World Bank World Development Indicators. In

robustness tests discussed in more detail in Section IV, we control for additional country-level

factors, which might affect not only firms’ valuations but also their willingness and ability to

access international equity markets, including a country’s institutional quality, shareholder

rights, and legal origin.        We also use some indicators of stock market development as

independent variables, such as market capitalization over GDP and turnover (value traded over

market capitalization), and an index of accounting standards.




13
  Some countries do not have any international firms. We keep these in the sample as a control group, but
emphasize that this paper’s results hold when we exclude countries with zero or only one international firm. Also,
Japanese firms represent about 30 percent of the total firms in our sample. We therefore re-did our analyses
excluding Japanese firms and this yields the same conclusions reported below.



                                                       10
III. Results

       This section provides empirical evidence on the evolution of Tobin’s q as firms

internationalize. We proceed as follows. The first subsection tests (i) whether international

firms have higher qs than domestic firms and (ii) whether there is a significant increase in q after

firms internationalize. The second subsection looks at various sub-samples to provide robustness

tests and additional information on the bonding, segmentation, and market timing theories of

internationalization. In particular, we examine the exact mechanisms and exchanges through

which firms internationalize and whether they raise new equity capital. In the analyses we also

compare firms that internationalize with domestic firms (firms that do not internationalize) to

assess whether there is a relation between internationalization and valuation that holds when

conditioning on changes in each firm’s home market. The third subsection traces out the year-

by-year evolution of q and its components before, during, and after internationalization. This

provides a finer characterization of the internationalization process.



A. Before and After Internationalization

1. Preliminary Evidence: Do International Firms Have Higher Qs?

       As a preliminary step, the top panel of Figure 1 compares the average q of international

firms with the average q of domestic firms. Domestic firms are firms that never issue depositary

receipts, raise capital in international markets, or cross-list on the LSE, NASDAQ, or NYSE.

Thus, we compute the average q across all domestic firms, across all years in the sample, which

includes 57,876 firm-year observations. International firms are firms that at some point in the

sample period “internationalize.” Thus, we characterize a firm as international even if it has not

yet issued a depositary receipt, raised capital abroad, or cross-listed in an international market.



                                                 11
Given this definition, we compute the average q across all international firms, across all years.

This includes 9,087 firm-year observations.        Below, we explicitly assess what happens to

international firms’ q before and after internationalization.

       As shown in Figure 1, international firms’ q averages 1.55, while domestic firms have an

average q value of 1.39. The difference is statistically significant at the one percent level. The

difference of 0.16 is over ten percent of the sample mean of 1.41 and is 18 percent of the

standard deviation of Tobin’s q across all the firms in the sample (0.86). While international

firms have higher qs on average, this does not necessarily imply that the qs of international firms

increase after they internationalize. Firms that internationalize may be more highly valued than

domestic firms even before they internationalize, as discussed below.

       To assess whether the Tobin’s q of international firms is higher than the q of domestic

firms conditional on firm, industry, and country characteristics, Table 1 presents a series of

regressions. The first six regressions include all firms in the sample, which involves up to

66,963 firm-year observations. The next three regressions restrict the sample to firms with more

than 100 million U.S. dollars in average assets, where the average is taken for each firm over the

sample period. We examine this subset of firms because both market valuation and access to

international markets may be different for very small firms and excluding very small firms may

improve the comparability of firms across countries.

       The simplest specification regresses Tobin’s q for firm f, from country c, in year t (qc,f,t)

on the internationalization dummyc,f,t, which is a dummy variable for firm f, from country c,

during year t. This dummy variable equals one on and after the year when the firm becomes

international and zero before the firm internationalizes; it is also equal to zero for domestic firms.

All the regressions include country and year dummy variables.                Furthermore, in some




                                                 12
specifications, we control for (i) the national rate of economic growth of each firm’s home

country since macroeconomic success may simultaneously influence valuation and access to

international markets, (ii) the growth rate of sales over the last two years since firm growth

opportunities may shape both the market’s assessment of future cash flows and the benefits of

internationalizing, and (iii) the global industry q (averaged across all firms in the industry) of

each firm’s industry since industry developments may simultaneously drive domestic market

valuations and international demand for the firm.14 We include these variables to control for

firm, industry, and country-specific factors that may influence both valuation and access to

international markets.

         As shown in Table 1’s regressions 1, 2, and 7, the internationalization dummy enters

positively and significantly. Thus, when we simply examine the valuation of firms after they

internationalize and compare this to firms that have not internationalized (at least yet),

international firms have higher valuations. This result holds for firms of different sizes and when

controlling for country, firm, and industry factors.                    While these findings confirm that

international firms have higher qs than domestic firms, they do not necessarily imply that this

difference is generated by the internationalization process per se.

2. Is Q Higher After Internationalization?

         Next, we examine whether q rises after firms become international. As a preliminary

step, the bottom panel of Figure 1 compares the average q of international firms before and after

internationalization. As the figure shows, the q of international firms does not increase after they

internationalize. In fact, the average q is lower after internationalization.


14
  We take the natural logarithm of one plus the growth rate of each country’s Gross Domestic Product, i.e., log of (1
+ GDP growth), and the natural logarithm of one plus each firm’s average sales growth over the last two years, i.e.,
log of (1 + two-year average sales growth). We take logs to control for outlier observations, but this does not affect
the results.


                                                         13
        While Figure 1 displays unconditional means, Table 1 provides formal tests of whether q

increases following internationalization, conditional on country,               industry, and   firm

characteristics.    As a first step in making this assessment, we include both the

internationalization dummy and a dummy variable (international dummyc,f,t) that equals one for

all years if firm f from country c internationalizes at some point in the sample, and equals zero if

it is a domestic firm for the entire sample period. By including the international dummy along

with the internationalization dummy, we test whether q rises after internationalization and/or

whether firms that internationalize at some point tend to have higher qs on average.

        We find no evidence that q rises after internationalization. In Table 1’s regressions 3, 4,

and 8, including the international dummy eliminates the significance of the internationalization

dummy. This provides suggestive evidence that it is not the act of internationalizing per se that

is associated with higher valuation. Rather, these regressions imply that the big difference is

between firms that internationalize at some point and firms that do not, consistent with the idea

that better firms are the ones that are able to access international markets.

        Finally in Table 1, we provide a more direct test of firm values before and after

internationalization. We simultaneously include the internationalization dummy and a dummy

variable that equals one before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (before

internationalization dummyc,f,t).   For domestic firms (firms that never internationalize), the

before internationalization dummy equals zero throughout. If q rises after internationalization,

then the estimated coefficient on the internationalization dummy variable should be significantly

larger than the coefficient on the before internationalization dummy variable. We find the

opposite. In Table 1’s regressions 5, 6, and 9, the before internationalization dummy variable

enters with a larger coefficient than the internationalization dummy. Although there is not a




                                                 14
statistically significant difference, as reported at the bottom of the table, the results clearly

demonstrate that corporate qs do not rise after firms internationalize. In sum, the results in Table

1 suggest that firms that internationalize at some point in the sample tend to have higher qs than

domestic firms, but q does not rise after internationalization.



B. Internationalization: Different Sub-Samples

         To further assess whether q rises after internationalization, we cut the data into a variety

of sub-samples and re-do the analysis. Our sub-sample selection is primarily motivated by

arguments made by the bonding literature. According to this literature, internationalization

procedures that involve greater information disclosure and adherence to stricter investor

protection laws will have a bigger impact than procedures that do not boost information

disclosure and investor protection standards. Thus, pooling all types of internationalization

together could potentially bias downward the bonding effect of internationalization. Here, we

test whether the results hold when differentiating firms by (i) whether they list in a major public

exchange or not when internationalizing, (ii) whether they raise new equity capital or not when

they internationalize, (iii) whether firms raising capital in international markets do so through

private placements or public offerings, and (iv) whether firms internationalize into U.S. markets

through Level III ADRs or through different arrangements.15                            Note that many of these

categorizations overlap. In Tables 2-5, we only include firms with more than 100 million U.S.




15
   Some firms may have several types of listings or equity offerings in international markets. For example, a firm
might first raise capital in international markets through a private placement and then cross-list in a public exchange.
In Tables 2-5 we classify firms according to their first activity in international markets. So, if a firm privately raises
capital abroad and then lists on a major international exchange, we use the date of the private capital raising as the
year of internationalization and include the firm in the private capital raising sample.


                                                           15
dollars in average assets, which is most directly comparable to the sample of firms in regressions

7-9 of Table 1.16

1. Differentiating by Exchange Type

        Table 2 presents regression specifications similar to those in Table 1.                       Table 2’s

regressions 1–3 use a sub-sample of firms that internationalize via the U.S. OTC market and

private placements in international markets, while regressions 4–6 use a sub-sample of firms that

cross-listed or raised equity capital in a major public exchange.17

        Besides assessing the robustness of the earlier results, we separately consider (i)

OTC/private placements and (ii) exchange listings because exchange listings typically require

more information disclosure and adherence to tighter corporate governance standards. Thus,

from the perspective of the bonding hypothesis, we might expect to find that internationalization

induces an enduring increase in q for exchange listed firms but not for OTC/private placements

due to the enhanced governance environment.

        The Table 2 results on the sample of OTC/private placements and the sample of exchange

listings are the same as the full sample findings discussed above: international firms have higher

qs than domestic firms, but their valuations do not rise after internationalization. These findings

do not support arguments that internationalizing into major public exchanges (with arguably

better governance mechanisms) has a different impact on firms’ valuation than using the OTC

market or private placements. More specifically, regressions 1 and 4 show that q is not higher

after internationalization.       These regressions include both domestic firms and firms that

internationalize, where the domestic firms form a control group that allows us to assess whether



16
   We also estimated the regressions in Tables 2-5 including all the firms and obtained similar results.
17
   We also estimated regressions for firms that internationalize via the U.S. OTC market and private placements in
international markets separately and obtained similar results.


                                                       16
the q of firms that internationalize rises relative to the valuations of domestic firms.18 For the

OTC/private placements sample (regression 1) and the exchange listings sample (regression 4),

the internationalization dummy does not enter with a coefficient that is significantly larger than

the coefficient on the before internationalization dummy. In regressions 2, 3, 5, and 6, we only

include firms that internationalize at some point in the sample. As shown, q is not larger after

internationalization when examining either the OTC/private placements sample (regression 2) or

the exchange listings sample (regression 5).19

        In Table 2, we also examine relative Tobin’s q, which equals an international firm’s q

divided by the average q of domestic firms from the same country in the same year. Thus,

relative Tobin’s q is a direct measure of international firm valuation relative to average domestic

firm valuation. The bonding hypothesis predicts that a firm that internationalizes into a foreign

market with better corporate governance mechanisms will experience a rise in q relative to

domestic firms that do not internationalize (and thus do not commit to a higher level of

shareholder protection).

        The results indicate that relative q does not increase after internationalization. The

internationalization dummy does not enter significantly in either the OTC/private placements

sample (regression 3) or the exchange listings sample (regression 6). Again, it does not matter

whether we focus on a sample of firms that lists on major public exchanges or internationalizes

through the OTC market or private placements. The finding that relative q does not rise after

18
   Regressions 1 and 4 include all domestic firms and only the international firms being considered in each case
(those with OTC/private offerings in regression 1 and those listed in major public exchanges in regression 4). Since
both of these regressions include domestic firms, the total number of observations in these regressions sum to more
than total observations of regression 7 of Table 1.
19
   In terms of matching observations between Tables 1 and 2, note that Table 2 only includes firms with more than
100 million U.S. dollars in average assets. In Table 2, there are 3,521 observations of OTC/private placements and
3,351 observations of exchange listed international firms. Thus, the total number of international firm observations
is 6,872. There are also 32,251 domestic firm observations. Thus, we have a total number of observations of
39,123, which equals the total numbers of observations in columns 7-9 of Table 1. The same demarcations hold in
Tables 3-5.


                                                        17
firms cross-list in major exchanges where shareholder protection and information disclosure

regulations are more effective does not offer support for the bonding hypothesis.

2. Differentiating by Equity Offering Type

        Next, we differentiate firms by whether they raise capital when they internationalize.

Table 3 presents the same regressions as Table 2 except that the first three regressions use a sub-

sample of international firms that raise new equity capital when they internationalize. The next

three regressions, 4–6, use a sub-sample that consists of international firms that do not raise new

equity capital when they internationalize. In particular, international firms are classified as

“capital raising” if they raised new equity through a public or a private offering in international

markets.20 Level III ADRs involve capital raisings in public U.S. exchanges so these primary

market activities are part of the capital raising sample. Similarly, the capital raising sample

includes GDRs that involve new equity issuance, direct listings that entail capital raising in the

U.S. and other financial centers, and private placements, such as Regulation 144A offerings in

the U.S. and private placements in other international markets.

        We again find that q does not rise after internationalization for either the sample of firms

that raise capital, or the sample that does not (Table 3). Since the patterns replicate all of our

earlier findings, we keep the discussion very brief. As shown, (i) international firms have higher

qs than domestic firms and (ii) neither q nor relative q increase after internationalization.

Besides confirming the results presented above, the Table 3 regressions indicate that the pattern

for capital raising and non-capital raising firms is similar.




20
   Firms are only classified as capital raising if they issue new equity abroad. That is, firms are not classified as
capital raising if they raise new equity capital in their home market but do not also raise new equity abroad. All of
the international capital raisings in our sample take place in developed markets (e.g., Frankfurt, Hong Kong,
London, Luxembourg, New York, and Zurich).


                                                        18
3. Differentiating by Capital Raising Type

       Next, we focus only on the sample of firms that raise new equity capital when they

internationalize, but we divide these into two groups: private capital raisings and public capital

raisings. Thus, some firms raise capital when they list on major public exchanges, such as the

LSE, NASDAQ, and NYSE.              Other firms raise capital through private placements in

international markets that do not involve an exchange listing. We examine each of these groups

separately in Table 4 to assess whether the combination of capital raising and listing on a major

exchange produces different results. Specifically, raising new equity and listing on a major

exchange may provide stronger bonding to an improved governance regime than either one

separately, so that this smaller sample of firms might experience an increase in q after

internationalization.

       Table 4 indicates that q does not rise after internationalization, even for firms that

simultaneously raise capital and list on major exchanges. It is possible to see exactly the same

pattern for private and public capital raisings, and this pattern is the same as that reported above

for the full sample and other sub-samples. In particular, while firms that internationalize tend to

have on average higher qs than domestic firms (regressions 1 and 4), q does not rise after

internationalization.

4. Differentiating by Listing in U.S Markets

       Finally, we only examine internationalization into the U.S. market.          There may be

concerns that examining the full sample of international venues produces lots of noise and makes

it difficult to isolate the relationship between internationalization and valuation. Furthermore,

focusing on the U.S. is important if one believes that the U.S. market provides a particularly

effective shareholder protection environment. If this is true, then focusing on the U.S. provides a




                                                19
more powerful test of whether firms that internationalize into stronger shareholder protection

regimes enjoy a boost in valuation afterwards.

        Table 5 presents regressions on two samples of firms that internationalize into U.S.

markets. The first sample includes all types of U.S. listings (regressions 1-3). This includes all

ADR programs, firms that raise equity capital in U.S. markets (including through Regulation

144A private placements), and cross-listings on the NASDAQ and NYSE. The second sample

only includes Level III ADRs, which are ADRs listed on a U.S. exchange that involve a capital

raising component (regressions 4-6).21 These ADR programs are subject to more strict disclosure

requirements and liability standards. In particular, they require full SEC disclosure with Form

20-F, reconciliation of financial statements to U.S. GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting

Principles), and compliance with the exchange’s listing rules and corporate governance

standards.22    Issuers are also subject to the strict liability provisions of Section 11 of the

Securities Act of 1933, which implies that they face direct liability for any material misleading

statement or omission.23 Level III ADRs offer better investor protection than other forms of

internationalization and therefore, from the perspective of the bonding hypothesis, we should

expect to find that this type of listings induces an enduring increase in q, at least relative to

domestic firms that do not improve their corporate governance practices through

internationalization.


21
   We also estimated the regressions for different sub-samples (Level I and II ADRs and Regulation 144A
placements), obtaining similar results.
22
   Form 20-F is used by foreign firms to file annual reports with the SEC (equivalent to Form 10-K for U.S. issuers).
There are two sets of financial statement requirements, referred to as Item 17 (“low disclosure”) and Item 18 (“high
disclosure”). Level III ADRs issuers are required to file an Item 18 Form 20-F, which requires disclosures on
income taxes, leases, pensions, non-consolidated affiliated, related parties, and industry and geographic segment
information.
23
   Firms with Level I and II ADRs and Regulation 144A placements are subject to liability under Section 10(b) and
Rule 10b-5 of the Exchange Act. Liability under these provisions requires the plaintiff to proof that the defendant
acted with an intent to defraud (“scienter”). Therefore, firms with Level III ADRs are subject to stricter liability
standards (see Greene et al., 2000).


                                                        20
       Table 5 indicates that the valuation patterns for U.S. listings do not differ from the results

presented above: q does not rise significantly after internationalization. These results hold for

the full sample of U.S. listings (regressions 1-3) and for the much small sample of Level III

ADRs (regressions 4-6).

       In sum, Tables 1-5 show that (i) international firms on average enjoy higher valuations

than domestic firms, (ii) international firm valuations are not significantly higher after they

internationalize than they were before, and (iii) the valuation of international firms does not

increase relative to that of domestic firms following internationalization. Thus, contrary to some

versions of the bonding hypothesis, the evidence on q is inconsistent with the prediction that

firms increase their valuation by bonding to a better corporate governance regime through

internationalization and that this produces an enduring increase in q relative to firms from the

same country that do not internationalize. We now examine the times-series pattern of valuation

changes during the process of internationalization in more depth.



C. Internationalization: Dynamics

       To shed additional light on the bonding, segmentation, and market timing theories of

internationalization, this section provides more details on the evolution of q and its components

during the process of internationalization. Rather than simply examining corporate valuation

before and after firms internationalize, we trace through the year-by-year evolution of q and its

components before, during, and after internationalization. We first describe the results and then

link these analyses to the different theories of internationalization.




                                                  21
1. Results on the Evolution of Q and its Components

       As a preliminary step, Figure 2 plots the evolution of q during the internationalization

process. The top panel shows the average q in each year around the internationalization date. It

shows that q tends to increase before internationalization, reaching its maximum level during the

internationalization year, and then falls. The bottom panel documents a similar pattern for

relative q. The valuation of international firms increases before internationalization relative to

that of domestic firms and then falls after internationalization. The internationalization process

seems to have only a temporary impact on firm valuation and does not generate a permanent

increase in the q of international firms relative to that of domestic firms.

       While Figure 2 displays unconditional means, in Table 6 we use dummy variables to

trace trough the year-by-year evolution of q and its components, controlling for other factors.

We separately document the time-series patterns of (i) Tobin’s q, (ii) the numerator of q, defined

as the market value of equity plus the book value of debt, (iii) the denominator of q, which

equals the book value of assets of the firm, (iv) the market value of equity, and (v) the book

value of debt. Furthermore, we examine each of these five variables relative to domestic firms.

As above, we examine each firm’s q divided by the average q of domestic firms from the

corporation’s home market and call this relative Tobin’s q. Similarly, we examine each firm’s

market capitalization and divide it by the average market capitalization of domestic firms from

the corporation’s home market. We do this for each of the components of q. Thus, Table 6

contains ten regressions.

       Methodologically, we include a series of dummy variables that trace out annual patterns.

Thus, for each firm we create a dummy variable called “three years before internationalization

dummy” that equals one three years before the firm internationalizes and zero otherwise.




                                                  22
Similarly, for each firm we create a dummy variable called “two years before internationalization

dummy” that equals one two years before the firm internationalizes and zero otherwise. We

construct corresponding dummy variables for each of the years surrounding internationalization

and the internationalization year itself. Table 6 presents the results.

       As shown in Table 6’s column 1, one year before a firm internationalizes its q is

significantly (at the five percent level) higher than its long-run pre-internationalization value

(i.e., its value more than three years before internationalization). Tobin’s q rises even further in

the internationalization year. However, by the first year after internationalization, q is no longer

significantly (at the five percent) higher than its value more than three years before

internationalization. While it enters significantly at the ten percent level, there are almost 7,000

observations, what suggests that it is more appropriate to use a five percent significance level.

Also, the dummy variable on two years after internationalization does not enter significantly,

even at the ten percent level. Furthermore, when looking at the estimated coefficients rather than

their significance, one year after internationalization q relinquishes virtually all of its gain during

the previous two years.         Relative q follows a similar pattern, rising the year before

internationalization and even further during the year of internationalization, and then

relinquishing these gains during the year after internationalization. Again, the dummy variable

for the year after internationalization does not enter with a significant coefficient at the five

percent level.      The time series pattern is similar to that illustrated in Figure 2.

Internationalization does not induce an enduring increase on q relative to the valuation of firms

that do not internationalize.

       Turning to the components of q, the numerator of Tobin’s q rises one year before

internationalization, rises further in the year of internationalization, and remains high going




                                                  23
forward. These dynamics are driven primarily by market capitalization, which follows a similar

pattern: rising before internationalization, even further during internationalization, and then

decreasing but staying at a higher level than before internationalization. The book value of debt

does not rise significantly until the year of internationalization. This suggests that markets

anticipate internationalization and view it positively, which is reflected in higher prices before

firms actually internationalize.    This pattern could also reflect market timing, as firms

internationalize when their valuation increases.

       In contrast, the denominator of Tobin’s q, total assets, follows a different pattern. Total

assets rise significantly when the firm internationalizes, not before. Assets remain higher after

internationalization. This is consistent with the view that internationalization coincides with

corporate expansion, possibly because of a lower cost of capital and additional capital raisings.

2. Interpretation and Links to Theory

       Taken together, the evolution of q and its components tell a distinct story that relates to

theories of internationalization. Market capitalization rises before the firm internationalizes and

then remains high. Assets do not increase before internationalization. Rather, assets rise when

the firm internationalizes and then remain higher than they were before internationalization.

Thus, q rises before internationalization and even further during the year of internationalization

as market capitalization increases.         Then, q drops dramatically in the year after

internationalization as firms expand.

       Note that the differences between international and domestic firms exist and change well

before firms internationalize. For example, as shown in regression 2 of Table 6, the q of

international firms relative to that of domestic firms rises before internationalization, not after.

As shown in regression 6, the size of international firms relative to domestic firms (measured by




                                                   24
total assets) rises before they internationalize. Thus, compared to the baseline period of more

than three years before internationalization, both the relative q and relative size of firms that

internationalize increase years before they actually access international markets. Moreover,

while international firms expand relative to domestic firms after internationalization, the qs of

international firms relative to that of domestic firms do not rise after internationalization.24

         The pattern of q and its components presented in Table 6 is consistent with segmentation

theories, which predict that internationalization generates a reduction in firms’ cost of capital that

fosters their expansion. This is what we observe: internationalizing firms expand, both relative

to the period before internationalization and relative to domestic firms. Segmentation theories do

not predict that q will rise in the long run. Again, this is what we observe: q does not rise after

internationalization. We do observe an increase in q before and during internationalization. This

is not inconsistent with segmentation theories: if markets anticipate a “good” event –

internationalization – this will boost stock prices, increasing market capitalization and q. Then,

with internationalization, profit-maximizing firms respond by raising new capital and expanding,

which pushes q back to its trend value. This prediction is validated by the time-series patterns

documented in Table 6.

         The finding that there is not a permanent increase in the q of international firms relative

to that of domestic firms poses a challenge for the view that internationalization bonds firms to a

more effective corporate governance system.                    This view argues that internationalization

generates a permanent improvement in corporate governance practices, with a corresponding

increase in the q of international firms compared to the q of firms that do not internationalize.

While bonding may also lower the cost of capital, encourage firms to expand, and thereby put

24
   We constructed versions of Table 6 using the various sub-samples of firms that we use in Tables 2-5 and did not
find a permanent increase in q or relative q after internationalization for any of these sub-samples. This confirms the
findings from Tables 2-5.


                                                         25
downward pressure on q after internationalization, bonding still implies that international firms

commit to a better governance structure than domestic firms.         This suggests that the q of

international firms relative to that of domestic firms should be higher after internationalization.

We do not find this. To be consistent with our findings, bonding models need to account for the

very rapid post-internationalization return of q to its baseline value of more than three years

before internationalization. We discuss market timing theories of internationalization in the next

section, where we extend the analysis to control for market sentiment.



IV. Additional Robustness Tests and Extensions

       Besides the robustness tests discussed throughout the paper, we conducted two additional

sets of sensitivity analyses, not shown in the paper, to provide information on the different

theories of internationalization.

       First, to assess whether market timing fully explains the time-series patterns documented

above, we controlled for a wide array of variables that proxy for movements in international

stock markets, foreign investor demand, and local market conditions. We control for market

conditions because market timing theories suggest that firms issue equity in “hot” markets.

Firms might choose to list abroad to take advantage of what they view as a temporarily high

price for their shares. Therefore, market timing might explain the temporary rise in q before

internationalization.

       Thus, we experimented with numerous controls for market conditions. More specifically,

our basic specifications (used throughout) indirectly control for worldwide changes in investor

sentiment because we include year dummies. Furthermore, our basic specifications control for

industry effects by including the global average value of q for each firm’s industry. In additional




                                                26
robustness tests, we also estimated the regressions including several measures of international

stock market performance, including both the annual rate of return and price-earnings ratio of the

S&P 500 index. We also controlled for international investor demand for a country’s firms by

including portfolio equity flows and total equity flows (the sum of foreign direct investment and

portfolio equity flows) into the country, both in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of GDP. We

also included variables measuring the degree of internationalization of domestic equity markets,

such as the number of international firms over the total number of firms listed in the domestic

stock market and the ratio of stock market capitalization of international firms to that of domestic

firms. These variables might also proxy for foreign investor interest in local firms. Finally, we

included measures of domestic stock market performance, such as local stock index returns and

the average q of all firms in the domestic market.

       Nevertheless, even after including these proxies for market conditions, we find the same

time-series patterns. Although we found some of these control variables to be significant, our

results on the evolution of q were not affected by their inclusion. If these variables capture

market timing forces, then the robustness of our results to including these controls suggests that

market timing is not the only explanation of the times-series pattern of corporate valuation that

we identify.

       Second, we controlled for shareholder protection laws, accounting standards, and

institutional development in the home country. La Porta et al. (2002) find that firms in countries

with better investor protection laws have higher Tobin’s q than comparable firms in countries

with weaker corporate governance systems. We therefore re-did our regressions controlling for

the quality of investor protection laws, by including an index of the strength of shareholders




                                                27
rights and dummies for a country’s legal origin.25 Our results are robust to the inclusion of these

variables.26 We also included some measures of institutional quality, such as an index of the

efficiency of the judicial system produced by Business International Corporation and an index of

accounting standards produced by the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research,

and obtained similar results. The bonding hypothesis predicts that firms from countries with

weaker investor protection should experience a larger increase in their valuations after cross-

listing than firms from countries with better investor protection. In order to test this hypothesis,

we also included interactions between our measures of investor protection and the

internationalization dummies in some specifications. These interactions are not significant, and

our results were not affected by their inclusion.



V. Conclusions

        This paper examined the evolution of the corporate valuation of firms that cross-listed,

issued depositary receipts, or raised equity capital in international markets over the period 1989-

2000. We documented the time-series patterns of q before, during, and after internationalization

and compared these patterns to firms that never internationalized.                     We also examined the

individual components of q in assessing what happens during the process of internationalization.

        There are four key findings. First, international firms tend to have higher valuations than

domestic firms. More specifically, the average q of firms that at some point in the sample

internationalize is higher than the q of firms that never internationalize.

        Second, corporations do not experience an enduring increase in q after they

internationalize. We find that (a) valuations are not higher after internationalization and (b)

25
  These are the same variables used by La Porta et al. (2002).
26
  The index of shareholders rights is not significant in most of our regressions while the English legal origin dummy
tends to be positive and significant.


                                                        28
valuations of firms that internationalize do not increase relative to those of domestic firms (i.e.,

the relative q does not increase after internationalization). Thus, although there are large cross-

firm differences in q, our results are consistent with the view that these differences are not

affected by internationalization per se.

       Third, in terms of the year-by-year dynamics, q rises before internationalization, but then

falls rapidly in the year after internationalization. We find that one year after internationalization

the q of international firms is not significantly higher than it was two years (or even three years)

before they internationalized. Furthermore, the relative Tobin’s q of international firms (q

divided by the average q of domestic firms from the same home country) follows the same

pattern: rising in the year before internationalization and during the internationalization year, but

relinquishing these increases by the year after internationalization.

       Finally, in terms of the components of q, a firm’s market capitalization tends to rise prior

to internationalization and remains high thereafter, while the firm’s assets increase during

internationalization as the firm expands. Thus, firms that internationalize expand relative to

domestic firms. On net, however, internationalization is not associated with a lasting effect on

valuations as measured by Tobin’s q.

       The results provide new evidence on different theories of internationalization. First,

market segmentation theories hold that internationalization boosts firm size but exerts only a

fleeting impact on q, because overcoming barriers to raising capital abroad does not induce a

fundamental improvement in corporate governance. According to market segmentation-type

arguments, market values rise because internationalization facilitates, for                 example,

diversification, information flow, or the trading of shares in more liquid markets. The increase in

q should be short-lived, however, because corporations expand when the cost of capital falls.




                                                 29
Consistent with these predictions, we find that internationalization is associated with a

permanent increase in market capitalization, a temporary increase in q, and a subsequent jump in

corporate assets.

       Second, the evidence is consistent with market timing arguments. In particular, firms

may respond to positive shocks to their share prices by raising capital in international markets.

Since the increase in market value before internationalization is also consistent with markets

anticipating that the firm is going to enjoy positive future benefits from internationalization (due

to a reduction in segmentation, bonding, or any other cause), it is difficult to distinguish market

timing from other theories of internationalization. Toward this end, we attempt to control for

market timing by conditioning on stock market returns in the U.S. and the domestic market,

price-earnings ratios, and global industry q values, among other country, industry, and firm traits.

Our results are robust to including these factors. Thus, to the extent that we have appropriately

controlled for market timing effects, these findings imply that market timing is at least not the

only force underlying the evolution of q and its components.

       Third, the results provide evidence regarding the bonding view of internationalization. If

internationalization provides a vehicle for firms to adopt a more effective corporate governance

regime that reduces the ability of insiders to divert corporate resources for private gain, then this

should induce an enduring increase in corporate valuations relative to domestic firms that do not

commit to a tougher governance regime through internationalization. However, we find that q

and relative q rise prior to internationalization and then fall very quickly back to their long-run

pre-internationalization values. Our paper suggests that to be consistent with these time-series

patterns, bonding models should explicitly account for the very short-lived increase in q when

firms internationalize.




                                                 30
       In the end, our major contribution is that we document the evolution of corporate

valuation during the process of internationalization along with the evolution of the components

of q. We trust that this helps future work (a) distinguish more precisely among different theories

of internationalization and (b) develop models that more completely describe international

financial integration.




                                               31
References

Ahearne, A., W. Griever, and F. Warnock, 2004. Information Costs and Home Bias: An Analysis
      of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities, Journal of International Economics 62, 313-336.
Alexander, G., C. Eun, and S. Janakiramanan, 1987. Asset Pricing and Dual Listing on Foreign
      Capital Markets: A Note, Journal of Finance 42, 151-158.
Alexander, G., C. Eun, and S. Janakiramanan, 1988. International Listings and Stock Returns:
      Some Empirical Evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 135-151.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986. Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread, Journal of
     Financial Economics 17, 223-249.
Ammer, J., S. B. Holland, D. C. Smith, and F. E. Warnock, 2004. Look at Me Now: The Role of
     Cross-Listing in Attracting U.S. Shareholders, Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 815.
Baker, H. K., J. R. Nofsinger, and D. G. Weaver, 2002. International Cross Listing and
       Visibility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 495-521.
Bauer, R., G. L. Clark, and D. Wójcik, 2004. Corporate Governance and Cross-Listing: Evidence
       from European Companies, University of Oxford Economic Geography Research Group
       Working Paper 04-24.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2000. Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal
       of Finance 55, 565–613.
Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 2003. Emerging Markets Finance, Journal of Empirical Finance
       10, 3–55.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, 2001. Emerging Equity Markets and Economic
       Development, Journal of Development Economics 66, 465–504.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, 2004. Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?
       Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Benos, E. and M. S. Weisbach, 2004. Private Benefits and Cross-Listings in the United States,
       Emerging Markets Review 5, 217-240.
Biddle, G. C. and S. M. Saudagaran, 1992. Financial Disclosure Levels and Foreign Stock
       Exchange Listing Decisions, Journal of International Financial Management and
       Accounting 4, 106-148.
Black, F., 1974. International Capital Market Equilibrium with Investment Barriers, Journal of
       Financial Economics 1, 337-352.
Blanchard, O. J., C. Rhee, and L. Summers, 1993. The Stock Market, Profit, and Investment,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 15-36.
Brennan, M. J. and A. Subrahmanyam, 1996. Market Microstructure and Asset Pricing: On the
      Compensation for Illiquidity in Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 441-
      464.




                                             32
Cantale, S., 1996. The Choice of a Foreign Market as a Signal, Working Paper, Tulane
       University.
Chari, A. and P. B. Henry, 2002. Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative Efficiency or
       Animal Spirits? NBER Working Paper No. 8908.
Chari, A. and P. B. Henry, 2004. Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a Natural
       Experiment, Journal of Finance 59, 1295-1324.
Chowdhry, B. and V. Nanda, 1991. Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity, Review of
     Financial Studies 4, 483-511.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel, and S. Schmukler, 2003. Which Firms Access International Stock
       Markets?, Working Paper, World Bank.
Claessens, S. and L. Laeven, 2003. Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth,
       Journal of Finance 58, 2401-2436.
Coase, R. H., 1937. The Nature of the Firm, Economica 4, 386-405
Coffee, J., 1999. The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate
       Governance and its Implications, Northwestern Law Review 93, 641-708.
Coffee, J., 2002. Racing Towards the Top?: The Impact of Cross-Listings and Stock Market
       Competition on International Corporate Governance, Columbia Law Review 102, 1757-
       1831.
Doidge, C., 2004. U.S. Cross-Listings and the Private Benefits of Control: Evidence from Dual-
      class Firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.
Doidge, C. A., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, 2004. Why Are Firms that List in the U.S. Worth
      More?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Domowitz, I., J. Glen, and A. Madhavan, 1998. International Cross-Listing and Order Flow
     Migration: Evidence from an Emerging Market, Journal of Finance 53, 2001-2027.
Edison, H., R. Levine, L. Ricci, and T. Slot, 2002. International Financial Integration and
       Economic Growth, Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 749-776.
Errunza, V., and E. Losq, 1985. International Asset Pricing Under Mild Segmentation: Theory
       and Tests, Journal of Finance 40, 105-124.
Errunza, V., and D. Miller, 2000. Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital in International
       Equity Markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 577-600.
Foerster, S., and G. A. Karolyi, 1998. Multimarket Trading and Liquidity: A Transaction Data
       Analysis of Canada-U.S. Interlistings, Journal of International Financial Markets,
       Institutions and Money 8, 393-412.
Foerster, S. and G. A. Karolyi, 1999. The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
       Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the United States,
       Journal of Finance 54, 981-1013.
Foerster, S. and G. A. Karolyi, 2000. The Long-Run Performance of Global Equity Offerings,
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 499-528.



                                             33
Fuerst, O., 1998. A Theoretical Analysis of the Investor Protection Regulations Argument for
        Global Listing of Stocks, Working Paper, Yale University.
Greene, E., A. Beller, E. Rosen, L. Silverman, D. Braverman, and S. Sperber, 2000. U.S.
      Regulation of the International Securities and Derivatives Markets, Aspen Law and
      Business, New York.
Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju, 2001. How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
       Stockholdings and Trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053-1073.
Hart, O., 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press, London.
Henderson, B. J., N. Jegadeesh, and M. S. Weisbach, 2004. World Markets for Raising New
      Capital, NBER Working Paper No. 10225.
Henry, P. B., 2000a. Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market
       Equity Prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529–564.
Henry, P. B., 2000b. Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms? Journal of
       Financial Economics 58, 301–334.
Henry, P. B., 2003. Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth,
       American Economic Review 93, 91-96.
Huberman, G., 2001. Familiarity Breeds Investment, Review of Financial Studies 14, 659-680.
Huddart, S., J. Hughes, and M. Brunnermeier, 1999. Disclosure Requirements and Stock
      Exchange Listing Choice in an International Context, Journal of Accounting and
      Economics 26, 237-269.
Jayaraman, N., K. Shastri, and K. Tandon, 1993. The Impact of International Cross-Listings on
       Risk and Return: The Evidence from American Depositary Receipts, Journal of Banking
       and Finance 17, 91-103.
Jensen, M., and W. Meckling, 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs,
       and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Kang, J., and R. M. Stulz, 1997. Why Is There a Home Bias? An Analysis of Foreign Portfolio
       Equity Ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.
Karolyi, A. and R. M. Stulz, 2003. Are Assets Priced Locally or Globally? in G. Constantinides,
       M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz (eds.), The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North
       Holland.
Klapper, L. F. and I. Love, 2004. Corporate Governance, Investor Protection, and Performance
      in Emerging Markets, Journal of Corporate Finance 10, 703-728.
Lang, M., V. Lins, and D. Miller, 2003. ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy. Does Cross Listing in
      the United States Improve a Firm's Information Environment and Increase Market Value?
      Journal of Accounting Research 41, 317-345.
Lang, M., J. S. Raedy, and M. Yetman, 2003. How Representative Are Cross-Listed Firms? An
      Analysis of Firm Performance and Accounting Quality, Journal of Accounting Research
      41, 363-386.




                                              34
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002. Investor Protection and
       Corporate Valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.
Lau, S. T., J. D. Diltz, and V. P. Apilado, 1994. Valuation Effects of International Stock
       Exchange Listings, Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 743-755.
Levine, R. and S. Schmukler, 2003. Migration, Spillovers, and Trade Diversion: The Impact of
       Internationalization on Domestic Stock Market Liquidity. NBER Working Paper No.
       9614.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998a. Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,
       World Development 26, 1169-1183.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998b. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth, American
       Economic Review 88, 537-558.
Licht, A. N., 2003. Cross-Listing and Corporate Governance: Bonding or Avoiding?, Chicago
       Journal of International Law 4, 141-163.
Licht, A. N, 2004. Legal Plug-Ins: Cultural Distance, Cross-Listing, and Corporate Governance
       Reform, Berkeley Journal of International Law 22, 159.
Madhavan, A., 1995. Consolidation, Fragmentation, and the Disclosure of Trading Information,
     Review of Financial Studies 8, 579-603.
Merton, R.C., 1987. A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
      Information, Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.
Miller, D., 1999. The Market Reaction to International Cross-Listings: Evidence from
       Depositary Receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.
Moel, A., 2000. The Role of Information Disclosure on Stock Market Listing Decisions: The
      Case of Foreign Firms Listing in the U.S., Working Paper, Harvard Business School.
Pagano, M., 1989. Trading Volume and Asset Liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104,
      255-274.
Pagano, M., O. Randl, A. Röell, and J. Zechner, 2001. What Makes Stock Exchanges Succeed?
      Evidence from Stock Listing Decisions, European Economic Review 45, 770-782.
Pagano M., A. Röell, and J. Zechner, 2002. The Geography of Equity Listing: Why Do
      Companies List Abroad? Journal of Finance 57, 2651-2694.
Patro, D. K. and J. K. Wald, 2004. Firm Characteristics and the Impact of Emerging Market
       Liberalizations, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.
Pinegar, J. M. and R. Ravichandran, 2003. U.S. Investors’ Perceptions of Corporate Control in
       Mexico: Evidence from Sibling ADRs, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
       38, 213-230.
Reese, W. A. Jr. and M. S. Weisbach, 2002. Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests, Cross-
       listing in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings, Journal of Financial
       Economics 66, 65-104.




                                              35
Sarkissian, M. and M. J. Schill, 2003. Are There Permanent Valuation Gains to Overseas
       Listing? Evidence from Market Sequencing and Selection, Darden Graduate School of
       Business Administration University of Virginia, Working Paper No. 03-03.
Sarkissian, M. and M. J. Schill, 2004. The Overseas Listing Decision: New Evidence of
       Proximity Preference, Review of Financial Studies 17, 769-809.
Schmukler, S. and E. Vesperoni, 2003. Financial Globalization and Debt Maturity in Emerging,
     Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Shin, H. and R. M. Stulz, 2000. Firm Value, Risk, and Growth Opportunities, NBER Working
       Paper No. 7808.
Siegel, J., 2004. Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities
        Laws?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Smith K., and G. Sofianos, 1997. The Impact of an NYSE Listing on the Global Trading of Non-
      U.S. Stocks, NYSE Working Paper 97-02.
Solnik, B., 1974. An Equilibrium Model of the International Capital Market, Journal of
       Economic Theory 18, 365-378.
Stapleton, R. and M. Subrahmanyam, 1977. Market Imperfections, Capital Market Equilibrium,
       and Corporate Finance, Journal of Finance 32, 307–319.
Stulz, R., 1981, On the Effects of Barriers to International Asset Pricing, Journal of Finance 25,
        783-794.
Stulz, R. M., 1999. Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital, Journal of Applied
        Corporate Finance 12, 1-12.
Werner, I., and A. Kleidon, 1996. U.S. and U.K. Trading of British Cross-Listed Stocks: An
      Intraday Analysis of Market Integration, Review of Financial Studies 9, 619-664.




                                               36
                                             Figure 1
                        Tobin's Q of Domestic and International Firms
The top panel displays the average Tobin's q of domestic and international firms over the whole
sample period. The bottom panel shows the average Tobin's q of international firms before and
after internationalization. International firms are those identified as having at least one active
depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in international markets, or trading in
the London Stock Exchange, NASDAQ, or NYSE.


                                             All Firms
                                        Average Tobin's Q
  1.8

                                                                       1.55
  1.5                     1.39


  1.2



  0.9



  0.6
                     Domestic Firms                           International Firms

                                      International Firms
                                      Average Tobin's Q
  1.8
                          1.64
                                                                      1.53
  1.5


  1.2


  0.9


  0.6
               Before Internationalization                 After Internationalization
                                                                 Figure 2
                                          Internationalization and the Evolution of Tobin's Q
The top panel shows the evolution of Tobin's q of international firms around internationalization. The data are the average Tobin's q in
each year around the internationalization date (date zero). The bottom panel shows the evolution of the relative Tobin's q of
international firms, defined as the Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms in the firm's
home country. The data are the average relative Tobin's q in each year around the internationalization date (date zero). International
firms are those identified as having at least one active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in international markets,
or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ.


                                                                Tobin's Q
  1.8




  1.7




  1.6




  1.5



  1.4
        -3                 -2                    -1                    0                      1                 2                    3
                                                      Year Relative to Internationalization


                                                           Relative Tobin's Q
  1.35


  1.30


  1.25


  1.20


  1.15


  1.10
         -3                 -2                   -1                     0                     1                 2                    3
                                                      Year Relative to Internationalization
                                                                                                      Table 1
                                                                                        Internationalization and Tobin's Q
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. The dependent variable is Tobin's q. The international dummy equals one if a firm becomes
international at any point and zero for domestic firms. The internationalization dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is
delisted). The before internationalization dummy equals one before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise. International firms are those identified as having at least one active depositary receipt
program, having raised equity capital in international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ. The test reported at the bottom tests the null hypothesis that the internationalization
dummy equals the before internationalization dummy. See Appendix Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables. Financial firms are excluded from the sample. United States and United Kingdom are
excluded from the sample since they are considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not reported. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one
percent, respectively.
                                                                                        Domestic and International Firms
                                                                                                                                                                   Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S.
                                                                                                         All Firms                                                            Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                                                         Tobin's Q                                                                    Tobin's Q
                                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)                 (7)               (8)             (9)
Internationalization dummy (a)                                  0.166 ***       0.162 ***       -0.039            -0.045           0.176 ***       0.171 ***           0.183 ***        -0.025           0.193 ***
                                                              [6.491]         [6.531]          [0.839]           [0.879]         [6.763]         [6.768]             [7.387]           [0.480]         [7.691]
International dummy                                                                              0.215 ***         0.216 ***                                                             0.218 ***
                                                                                               [4.696]           [4.249]                                                               [4.290]
Before internationalization dummy (b)                                                                                              0.217 ***       0.218   ***                                           0.219 ***
                                                                                                                                 [4.676]         [4.212]                                               [4.239]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                                         2.803 ***                          2.819 ***                       2.820   ***         2.546 ***         2.562 ***       2.563 ***
                                                                             [18.216]                           [18.337]                        [18.339]            [15.285]         [15.405]         [15.407]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                                      0.300 ***                          0.295 ***                       0.295   ***         0.305 ***         0.299 ***       0.299 ***
                                                                             [11.177]                           [10.984]                        [10.983]             [9.837]           [9.601]         [9.600]
Global industry q                                                               0.755 ***                          0.749 ***                       0.749   ***         0.554 ***         0.546 ***       0.545 ***
                                                                             [13.580]                           [13.505]                        [13.503]             [9.211]           [9.112]         [9.111]


Country dummies                                                  Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Year dummies                                                     Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes

No. of observations                                           66,963           51,608           66,963           51,608          66,963           51,608              39,123          39,123           39,123
No. of firms                                                   9,096            9,031            9,096            9,031           9,096            9,031               6,195           6,195            6,195
No. of countries                                                  74               71               74               71              74               71                  68              68               68
Mean of dependent variable                                     1.413            1.355            1.413            1.355           1.413            1.355               1.308           1.308            1.308
Before int. dummy - Internationalization dummy, (b)-(a)                                                                           0.040            0.048                                                0.026
Test (b)-(a)=0; P-value                                                                                                           0.389            0.364                                                0.621
R-squared                                                      0.059            0.099            0.060               0.101        0.060            0.101               0.098            0.100           0.100
                                                                                               Table 2
                                                                      Internationalization and Tobin's Q by Exchange Type
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) the dependent variable is Tobin's q . In
columns (3) and (6) the dependent variable is the Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms in the firm's home country. The internationalization
dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The before internationalization dummy equals one
before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise. International firms are those identified as having at least one active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in
international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ. OTC and private international firms are those that cross-listed in U.S. over-the-counter (OTC) markets
or raised capital through a private placement in international markets. Exchange listed international firms are those that cross-listed or raised capital in a public exchange. The
internationalization date considered for classifiying firms according to the exchange type is the date of their first international activity (e.g., if a firm first raised capital in international
markets through a private placement and then cross-listed in a public exchange, it is classified as private and only the date of this private capital raising is considered). The test reported at
the bottom tests the null hypothesis that the internationalization dummy equals the before internationalization dummy. See Appendix Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables.
Financial firms are excluded from the sample. United States and United Kingdom are excluded from the sample since they are considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not
reported. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                          Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S. Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                               OTC and Private Placements                                               Exchange Listings
                                                                Domestic and                                                        Domestic and
                                                             International Firms           International Firms Only              International Firms             International Firms Only
                                                                  Tobin's Q            Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q          Tobin's Q              Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q
                                                                     (1)                   (2)                     (3)                   (4)                     (5)                     (6)
Internationalization dummy (a)                                        0.117 ***           -0.083                  -0.075                  0.274 ***             -0.089                  -0.054
                                                                    [3.826]              [1.196]                 [1.356]                [7.089]                [0.990]                 [0.859]
Before internationalization dummy (b)                                 0.167 **                                                            0.270 ***
                                                                    [2.561]                                                             [3.377]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                               2.534 ***            2.112 ***               0.296                  2.610 ***              1.500 ***             -0.084
                                                                   [14.627]              [4.147]                 [0.828]               [14.806]                [2.732]                [0.205]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                            0.257 ***            0.224 ***               0.160 ***              0.304 ***              0.543 ***              0.403 ***
                                                                    [8.648]              [2.758]                 [2.725]                [9.099]                [3.401]                [3.332]
Global industry q                                                     0.485 ***            0.311 *                 0.195                  0.561 ***              0.887 ***              0.614 ***
                                                                    [8.304]              [1.696]                 [1.325]                [8.894]                [3.619]                [3.328]


Country dummies                                                        Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Year dummies                                                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes

No. of observations                                                 35,772                  3,521                  3,512                35,602                   3,351                  3,327
No. of firms                                                         5,668                    531                    530                 5,664                     527                    523
No. of countries                                                        64                     47                     46                    67                      50                     46
Mean of dependent variable                                           1.283                  1.383                  1.100                 1.300                   1.576                  1.232
Before int. dummy - Internationalization dummy, (b)-(a)              0.050                                                              -0.004
Test (b)-(a)=0; P-value                                              0.438                                                               0.964
R-squared                                                            0.092                  0.136                  0.106                 0.104                   0.158                  0.156
                                                                                                 Table 3
                                                                  Internationalization and Tobin's Q by Equity Offering Type
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) the dependent variable is Tobin's q . In
columns (3) and (6) the dependent variable is the Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms in the firm's home country. The internationalization
dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The before internationalization dummy equals one
before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise. International firms are those identified as having at least one active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in
international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ. Capital raising international firms are those that raised capital either through a public or a private offer
in international markets. Non-capital raising international firms are those that listed in foreign markets without raising capital at the same time. The internationalization date considered for
classifiying firms according to the equity offering type is the date of their first international activity (e.g., if a firm first raised capital in international markets through a private placement and
then cross-listed in a public exchange, it is classified as capital raising and only the date of this private capital raising is considered). The test reported at the bottom tests the null hypothesis
that the internationalization dummy equals the before internationalization dummy. See Appendix Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables. Financial firms are excluded from the
sample. United States and United Kingdom are excluded from the sample since they are considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not reported. Absolute values of t-statistics
are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                          Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S. Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                                       Capital Raisings                                                    Non-Capital Raisings
                                                                 Domestic and                                                           Domestic and
                                                              International Firms              International Firms Only              International Firms              International Firms Only
                                                                   Tobin's Q               Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q          Tobin's Q               Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q
                                                                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)                   (4)                      (5)                     (6)
Internationalization dummy (a)                                         0.255 ***              -0.089                  -0.042                  0.136 ***              -0.094                  -0.081
                                                                     [5.659]                 [0.908]                 [0.545]                [4.224]                 [1.029]                 [1.155]
Before internationalization dummy (b)                                  0.274 ***                                                              0.188 **
                                                                     [3.712]                                                                [2.223]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                                2.451 ***               0.441                  -0.670 *                2.624 ***               3.103 ***               0.747 *
                                                                    [14.115]                 [0.781]                 [1.705]               [14.817]                 [5.142]                 [1.650]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                             0.303 ***               0.662 ***               0.505 ***              0.250 ***               0.173 **                0.115 **
                                                                     [9.046]                 [3.667]                 [3.619]                [8.329]                 [2.216]                 [2.080]
Global industry q                                                      0.553 ***               0.945 ***               0.700 ***              0.486 ***               0.322                   0.177
                                                                     [8.765]                 [3.400]                 [3.371]                [8.161]                 [1.333]                 [0.988]


Country dummies                                                          Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Year dummies                                                             Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes

No. of observations                                                   35,154                   2,903                  2,874                  35,139                   2,888                  2,884
No. of firms                                                           5,656                     519                    515                   5,537                     400                    399
No. of countries                                                          67                      53                     49                      64                      39                     38
Mean of dependent variable                                             1.293                   1.531                  1.188                   1.281                   1.387                  1.123
Before int. dummy - Internationalization dummy, (b)-(a)                0.020                                                                  0.053
Test (b)-(a)=0; P-value                                                0.801                                                                  0.530
R-squared                                                              0.101                   0.215                  0.233                   0.093                   0.114                  0.069
                                                                                                    Table 4
                                                                    Internationalization and Tobin's Q by Capital Raising Type
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) the dependent variable is Tobin's q . In
columns (3) and (6) the dependent variable is the Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms in the firm's home country. The internationalization
dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The before internationalization dummy equals one
before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise. International firms are those identified as having at least one active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in
international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ. The sample of international firms includes only capital raising international firms, defined as those
that raised capital either through a public or a private offering in international markets. The internationalization date considered for classifiying firms according to the exchange and equity
offering type is the date of their first international activity (e.g., if a firm first raised capital in international markets through a private placement and then raised capital in a public exchange,
it is classified as having a private listing and only the date of this private listing is considered). The test reported at the bottom tests the null hypothesis that the internationalization dummy
equals the before internationalization dummy. See Appendix Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables. Financial firms are excluded from the sample. United States and United
Kingdom are excluded from the sample since they are considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not reported. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean
significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                          Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S. Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                                   Private Capital Raisings                                               Public Capital Raisings
                                                                Domestic and                                                           Domestic and
                                                             International Firms              International Firms Only              International Firms              International Firms Only
                                                                  Tobin's Q               Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q          Tobin's Q               Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q
                                                                     (1)                      (2)                     (3)                   (4)                      (5)                     (6)
Internationalization dummy (a)                                        0.091 *                -0.163                  -0.066                  0.363 ***              -0.148                  -0.123
                                                                    [1.667]                 [1.268]                 [0.773]                [5.780]                 [1.206]                 [1.262]
Before internationalization dummy (b)                                 0.190 **                                                               0.368 ***
                                                                    [2.480]                                                                [2.869]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                               2.494 ***               0.071                  -0.581                  2.540 ***               0.537                  -0.790
                                                                   [13.980]                 [0.092]                 [1.120]               [14.197]                 [0.749]                 [1.470]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                            0.265 ***               0.342 *                 0.246 *                0.299 ***               1.024 ***               0.788 ***
                                                                    [8.342]                 [1.791]                 [1.688]                [8.830]                 [4.205]                 [4.176]
Global industry q                                                     0.506 ***               0.565 *                 0.442 **               0.546 ***               1.029 ***               0.770 ***
                                                                    [8.309]                 [1.965]                 [2.032]                [8.534]                 [2.634]                 [2.610]


Country dummies                                                         Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Year dummies                                                            Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes

No. of observations                                                  33,524                   1,273                   1,261                 33,881                   1,630                  1,613
No. of firms                                                          5,387                     250                     248                  5,406                     269                    267
No. of countries                                                         65                      46                      44                     65                      41                     39
Mean of dependent variable                                            1.277                   1.414                   1.072                  1.288                   1.622                  1.279
Before int. dummy - Internationalization dummy, (b)-(a)               0.099                                                                  0.006
Test (b)-(a)=0; P-value                                               0.238                                                                  0.966
R-squared                                                             0.095                   0.253                   0.279                  0.103                   0.254                  0.268
                                                                                             Table 5
                                                                      Internationalization in U.S. Markets and Tobin's Q
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. In columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) the dependent variable is Tobin's q . In
columns (3) and (6) the dependent variable is the Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms in the firm's home country. The internationalization
dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The before internationalization dummy equals one
before a firm becomes international and zero otherwise. The sample of international firms includes only those that internationalized in U.S. markets, defined as those having at least one
active American depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in U.S. markets, or trading in the NYSE or NASDAQ. Firms that internationalized by raising capital or cross-listing
in international markets other than the U.S. are not included in the sample (the first internationalization date is considered, e.g. if a firm raised capital in international markets other than the
U.S. and then issued an ADR it is not included). The internationalization date considered for classifiying firms according to the ADR Level is the date of their first international activity
(e.g., if a firm first raised capital in U.S. markets through a Regulation 144A private placement and afterwards established a Level III program, it is classified as having a private listing and
not included as Level III ADR). The test reported at the bottom tests the null hypothesis that the internationalization dummy equals the before internationalization dummy. See Appendix
Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables. Financial firms are excluded from the sample. United States and United Kingdom are excluded from the sample since they are
considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not reported. Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                          Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S. Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                                   All Types of U.S. Listings                                               Level III ADRs
                                                                Domestic and                                                          Domestic and
                                                             International Firms               International Firms Only            International Firms            International Firms Only
                                                                  Tobin's Q                Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q        Tobin's Q             Tobin's Q          Relative Tobin's Q
                                                                     (1)                       (2)                     (3)                 (4)                   (5)                     (6)
Internationalization dummy (a)                                        0.214 ***               -0.048                  -0.041                0.624 ***             0.211                   0.084
                                                                    [7.436]                  [0.755]                 [0.833]              [5.400]               [0.895]                 [0.398]
Before internationalization dummy (b)                                 0.244 ***                                                             0.693 ***
                                                                    [4.131]                                                               [2.947]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                               2.509 ***                1.898 ***              0.221                 2.520 ***              0.906                 -0.916
                                                                   [14.758]                  [4.618]                [0.752]              [13.696]                [0.756]                [0.959]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                            0.284 ***                0.324                  0.242 ***             0.277 ***              1.204 ***              1.103 ***
                                                                    [9.199]                  [3.903] ***            [3.898]               [8.341]                [2.743]                [3.353]
Global industry q                                                     0.551 ***                0.731 ***              0.508 ***             0.526 ***              1.251 **               0.991 **
                                                                    [9.006]                  [3.723]                [3.488]               [8.285]                [2.057]                [2.047]


Country dummies                                                        Yes                      Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Year dummies                                                           Yes                      Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes

No. of observations                                                 37,657                    5,406                   5,375               32,884                    633                    629
No. of firms                                                         5,980                      843                     838                5,247                    110                    110
No. of countries                                                        68                       56                      51                   63                     29                     29
Mean of dependent variable                                           1.302                    1.485                   1.177                1.281                  1.784                  1.463
Before int. dummy - Internationalization dummy, (b)-(a)              0.030                                                                 0.069
Test (b)-(a)=0; P-value                                              0.617                                                                 0.767
R-squared                                                            0.102                    0.162                   0.152                0.105                  0.449                  0.452
                                                                                                                       Table 6
                                                                                       Internationalization and the Evolution of Tobin's Q and its Components
This table reports ordinary least square regressions with standard errors estimated with clusters at the firm level. The dependent variables are: (1) Tobin's q ; (2) Tobin's q of each international firm over the average Tobin's q of all domestic firms
in the firm's home country; (3) logarithm of Tobin's q numerator in U.S. dollars, calculated as the book value of debt (defined as total assets minus book value of equity) plus market capitalization; (4) Tobin's q numerator of each international
firm over the average Tobin's q numerator of all domestic firms in the firm's home country; (5) logarithm of total assets in U.S. dollars; (6) total assets of each international firm over the average total assets of all domestic firms in the firm's home
country; (7) logarithm of market capitalization in U.S. dollars; (8) market capitalization of each international firm over the average market capitalization of all domestic firms in the firm's home country; (9) logarithm of book value of debt in U.S.
dollars; and (10) book value of debt of each international firm over the average book value of debt of all domestic firms in the firm's home country. The single year internationalization dummies equal one in the referred year and zero otherwise.
The more than three years after internationalization dummy equals one after the third year following internationalization and zero before (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). International firms are those identified as having at least one active
depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange, NYSE, or NASDAQ. See Appendix Table 2 for the definition of the remaining variables. The sample includes only
international firms. Financial firms are excluded from the sample. United States and United Kingdom are excluded from the sample since they are considered financial centers. A constant is estimated but not reported. Absolute values of t-
statistics are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                                                                            International Firms Only
                                                                                     Excluding Firms with Less than 100 Million U.S. Dollars in Average Assets
                                                                                Relative Tobin's      Tobin's Q        Relative Tobin's                        Relative Total         Market         Relative Market     Book Value of        Relative Book
                                                                Tobin's Q              Q              Numerator         Q Numerator         Total Assets          Assets           Capitalization     Capitalization         Debt             Value of Debt
                                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                 (7)                (8)                (9)                 (10)
Three years before internationalization dummy                     0.100 *            0.080 **           0.148               1.479 **           0.114               1.474 **            0.165 *            0.459              0.121                0.459
                                                                [1.710]            [2.029]            [1.515]             [2.509]            [1.124]             [2.008]             [1.717]            [1.233]            [1.091]              [1.233]
Two years before internationalization dummy                       0.119 *            0.087 *            0.162               1.887 ***          0.108               1.951 ***           0.244 **           0.905 *            0.076                0.905 *
                                                                [1.799]            [1.813]            [1.569]             [2.666]            [1.012]             [2.611]             [2.268]            [1.683]            [0.636]              [1.683]
One year before internationalization dummy                        0.176 **           0.113 **           0.254 **            2.563 ***          0.154               2.315 ***           0.395 ***          1.457 **           0.136                1.457 **
                                                                [2.541]            [2.309]            [2.310]             [3.435]            [1.343]             [3.187]             [3.543]            [2.464]            [1.050]              [2.464]
Internationalization year dummy                                   0.192 **           0.142 **           0.424 ***           3.252 ***          0.317 ***           2.855 ***           0.602 ***          1.828 ***          0.275 **             1.828 ***
                                                                [2.422]            [2.474]            [3.586]             [4.127]            [2.611]             [3.829]             [5.006]            [2.986]            [2.002]              [2.986]
One year after internationalization dummy                         0.137 *            0.102 *            0.377 ***           2.957 ***          0.304 **            2.592 ***           0.520 ***          1.563 **           0.263 *              1.563 **
                                                                [1.790]            [1.830]            [2.930]             [3.694]            [2.322]             [3.478]             [3.917]            [2.503]            [1.788]              [2.503]
Two years after internationalization dummy                        0.104              0.064              0.425 ***           3.029 ***          0.376 ***           2.746 ***           0.540 ***          1.553 **           0.357 **             1.553 **
                                                                [1.390]            [1.191]            [3.166]             [3.691]            [2.750]             [3.614]             [3.933]            [2.369]            [2.334]              [2.369]
Three years after internationalization dummy                     -0.005             -0.006              0.460 ***           3.571 ***          0.468 ***           3.366 ***           0.502 ***          1.625 **           0.473 ***            1.625 **
                                                                [0.066]            [0.106]            [3.297]             [3.988]            [3.291]             [4.050]             [3.528]            [2.414]            [2.992]              [2.414]
More than three years after internationalization dummy           -0.091             -0.069              0.852 ***           5.802 ***          0.904 ***           5.469 ***           0.824 ***          2.870 ***          0.927 ***            2.870 ***
                                                                [1.111]            [1.140]            [5.324]             [5.045]            [5.579]             [5.173]             [5.075]            [3.603]            [5.221]              [3.603]
Log of (1 + GDP growth)                                           1.943 ***          0.157              2.214 ***           4.309              1.036 **            2.940               5.040 ***        14.527 ***           0.499              14.527 ***
                                                                [5.230]            [0.580]            [5.276]             [1.405]            [2.506]             [1.200]            [10.021]            [5.024]            [1.019]              [5.024]
Log of (1 + two-year average sales growth)                        0.339 ***          0.250 ***          0.445 ***           1.609 ***          0.273 ***           1.256 ***           0.578 ***          0.960 **           0.305 ***            0.960 **
                                                                [4.211]            [4.176]            [4.972]             [3.122]            [3.450]             [2.882]             [4.533]            [2.242]            [3.360]              [2.242]
Global industry q                                                 0.614 ***          0.413 ***
                                                                [3.725]            [3.337]

Industry dummies                                                   No                  No                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Country dummies                                                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Year dummies                                                       Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes

No. of observations                                               6,872              6,839              6,872               6,839              6,872               6,839              6,872               6,839              6,871                6,839
No. of firms                                                      1,058              1,053              1,058               1,053              1,058               1,053              1,058               1,053              1,058                1,053
No. of countries                                                     57                 52                 57                  52                 57                  52                 57                  52                 57                   52
Mean of dependent variable                                        1.477              1.164              7.774               7.477              7.499               6.697              6.954               4.760              6.881                4.760
R-squared                                                         0.143              0.125              0.377               0.144              0.372               0.165              0.343               0.112              0.378                0.112
                                                           Appendix Table 1
                                                             Basic Statistics
This table reports summary statistics by country. It displays the total number of firms, the number of international firms, the number of
domestic firms, the sample coverage, and the sample average of Tobin's q . International firms are those identified as having at least one
active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange,
NYSE, or NASDAQ.


                                                   Number of     Number of                                   Tobin's Q of Tobin's Q of
                                    Number of                                     Sample
               Country                             Domestic     International                   Tobin's Q     Domestic    International
                                      Firms                                       Period
                                                     Firms          Firms                                       Firms         Firms
 1   Argentina                         42              27             15        1989 - 2000        1.11          1.04          1.23
 2   Australia                         219            161             58        1989 - 2000        1.51          1.49          1.55
 3   Austria                           71              55             16        1989 - 2000        1.33          1.32          1.37
 4   Bahamas                            1               0              1        1996 - 2000        1.08            -           1.08
 5   Belgium                           97              84             13        1989 - 2000        1.59          1.50          2.48
 6   Bermuda                            1               1              0        1996 - 1999        1.11          1.11            -
 7   Botswana                           2               2              0        1996 - 2000        1.87          1.87            -
 8   Brazil                            137             94             43        1989 - 2000        0.91          0.91          0.91
 9   Bulgaria                           6               5              1        1998 - 2000        1.57          1.78          0.52
10   Canada                            516            390            126        1989 - 2000        1.57          1.43          1.94
11   Channel Islands                    1               1              0        1991 - 1998        1.54          1.54            -
12   Chile                             88              71             17        1989 - 2000        1.41          1.34          1.61
13   China                             115             70             45        1992 - 2000        1.42          1.56          1.15
14   Colombia                          18              15              3        1989 - 2000        0.99          0.97          1.11
15   Cote d'Ivoire                      1               1              0        1998 - 2000        2.28          2.28            -
16   Croatia                            2               1              1        1997 - 2000        1.36          0.63          2.08
17   Czech Republic                    28              26              2        1995 - 2000        0.96          0.87          1.83
18   Denmark                           150            145              5        1989 - 2000        1.38          1.36          1.83
19   Egypt                              4               1              3        1997 - 2000        2.02          1.38          2.21
20   Estonia                            4               4              0        1997 - 2000        1.10          1.10            -
21   Finland                           96              77             19        1989 - 2000        1.30          1.33          1.21
22   France                            560            511             49        1989 - 2000        1.39          1.36          1.61
23   Germany                           526            491             35        1989 - 2000        1.55          1.54          1.59
24   Ghana                              4               3              1        1996 - 2000        1.08          1.03          1.23
25   Greece                            124            119              5        1989 - 2000        2.09          2.10          1.78
26   Hong Kong                         228            155             73        1989 - 2000        1.29          1.21          1.45
27   Hungary                           22               8             14        1992 - 2000        1.39          1.37          1.40
28   India                             293            233             60        1990 - 2000        1.65          1.70          1.45
29   Indonesia                         93              85              8        1989 - 2000        1.34          1.33          1.44
30   Ireland                           58              27             31        1989 - 2000        1.55          1.48          1.60
31   Israel                            41              23             18        1993 - 2000        1.43          1.18          1.71
32   Italy                             135            114             21        1989 - 2000        1.29          1.24          1.56
33   Jamaica                            2               2              0        1998 - 2000        0.84          0.84            -
34   Japan                            2,647          2,533           114        1989 - 2000        1.34          1.34          1.42
35   Jordan                             1               0              1        1997 - 2000        1.27            -           1.27
36   Kenya                              9               9              0        1996 - 2000        1.24          1.24            -
37   Latvia                             5               4              1        1997 - 2000        0.72          0.70          0.80
38   Liechtenstein                      1               1              0        1989 - 2000        1.42          1.42            -
                                                    Appendix Table 1 (Continued)
                                                             Basic Statistics
This table reports summary statistics by country. It displays the total number of firms, the number of international firms, the number of
domestic firms, the sample coverage, and the sample average of Tobin's q . International firms are those identified as having at least one
active depositary receipt program, having raised equity capital in international markets, or trading in the London Stock Exchange,
NYSE, or NASDAQ.


                                                   Number of     Number of                                   Tobin's Q of Tobin's Q of
                                    Number of                                     Sample
               Country                             Domestic     International                   Tobin's Q     Domestic    International
                                      Firms                                       Period
                                                     Firms          Firms                                       Firms         Firms
39   Lithuania                          3               3              0        1996 - 2000        1.18          1.18            -
40   Luxembourg                         9               5              4        1989 - 2000        1.41          1.44          1.36
41   Malaysia                          300            289             11        1989 - 2000        1.70          1.69          1.85
42   Mauritius                           7              7              0        1997 - 2000        1.12          1.12            -
43   Mexico                            96              37             59        1989 - 2000        1.18          1.03          1.25
44   Netherlands                       145            110             35        1989 - 2000        1.63          1.51          2.05
45   New Zealand                        53             44              9        1989 - 2000        1.46          1.41          1.78
46   Nigeria                           15              15              0        1992 - 2000        1.27          1.27            -
47   Norway                            147            128             19        1989 - 2000        1.60          1.61          1.52
48   Pakistan                          80              77              3        1989 - 2000        1.30          1.30          1.10
49   Panama                             1               0              1        1995 - 2000        1.46            -           1.46
50   Papua New Guinea                    1              0              1        1996 - 1998        1.20            -           1.20
51   Peru                              26              21              5        1992 - 2000        1.14          0.90          1.75
52   Philippines                       65              54             11        1989 - 2000        1.40          1.37          1.51
53   Poland                            46              38              8        1992 - 2000        1.26          1.24          1.34
54   Portugal                          64              58              6        1989 - 2000        1.06          1.06          0.96
55   Romania                            8               8              0        1997 - 2000        0.91          0.91            -
56   Russia                             15              4             11        1996 - 2000        1.00          0.99          1.01
57   Saudi Arabia                      10              10              0        1997 - 2000        1.11          1.11            -
58   Senegal                            1               1              0        1998 - 2000        1.27          1.27            -
59   Singapore                         171            158             13        1989 - 2000        1.45          1.42          1.79
60   Slovak Republic                    7               5              2        1996 - 2000        0.73          0.66          0.90
61   Slovenia                           8               8              0        1996 - 2000        0.86          0.86            -
62   South Africa                      232            196             36        1989 - 2000        1.53          1.50          1.70
63   South Korea                       327            302             25        1989 - 2000        1.04          1.03          1.10
64   Spain                             123            116              7        1989 - 2000        1.28          1.28          1.36
65   Sri Lanka                         11              10              1        1993 - 2000        1.16          1.16          1.15
66   Sweden                            189            162             27        1989 - 2000        1.59          1.57          1.68
67   Switzerland                       139            120             19        1989 - 2000        1.37          1.29          1.87
68   Taiwan, Province of China         187            157             30        1989 - 2000        1.65          1.58          2.04
69   Thailand                          171            160             11        1989 - 2000        1.28          1.24          1.87
70   Tunisia                             3              3              0        1997 - 2000        1.47          1.47            -
71   Turkey                            67              61              6        1989 - 2000        2.03          1.97          2.51
72   Ukraine                             3              2              1        1997 - 2000        0.80          0.66          1.03
73   Venezuela                         12               3              9        1989 - 2000        0.89          0.68          0.93
74   Zimbabwe                            6              5              1        1994 - 2000        0.85          0.88          0.67

     Total                            9,096          7,926          1,170                          1.41          1.39           1.55
                                                              Appendix Table 2
                                                    Series Description and Data Sources
This table shows the description of the data used and their sources.

Series Names             Description                                                                Source
Tobin's q                Ratio of market value of a firm's assets to their replacement cost, at the end Worldscope, S&P (former IFC) Emerging
                         of the most recent fiscal year. Market value of assets is calculated as the Markets Database, and Bloomberg
                         book value of debt, computed as book value of assets minus book value of
                         equity, plus market capitalization of equity. The replacement value of assets
                         is proxied by the book value of assets.


GDP growth               Annual percent change of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in constant local World Bank: World Development Indicators
                         currency.
Two-year average sales   Geometric average annual sales growth over the last two years. Sales are Worldscope
growth                   expressed in U.S. dollars.

Global industry q        Average Tobin's q of all firms belonging to the same industry. Firms are Worldscope, S&P (former IFC) Emerging
                         classified in industries following the SIC ten major divisions.          Markets Database, and Bloomberg
