                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               GLOBALIZATION, LABOR INCOME,
                                  AND POVERTY IN MEXICO

                                           Gordon H. Hanson

                                         Working Paper 11027
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11027


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




I thank Julie Cullen, Esther Duflo, Ann Harrison, Jim Levinsohn, and participants in the NBER Conference
on Globalization and Poverty for helpful comments. Jeffrey Lin provided excellent research assistance.The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Globalization, Labor Income, and Poverty in Mexico
Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 11027
January 2005
JEL No. F1

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, I examine changes in the distribution of labor income across regions of Mexico during

the country's decade of globalization in the 1990's. I focus the analysis on men born in states with

either high-exposure or low-exposure to globalization, as measured by the share of foreign direct

investment, imports, or export assembly in state GDP. Controlling for regional differences in the

distribution of observable characteristics and for initial differences in regional incomes, the

distribution of labor income in high-exposure states shifted to the right relative to the distribution

of income in low-exposure states. This change was primarily the result of a shift in mass in the

income distribution for low-exposure states from upper-middle income earners to lower income

earners. Labor income in low-exposure states fell relative to high-exposure states by 10% and the

incidence of wage poverty (the fraction of wage earners whose labor income would not sustain a

family of four at above-poverty consumption levels) in low-exposure states increased relative to

high-exposure states by 7%.

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

       There is now an immense body of literature on how globalization affects labor

markets. Early research centered on the United States (Freeman, 1995; Richardson,

1995), motivated in part by an interest in understanding what caused marked changes in

the U.S. wage structure during the 1980’s and 1990’s (Katz and Autor, 1999).                A

common theme in this work is that globalization – especially in the form of global

outsourcing – has modestly but significantly contributed to increases in wage differentials

between more and less-skilled workers (Feenstra and Hanson, 1999 and 2003). A small

effect for international trade is perhaps not surprising, given the large size of the U.S.

economy and the still limited role that trade plays in U.S. production and consumption

(Feenstra, 1998; Freeman, 2003). Later research shifted attention to other countries, and

to the developing world in particular, which in the 1980’s began to lower barriers to trade

and capital flows aggressively.      The tendency for rising wage inequality to follow

globalization is not limited to the United States or other rich countries. Expanding trade

and capital flows have been associated with increases in the relative demand for skilled

labor in many economies, including Chile (Pavcnik, 2003), Columbia (Attanasio,

Goldberg, and Pavcnik, 2004), Hong Kong (Hsieh, 2003), Mexico (Feenstra and Hanson,

1997), and Morocco (Currie and Harrison, 1997), just to list a few recent examples.1

       In most research to date, the focus has been on the relationship between

globalization and earnings inequality. Fewer studies have examined how globalization

affects income levels. This comes as something of a surprise, given the long-standing

interest of developing-country research in how changes in policy affect the well-being of


1
   See Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004) and Pavcnik and Goldberg (2004) for surveys of the
literature on globalization and income in developing countries.


                                                                                            1
the poor. The relative lack of attention on the impact of globalization on poverty is

perhaps partly attributable to methodology. The most established empirical techniques

for identifying the effects of economic shocks, such as globalization or technological

change, on earnings relate to estimating changes in the relative demand for labor of

different skill types (Katz and Autor, 1999). The lack of attention may also reflect a

U.S.-bias in the type of questions being asked. The strong emphasis in U.S. research on

why earnings inequality has increased may have spilled over into research on other

countries, partially crowding out other issues.

        In this paper, I examine how the distribution of income changed in Mexico during

country’s decade of globalization in the 1990’s. Taking the income distribution as the

unit of analysis makes it possible to examine changes both in the nature of inequality –

reflected in the shape of the distribution – and in the level of income – reflected in the

position of the distribution. Mexico is an interesting case because over the last two

decades the country has aggressively opened its economy to the rest of the world. This

process began with a unilateral liberalization of trade in 1985, continued with the

elimination of many restrictions on foreign capital in 1989, and culminated with the

North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 (Hanson, 2004).2

        The one study of which I’m aware that attempts to estimate the impact of trade

liberalization on poverty in Mexico is Nicita (2004). He applies data from the Mexico’s

National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure to techniques developed by

Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) to construct an estimate of how tariff reductions have

2
 See Chiquiar (2003) for a discussion of recent policy changes in Mexico. For other work on the labor-
market implications of globalization in Mexico, see Ariola and Juhn (2003), Cragg and Epelbaum (1996),
Farris (2003), Feliciano (2001), Revenga (1997), Hanson and Harrison (1999), and Robertson (2003). See
Hanson (2004) for a review of this literature. For work on trade reform and wage inequality in Latin
America, see Behrman, Birdsall, and Szekely (2003).


                                                                                                    2
affected household welfare.     This exercise involves estimating the impact of tariff

changes on domestic goods’ prices, the impact of changes in goods’ prices on the wages

of different skill groups, and income and price elasticities of demand for different goods,

and then combining these estimates to form an estimate of the change in real income due

to tariffs. During the 1990’s, tariff changes appeared to raise disposable income for all

households, with richer households enjoying a 6% increase and poorer households

enjoying a 2% increase. These income gains imply a 3% reduction in the number of

households in poverty. Income gains are larger in regions closer to the United States,

where tariff-induced price changes are larger. I will also find that proximity to world

markets matters for income changes. By focusing on prices for final goods, the Deaton

and Muellbauer (1980) approach taken by Nicita (2004) ignores other impacts of

globalization, such as increases in foreign investment or increased trade in intermediate

inputs. The approach I develop, which cannot relate specific policy changes to changes

in income, does consider these other aspects of Mexico’s economic opening.

       An obvious empirical challenge in studying income distributions, rather than

individuals or industries, is the paucity of degrees of freedom. Income distributions are

aggregate entities, implying the number of observations is limited to the number of time

periods in the sample. In my case, I really have only two observations, 1990 and 2000,

corresponding to the most recent years in which Mexico conducted its census of

population and housing. My strategy for identifying the impact of globalization on

Mexico’s income distribution is to exploit regional variation in exposure to foreign trade

and investment. As discussed in section 2, geography and history have made states in

Mexico’s north and center highly exposed to globalization and left states in Mexico’s




                                                                                         3
south relatively disengaged from the global economy. I take states with high exposure to

globalization to be the treatment group and states with low exposure to globalization to

be the control group (leaving states with intermediate exposure to globalization out of the

analysis). I then apply a difference-in-difference strategy by comparing the change in the

income distribution for high-exposure states to the change in income distribution for low-

exposure states during Mexico’s globalization decade. Implicit in the analysis is the

assumption is that labor is sufficiently immobile across regions of Mexico for region-

specific labor-demand shocks to affect regional differentials in labor income.

       The analysis is complicated by a host of issues, three of which stand out. One is

that income distributions change both because the characteristics of the underlying

population of individuals change and because the returns to these characteristics change.

To identify the effects of globalization, I want to examine changes in returns to

characteristics (in my case, inter-regional differences in these changes), while holding the

distribution of characteristics constant. To perform this exercise, I apply non-parametric

techniques from DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) and Leibbrandt, Levinsohn, and

McCrary (2004), which I describe in section 3. I also compare results from this approach

to results from a more-standard parametric approach, both of which are presented in

section 4.   A second issue is that other shocks in the 1990’s may also have had

differential effects on regions with high versus low exposure to globalization. Candidate

shocks include the privation and deregulation of industry, the reform of Mexico’s land-

tenure system, and, most importantly, Mexico’s peso crisis in 1994. The potential for

these shocks to contaminate the analysis is an important concern, which I address by way

of discussing qualifications to my results in section 5.




                                                                                          4
        A third issue has to do with measurement.                There are many components to

income, including labor earnings, capital returns, rental income, government transfers,

gifts, and remittances from family members abroad. Surveys that measure each of these

components carefully, such as Mexico’s National Survey of Household Income and

Expenditure, are not representative across the regions of the country (Cortes et al., 2003),

which makes it impossible to apply my estimation strategy to these data. Surveys that are

representative across Mexico’s regions, such as the Census of Population and Housing,

measure labor income with relatively high precision, but lack complete data on other

income categories. To ensure my data are regionally representative, I use the Mexican

Census, and to minimize the impact of measurement error, I focus the analysis on labor

income. Excluding other sources of income has the obvious drawback of limiting the

analysis to labor earnings, rather than to the full distribution of income.3

        To preview the results, states with high-exposure to globalization began the

1990’s with higher incomes than low exposure states, even after controlling for regional

differences in the observable characteristics of individuals. During the 1990’s, low-

exposure states had slower growth in labor income than high-exposure states. This took

the form of a left-ward shift in the income distribution of low-exposure states relative to

high-exposure states.       The results of this income shift were (a) a decrease in average

labor earnings of 10% for individuals from states with low exposure to globalization

relative to individuals from states with high exposure to globalization, and (b) an increase

in the incidence of wage poverty (the fraction of wage earners whose labor income would


3
 One interesting extension to my analysis would be to use Mexico’s National Survey of Household Income
and Expenditure to estimate the empirical relationship between labor income and poverty. One could then
use this mapping to evaluate how the changes in labor income that I estimate (using data from the Census
of Population and Housing) may have affected poverty.


                                                                                                      5
not sustain a family of four at above-poverty consumption levels) in low-exposure states

of 7% relative to that in high-exposure states.



2. Regional Exposure to Globalization
2.1 Data Sources

        Data for the analysis come from two sources. In 1990, I use the 1% microsample

of the XII Censo General de Poblacion y Vivienda, 1990, and in 2000 I use a 10%

random sample of the 10% microsample of the XIII Censo General de Poblacion y

Vivienda, 2000. The sample is working age men with positive labor earnings. I focus on

men, since labor-force participation rates for women are low and vary considerably over

time, ranging from 21% in 1990 to 32% in 2000. This creates issues of sample selection

associated with who supplies labor outside the home. Compounding the problem, many

women who report zero labor earnings may work in the family business or on the family

farm. For men, problems of sample selection and measurement error also exist but

appear to be less severe. Their labor-force participation rates vary less over time, rising

modestly from 73% in 1990 to 74% in 2000. Still, differences in labor-force participation

over time and across regions could affect the results reported in section 4. In section 3, I

discuss strategies to correct for self-selection into the labor force.



2.2 The Opening of Mexico’s Economy

        In Mexico, the last two decades have not been a quiet period. Since 1980, the

country has had three currency crises, bouts of high inflation, and several severe

macroeconomic contractions, the most recent of which occurred in 1995 following a

large devaluation of the peso that precipitated the country’s conversion from a fixed to a



                                                                                          6
floating exchange rate. The liberalization of the country’s trade and investment policies

has been, in part, a response to this turmoil. Mexico’s currency crises and ensuing

contractions have had very negative consequences on the country’s poor. Table 1 shows

that poverty rates rose sharply after the 1995 peso crisis.

        Mexico’s economic opening began in 1982, when the government responded to a

severe balance of payments crisis by easing restrictions on export assembly plants known

as maquiladoras. In 1985, Mexico joined the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs

(GATT), which entailed cutting tariffs and eliminating many non-tariff barriers. In 1989,

Mexico eased restrictions on the rights of foreigners to own assets in the country. In

1994, NAFTA consolidated and extended these reforms. Partly as a result of these policy

changes, the share of international trade in Mexico’s GDP has nearly tripled, rising from

11% in 1980 to 32% in 2002. Mexico is now as closely tied to the U.S. economy as it

has been at any point in its history. In 2002, the country sent 89% of its exports to and

bought 73% of its imports from the United States.4

        Mexico’s maquiladoras, shown in Figure 1, have been instrumental in the

country’s export conversion. Between 1983 and 2002, real value added in maquiladoras

grew at an average annual rate of 11%, making it the most dynamic sector in the country.

In 2002, these export assembly plants accounted for 45% of Mexico’s manufacturing

exports and 28% of the country’s manufacturing employment (up from 4% in 1980).

Their concentration in northern Mexico in part accounts for the differential regional

impact of globalization in the country. A brief history of Mexico’s trade policy reveals

the origins of northern Mexico’s advantage in export production.


4
  Concomitant with its economic opening, Mexico privatized state-owned enterprises, deregulated entry
restrictions in many industries, and used wage and price restraints to combat inflation.


                                                                                                   7
        In the 1940’s, Mexico adopted a strategy of import substitution industrialization.

To import most manufacturing products, firms had to obtain a license from the

government and to pay moderate to high tariffs. In 1965, Mexico softened its import

substitution strategy by allowing the creation of maquiladoras (Hansen, 1981).5 Firms

could import free of duty the inputs, machinery, and parts needed for export assembly

operations, as long as they exported all output. To ensure firms abided by this rule, they

were required to buy a bond equal to the value of their imports that would be returned to

them once they had exported all their imported inputs in the form of final goods (hence

the term in-bond assembly plants). In contrast to other firms in the country, maquiladoras

could be 100% foreign owned. Bureaucratic restrictions on maquiladoras kept the sector

small until 1982, when the government streamlined regulation of the plants.

        Initially, maquiladoras were required to locate within 20 miles of an international

border or coastline.        In 1972, the government relaxed these rules and allowed

maquiladoras to locate throughout the country.                However, the plants continued to

concentrate near the United States.             As seen in Figure 2, 83% of maquiladora

employment is still located in states on the U.S. border. Proximity to the U.S. market is

motivated in part by a desire to be near U.S. consumers, to whom maquiladoras export

most of their production, and in part by a desire to be near U.S. firms, who often manage

Mexican maquiladoras out of offices based in U.S. border cities.

        U.S. trade policies initially gave maquiladoras an advantage over other Mexican

producers in exporting to the U.S. market. Prior to NAFTA, a U.S. firm that made


5
  The original motivation for this program was to create employment opportunities for Mexican workers
returning to the country after working in the United States as temporary farm laborers under the Bracero
Program. The U.S. government ended the Bracero Program in 1964 and the Mexican government was
concerned that the returning workers would raise unemployment in border states.


                                                                                                      8
components, shipped them to a plant in Mexico for assembly, and then reimported the

finished good only paid U.S. import duties on the value of Mexican labor and raw materials

used in assembly. NAFTA ended this special status for maquiladoras by giving all Mexican

firms duty free access to the U.S. market.6 Yet, as seen in Figure 1, NAFTA did little to

stunt the growth of maquiladoras. In a purely legalistic sense, NAFTA did mean the end of

the maquiladora regime; it eliminated the "in-bond" arrangement under which maquiladoras

operated. However, Mexico'
                         s low wages continue to give the country a comparative

advantage in the assembly of manufactured goods for the U.S. economy.



2.3 Regional Exposure to Globalization

        Mexico’s trade and investment reforms have dramatically increased the openness

of its economy. These policies appear to have affected some parts of the country much

more than others. Figure 3 plots the share of state GDP accounted for by valued added in

maquiladoras during the 1990’s against distance to the United States. For three of the six

states that border the United States (Baja California, Chihuahua, Tamaulipas), the

maquiladora share of GDP is over 18%. For two of the three others (Coahuila, Sonora) it

is over 8%. In the rest of the country, the maquiladora share of GDP is below 5%.

        While maquiladoras are a large part of Mexico’s exports, they are by no means

the whole story. Export production also occurs in states with relatively large supplies of

skilled labor, which have attracted multinational auto companies (as in Aguascalientes)

and electronics producers (as in Jalisco). Figure 4 plots the share of foreign direct

investment in state GDP against the share of maquiladora value added in state GDP, both

6
 With NAFTA, all firms in Mexico obtained duty-free access to the U.S. market as long as they comply
with NAFTA rules of origin. NAFTA also exposes maquiladoras to rules of origin (from which they had
been exempt previously), but now also allows the plants to sell goods on the Mexican market.


                                                                                                  9
averaged over the 1990’s. While border states show up as high in both categories, other

states have attracted foreign direct investment in forms besides maquiladoras. These

include states in which Mexico’s most important industrial cities are located (Mexico

City, Federal District; Monterrey, Nuevo Leon; Guadalajara, Jalisco).

          Beyond FDI and maquiladoras, some states are exposed to globalization by virtue

of having ports and being large importers. This is seen in Figure 5, which plots FDI as a

share of state GDP against imports as a share of state GDP.7 A few states, such as

Yucatan and Sinaloa, have high imports, while attracting little in the way of FDI.

          To categorize states as having high or low exposure to globalization, I use the

three measures described in Figures 3-5: the share of maquiladora value added in state

GDP, the share of FDI in state GDP, and the share of imports in state GDP (each

averaged over the period 1993-1999). Using all three measures is important, since with

the exception of FDI and imports they are relatively weakly correlated across states, as

reported in Table 2. Table 3 reports the globalization measures for Mexico’s 32 states,

where states are sorted according to their average rank across the three measures. I select

as states with high exposure to globalization those whose average rank across the three

measures is in the top third (and that have at least one individual rank in the top third) and

I select as states with low exposure to globalization those whose average rank is in the

bottom third (and that have no single rank in the top third).

          Of the 7 states with high-exposure to globalization, 5 share a border with the

United States; of the 10 states with low-exposure to globalization, 5 are in southern

Mexico. Historically, Mexico’s north – with its more abundant mineral deposits, lower

population densities, and closer proximity to the United States – has been relatively rich,
7
    In Mexico, there are no data on exports at the state level (other than data on maquiladora exports).


                                                                                                           10
while Mexico’s south – with its higher population densities and larger indigenous

community – has been relatively poor. It is well known that since Mexico’s economic

opening the border region has enjoyed relatively high wage growth, widening regional

wage differentials in the country (Hanson, 2004). However, the recent success of the

border follows a period in which Mexico’s poorer regions had been catching up.

Chiquiar (2004) finds that from 1970 to 1985, the 15 years preceding Mexico’s entry into

the GATT, there was convergence in per capita GDP levels across Mexican states, and

that after 1985 this process broke down. For the period 1985-2001, there is strong

divergence in state per capita GDP levels. His results are reproduced in Figure 6.

Mexico’s globalization decade thus follows a period during which income differences

between high-exposure states and low-exposure states had been closing.

       Finally, it is important to note that exposure to globalization is not simply a proxy

for the opportunity to migrate to the United States. Contrary to popular belief, migration

to the United States is not especially common among residents of Mexican states on the

U.S. border. Mexico’s high migration states are in agricultural regions in central and

western Mexico, which have dominated migration to the United States for most of the

last century (Durand, Massey, and Zenteno, 2001).          Most of these states have low

exposure to FDI or to trade, as seen in Figures 7 and 8, which plot the fraction of the state

population migrating to the United States over the period 1995-2000 against the share of

FDI in state GDP or the share of imports in state GDP. This suggests that high exposure

to globalization does not indicate high exposure to emigration.

       Proximity to the United States explains part of regional differences in exposure to

globalization, but it is clearly not the whole story. Other states have become more




                                                                                          11
integrated into the global economy by virtue of having more skilled workers, better

transportation infrastructure, or larger markets. These features, while present before

globalization took hold in Mexico, are not exogenous. They reflect the ability of these

states to develop economically, which may in turn reflect the quality of their legal or

political institutions or other historical factors.   This suggests that my measure of

exposure to globalization may proxy for institutional quality or other regional

characteristics. Identifying the factors that determine regional variation in exposure to

global markets, while beyond the scope if this paper, is important. Without this mapping,

one cannot make policy recommendations. My findings will suggest that in Mexico

regions more exposed to globalization have done better in terms of income growth. But

the policy implications of this result are unclear as I leave unanswered the question of

how one goes about increasing regional exposure.



3. Empirical Methodology

       The empirical analysis involves comparing changes in income distribution during

Mexico’s globalization decade between two groups of states, states with high exposure to

globalization and states with low exposure to globalization. In this section, I describe

non-parametric and parametric approaches for making these comparisons.



3.1 Estimating Counterfactual Income Densities

       Let f(w|x,i,t) be the density of labor income, w, conditional on a set of observed

characteristics, x, in region i and time t. Define h(x|i,t) as the density of observed

characteristics among income earners in region i and time t. For regions, i=H indicates

high exposure to globalization and i=L indicates low exposure to globalization; for time



                                                                                      12
periods, t=00 indicates the year 2000 and t=90 indicates the year 1990. The observed

density of labor income for individuals in i at t is,

                                  g ( w | i ,t ) =   f ( w | x ,i ,t )h( x | i ,t )dx     (1)

Differences in     f ( w | x , H ,t ) and     f ( w | x , L ,t ) capture differences in returns to

observable characteristics in regions with high versus low exposure to globalization;

differences in h(x|H,t) and h(x|L,t) capture differences in the distribution of observed

characteristics in high versus low-exposure regions.

        To evaluate the change in income distributions across time and across regions, I

would like to compare changes in f ( w | x , H ,t ) and f ( w | x , L ,t ) , while holding the

distribution of x constant. However, in the data I do observe not these conditional

densities, but the only marginal densities, g(w|x,H,t) and g(w|x,L,t). To evaluate these

densities, I apply techniques from DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996). First, consider

the cross-time change in income distribution in the high-exposure region that is due to

changes in returns to observable characteristics, which can be written as

          f ( w | x , H ,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx − f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx       (2)

Equation (2) evaluates the change in income distribution in high-exposure regions

between 1990 and 2000, fixing the marginal density of observables to be that in high-

exposure regions in 1990. Rewrite equation (2) as

                           [ θ H 90 → H 00 − 1 ] f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx      (3)

where

                                                       f ( w | x , H ,00 )
                                  θ H 90 → H 00 =                                         (4)
                                                       f ( w | x , H ,90 )




                                                                                                13
Equation (3) is simply the observed marginal income density in high-exposure regions in

1990, adjusted by a weighting function. Given an estimate of the weighting function in

(4), it would be straightforward to apply a standard kernel density estimator to equation

(3). The key, then, to estimating the change in income distribution that is due to changes

in returns to observables is estimating the weighting function in (4).

       Before turning to the weighting functions, consider the analog to equation (2) for

regions with low exposure to globalization. The change in income distribution in low-

exposure regions that is due to changes in returns to observables is

          f ( w | x , L ,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx − f ( w | x , L ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx      (5)

Equation (5) evaluates the change in income distribution in regions with low exposure to

globalization between 1990 and 2000, again fixing the marginal density of observables to

be that in high-exposure regions in 1990.               To rewrite equation (5) in terms of the

marginal density of income in high-exposure regions in 1990, apply the weights

                           f ( w | x , L ,00 )                     f ( w | x , L ,90 )
       θ H 90 → L00 =                          and θ H 90 → L90 =                        (6)
                          f ( w | x , H ,90 )                     f ( w | x , H ,90 )

which yields

                  [ θ H 90 → L00 − θ H 90 → L90 ] f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx    (7)

As in estimating equation (3), estimating equation (7) comes down to applying the

appropriate weighting function to a standard kernel density estimator.

       The changes in conditional income densities in equations (2) and (5) reflect in

part the impact of globalization and in part the impact of other aggregate shocks to the

Mexican economy. The difference between these changes amounts to a difference-in-

difference estimator, which evaluates the change in returns to observables in regions with



                                                                                               14
high exposure to globalization relative to the change in returns observables in regions

with low exposure to globalization. Putting equations (3) and (7) together,

        (   f ( w | x, H ,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx − f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx −)
        (                                                                         )
            f ( w | x, L,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx − f ( w | x , L,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx =

            (θ H 90→H 00 − 1)− (θ H 90→L00 −θ H 90→L90 ) f ( w | x,H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx
                                                                                                 (8)

Equation (8) shows the 1990-to-2000 change income distribution in high-exposure

regions relative to low-exposure regions, holding the distribution of observables constant.

I use equation (8) to evaluate the impact of globalization on income distribution in

Mexico. The choice of the high-exposure region in 1990 as the base case is purely

arbitrary and should not affect the density difference. To check the robustness of the

results, I will discuss estimates using other base cases.

       To estimate the weighting functions in (4) and (6), I use Leibbrandt, Levinsohn,

and McCrary’s (2004) extension of the DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996). Applying

Bayes’ Axiom to the weighting equations yields,

                  f ( w | x , H ,00 )   Pr( t = 00 ,i = H ) | w, x ) 1 − Pr( t = 00 ,i = H ) | x )
θ H 90 → H 00 =                       =
                  f ( w | x , H ,90 ) 1 − Pr( t = 00 ,i = H ) | w, x ) Pr( t = 00 ,i = H ) | x )

                   f ( w | x , L ,00 )   Pr( t = 00 ,i = L ) | w, x ) 1 − Pr( t = 00 ,i = L ) | x )
θ H 90 → L00 =                         =
                  f ( w | x , H ,90 ) 1 − Pr( t = 00 ,i = L ) | w, x ) Pr( t = 00 ,i = L ) | x )

                   f ( w | x , L ,90 )   Pr( t = 90 ,i = L ) | w, x ) 1 − Pr( t = 90 ,i = L ) | x )
θ H 90 → L 90 =                        =
                  f ( w | x , H ,90 ) 1 − Pr( t = 90 ,i = L ) | w, x ) Pr( t = 90 ,i = L ) | x )

                                                                                                 (9)

Each weighting function is the product of odds ratios. Consider the first weight. The

first ratio is the odds an individual is from a high-exposure region in 2000 (based on a


                                                                                                       15
sample of individuals from high-exposure regions in 1990 and 2000), conditional on

observables, x, and labor income, w. The second ratio is the (inverse) odds an individual

is from a high-exposure region in 2000 (again, based on a sample of individuals from

high-exposure regions in 1990 and 2000), conditional on just on x. I can estimate the

odds ratios by estimating two logit models. In each case, the dependent variable is a 0-1

variable on the outcome i=H and t=00 (based on a sample of i=H and t=90 or 00). For

the first logit model, the regressors are x and w; for the second, the regressor is x, alone.

The other weights can be estimated analogously.

       After estimating the weights, I apply them to a standard kernel density estimator

to obtain estimates for the densities described by equations (3), (7), and (9). These

estimates are for the difference in income densities, in the case of (3) and (7), and for the

double difference in income densities, in the case of equation (9).



3.2 A Parametric Analog

       The advantage of the approach described in section 3.1 is that it characterizes the

difference in income across time periods and/or regions at all points in the distribution.

The disadvantage is that there are no standard errors for these density differences. To

examine the statistical significance of the results, I estimate a parametric analog to

equation (8), which is simply a difference-in-difference wage equation.

       I pool data on working age men in 1990 and 2000 from states with either high

exposure or low exposure to globalization and then estimate the following regression,

    ln whst = α s + X hst ( β 1 + β 2Y 2000ht + β 3 Highhs ) + φ * Y 2000ht * Highhs + ε hst

                                                                                        (10)




                                                                                               16
where w is labor market earnings, X is a vector of observed characteristics, Y2000 is a

dummy variable for the year 2000, and High is a dummy variable for high-exposure

states. The regression includes controls for state fixed effects and allows returns to

observable characteristics to vary across regions and across time. The coefficient, ,

captures the differential change in earnings from 1990 to 2000 between states with high-

exposure and low-exposure to globalization.

       Equation (10) is a standard difference-in-difference specification, which implies I

estimate the mean differential in wage growth between low-exposure and high-exposure

states. This approach ignores the possibility that the wage effect of being in a state with

high exposure to globalization may not be uniform throughout the wage distribution. The

results presented in the next section will provide evidence consistent with this possibility.

A more elegant approach would be to estimate the regional differential in wage changes

non-parametrically, as in the framework derived by Athey and Imbens (2003).



3.3 Estimation Issues

       Several estimation issues merit attention.       First, individuals self-select into

regions.   Individuals who have chosen to live in a state with high-exposure to

globalization may have relatively high drive or ambition and may have moved to the state

to take advantage of the opportunities globalization offers. Similarly, individuals who

have chosen not to leave states with low-exposure to globalization may have relatively

low drive or ambition. Given this pattern of selection, unobserved components of labor

income would tend to be positive for individuals in high-exposure states and negative for

individuals in low-exposure states. The estimation exercises in (9) and (10) would then

be polluted by systematic differences in unobserved characteristics between regions. To


                                                                                          17
avoid this problem, I categorize individuals by birth state and not by state of residence.

In this way, I pick up earnings differences in where people live based on where they were

born – a factor out of their control – and not on where they have chosen to reside – a

factor in their control. Consistent with expectations, in 1990 83% of those born in high-

exposure states still lived in those states, compared to only 73% of those born in low-

exposure states. In 2000, the figures were 82% and 70%.

          A second estimation issue is that individuals self-select into the labor force. This

is partly due to age. Over time, young workers enter the labor force and older workers

exit. To control for these movements, I limit the sample to the cohort of men who were

25 to 55 years old in 1990 (and 35 to 65 years old in 2000). Relatedly, if over the 1990’s

labor-market conditions improved by more in high-exposure states than in low-exposure

states, high-exposure states may have registered a larger increase the fraction of low-

ability individuals participating in the labor force.               Given this pattern of selection,

unobserved components of labor income may have increased by less in high-exposure

states and than in low-exposure states.8 To control for selection into the labor-force, I

follow Lee (2004) and trim low-wage earners across the four samples (i.e., for i=H,L and

t=90,00) such that the fraction included in the estimation is the same for each group.

          A third estimation issue is that shocks other than globalization may have had

differential impacts on regions with high versus low exposure to globalization. One such

shock is the pesos crisis of 1995. After a bungled devaluation of the peso in 1994,

Mexico chose to float its currency, which proceeded to plummet in value relative to the

dollar.     The ensuing increase in the peso value of dollar-denominated liabilities


8
 This suggests that selection into the labor force would work against selection into regions, in terms of the
impact on unobserved components of earnings.


                                                                                                         18
contributed to a banking collapse and a severe macroeconomic contraction. It is hard to

gauge whether the peso crisis would have hurt states with high exposure to globalization

more or less than states with low exposure. On the one hand, high-exposure states are

more specialized in the production of exports and the devaluation of the peso would have

increased demand for their output. On the other hand, high-exposure states are better

integrated into Mexico’s financial markets and the banking collapse may have hurt them

more. Other important shocks in the 1990’s included a reform of Mexico’s land tenure

system in 1992, the ongoing privatization of state-owned enterprises and deregulation of

industries, and the ruling party’s loss of majority control in Mexico’s congress in 1997.

Again, it is hard to say whether these shocks would have helped or hurt high-exposure

states more. The existence of these other shocks leaves the results subject to the caveat

that factors other than globalization may have accounted for any differential change in

income distribution across regions of the country. I return to this issue in section 5.



4. Empirical Results

         The sample for the analysis is men aged 25 to 55 in 1990 or 35 to 65 in 2000 who

were born in one of the seven Mexican states with high-exposure to globalization or in

one of the ten Mexican states with low-exposure to globalization.                                The dependent

variable is log average hourly labor earnings.9 I also discuss results using log total labor

income as the dependent variable. Summary statistics are in Table 4.




9
  For Mexico, average hourly wages are calculated as monthly labor income/(4.5*hours worked last week); for the
U.S., average hourly wages are calculated as annual labor income/(weeks worked last year*usual hours worked per
week). Assuming individuals work all weeks of a month could bias wage estimates downwards. To avoid
measurement error associated with implausibly low wage values or with top coding of earnings, I restrict the sample to
be individuals with hourly wages between $0.05 and $20 (in 2000 dollars). This restriction is nearly identical to
dropping the largest and smallest 0.5% of wage values.


                                                                                                                  19
4.1 Raw Income Distributions

         To provide a starting point for the analysis, consider the raw distributions of labor

income in states with either high exposure or low exposure to globalization. Figure 9

shows kernel density estimates for hourly labor earnings in 1990 and 2000. In both

years, the density for high-exposure states is shifted to the right compared to low-

exposure states. Between 1990 and 2000, the difference between the wage densities in

the two groups of states appears to widen. Higher wages in high-exposure states reflect

in part the fact these states have a more highly educated labor force, as indicated by Table

4. Higher wages in high-exposure states may also reflect differences in the returns to

observable characteristics across states in Mexico.

         To see what these distributional differences imply about differences in the

incidence of poverty between regions, Figure 10 shows the cumulative distribution for

wages in high-exposure and low-exposure states in the two years. The vertical line in

each graph shows the hourly wage needed to provide the minimum caloric intake for a

family of four with one wage earner working the mean number of annual labor hours in

that year.10 The peso value for the minimum caloric intake is from Cortes et al. (2003).

The poverty wage line in Figure 10 is not meant to provide an accurate indicator of the

fraction of individuals living in poverty. By focusing on labor income, I ignore other

sources of household earnings.                Government transfers, rental income, loans, in-kind

receipts, and remittances also supplement family income, suggesting that the implied

poverty wage threshold in Figure 10 is set too high – some families below this threshold

10
   In 1990, the implied poverty cutoff for the hourly wage was $1.16 in low-exposure regions and $1.25 in high-
exposure regions (in 2000 US dollars), and in 2000, it was $1.13 in low-exposure regions and $1.22 in high-exposure
regions. The poverty wage is lower in low-exposure regions because rural areas have lower prices for goods and
because a higher fraction of the population in low-exposure regions lives in rural areas. The line shown in Figure 9 is
that for the log poverty wage in low-exposure regions (in log terms the poverty wage in high-exposure and low-
exposure regions is nearly the same).


                                                                                                                   20
will receive enough income from other sources to allow them to afford a consumption

level that is above the poverty cutoff. Still, the poverty wage is a useful benchmark for

gauging the potential for a worker to sustain a family at above-poverty consumption

levels on labor income alone (which is two-thirds of total income in Mexico).

       In 1990, the fraction of workers earning less than the poverty cutoff wage in low-

exposure regions (0.42) is twice that in high-exposure regions (0.21). In 2000, the

difference is even larger, with the fraction of workers below the poverty wage at 0.49 in

low-exposure regions and 0.22 in high-exposure regions. While it appears that poverty

increased more rapidly in low-exposure regions, the results in Figure 10 are inconclusive.

Since both the price of labor and the composition of labor is changing across regions and

over time, we don’t know whether the apparent increase in the relative incidence of

poverty in low-exposure regions is due to a deterioration in the returns to observable

characteristics or to change in the relative composition of the labor force. To separate

these effects, I construct counterfactual income densities.



4.2 Counterfactual Income Distributions

       To control for regional differences in the distribution of observable

characteristics, I apply the weights in equation (9) to the kernel density for high-exposure

states in 1990. This produces the two sets of densities in Figure 11. The first graph

shows the actual income density in 1990 for high-exposure states and a counterfactual

density that would obtain were workers in high-exposure states in 1990 paid according to

the returns to observable characteristics in low-exposure states in 1990, or

          f ( w | x , L ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx = θ H 90 → L90 f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx




                                                                                                   21
Since the distribution of observable characteristics is the same in the actual and

counterfactual densities, comparing the two makes it possible to isolate the regional

differences in income densities that are attributable to regional differences in returns to

characteristics. In Figure 11, the density for high-exposure states in 1990 is again right-

shifted relative to low-exposure states, though the regional difference in incomes is

smaller than in Figure 9. Thus, even before Mexico’s globalization decade, incomes

were higher across the distribution in high-exposure states. These income differences

may be due to high-exposure states historically having better infrastructure, being more

specialized in the high-wage manufacturing sector, or being less specialized in the low-

wage agricultural sector, among other factors (see Chiquiar, 2003, for a more complete

discussion). This highlights the importance of controlling for initial income differences

between states when examining changes in income distributions over time.

       The second graph in Figure 11 shows income densities in 2000, evaluated based

on the distribution of observable characteristics in high-exposure states 1990. For high-

exposure states, the resulting counterfactual density is what workers in high-exposure

states in 2000 would earn were they to have the observable characteristics of workers in

high-exposure states in 1990, or

         f ( w | x , H ,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx = θ H 90 → H 00 f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx

For low-exposure states, the counterfactual is what workers in low-exposure states in

2000 would earn had they the characteristics of high-exposure states in 1990, or

         f ( w | x , L ,00 )h( x | H ,90 )dx = θ H 90 → L00 f ( w | x , H ,90 )h( x | H ,90 )dx

Comparing these counterfactuals isolates regional differences in income densities that are

due to differences in returns to characteristics, rather than to the distribution of


                                                                                                   22
observables. As in 1990, the density for high-exposure states in 2000 is right-shifted

relative to low-exposure states. Comparing the two years, it appears that differences in

income densities between high-exposure and low-exposure states have increased over

time, suggesting relative incomes have risen in the former.

       To relate the counterfactual wage densities to poverty, Figure 12 shows the

cumulative distribution analogues to the counterfactual wage kernels in Figure 11. The

first graph in Figure 12 thus shows the cumulative density for wages in high-exposure

and low-exposure states in 1990, based on the characteristics of workers in high-exposure

regions in 1990. Comparing this graph to the first graph in Figure 10, we again see that

the fraction of workers below the poverty wage is higher in low-exposure states (0.32)

than in high-exposure states (0.21). However, the difference in the incidence of wage

poverty between the two groups of states in Figure 12 (0.32-0.21=0.11) is considerably

lower than in Figure 10 (0.42-0.21=0.21).         Holding constant the distribution of

observable characteristics leaves the difference in cumulative distributions due to

differences in returns to observables. Again, the apparent higher initial incidence of

poverty in low-exposure states highlights the importance of controlling for initial

conditions when comparing changes in income distributions.

       The second graph in Figure 12 shows the cumulative density for wages in high-

exposure and low-exposure states in 2000, based on the characteristics of workers in

high-exposure regions in 1990. The fraction of workers earning less than the poverty

wage is 0.40 in low-exposure states and 0.22 in high-exposure states, which again is a

smaller difference (0.40-0.22=0.18) than that for the actual wage distributions in Figure

10 (0.49-0.22=0.27). Putting the 1990-to-2000 change in the incidence of wage poverty




                                                                                      23
for low-exposure versus high-exposure states together yields a difference-in-difference

estimate of (0.40-0.32)-(0.22-0.21)=0.07. During Mexico’s globalization decade of the

1990’s, the incidence of wage poverty in low-exposure states appeared to increase

relative to that in high-exposure states by approximately 7%.

       To explore these distributional changes in more detail, Figure 13 shows estimates

of equation (2) – the 1990-to-2000 change in income densities in high-exposure states –

and of equation (5) – the 1990-to-2000 change in income densities in low-exposure

states, where all densities are evaluated based on the distribution of observables in high-

exposure states in 1990 (as shown in equations (3) and (7)). In low-exposure states, there

was a pronounced shift in mass from the upper half of the distribution to the lower half of

the distribution. In high-exposure states, there was a modest shift in mass from the upper

part of the distribution to the middle of the distribution. While labor incomes in the

1990’s deteriorated in both regions, caused in part by Mexico’s peso crisis in 1995, the

deterioration was much less severe in states with high-exposure to globalization.

       The change in regional relative incomes is seen more clearly in Figure 14, which

shows an estimate of equation (8), the change in income density in high-exposure states

relative to the change in income density in low-exposure states (evaluated for the

distribution of observable characteristics in high-exposure states in 1990). It is clear that

the income of high-exposure states has increased relative to the income of low-exposure

states. This appears as shift in mass in the double density difference from the lower half

of the distribution to the upper half of the distribution. During Mexico’s globalization

decade, individuals born in states with high-exposure to globalization appear to have

done much better than individuals born in states with low-exposure to globalization.




                                                                                          24
       These results appear to be robust to changing the sample of states with either

high-exposure or low-exposure to globalization. In unreported results, I experimented

with dropping high-exposure states one at a time from the sample and re-estimating the

income densities and with dropping low-exposure states one at a time and re-estimating

the densities. Both sets of results are very similar to those reported.



4.3 Additional Results

       Throughout the analysis, we have evaluated labor income densities fixing the

distribution of observable characteristics to be those in states with high-exposure to

globalization in 1990. This choice of the base case is arbitrary and should not affect the

results. To examine the robustness of the findings, Figure 15 re-estimates the double

difference in income densities in equation (8), evaluating all densities based on the

distribution of observables in low-exposure states in 1990. Figure 15 is very similar to

Figure 14, confirming that the choice of base case does not matter for the results.

       The income densities shown so far are for average hourly labor earnings. If

changes in wages affect individual labor supply, changes in hourly labor earnings may

understate changes in total labor income. To see if this might be the case, Figure 16

estimates of the double density difference in equation (8), evaluated in terms of total

labor income rather than average hourly labor income. Figure 16 is similar to Figure 14,

suggesting that regional changes in the distribution of total labor income mirror regional

changes in the distribution of hourly labor income.

       In the results so far, I have included the full sample of workers from low-exposure

and high-exposure states in 1990 and 2000. One concern is that the nature of self-

selection into work varies across states or across time. If labor-force participation differs


                                                                                          25
between low-exposure and high-exposure states, then cross-section comparisons in wage

distributions may be contaminated by sample selection. If these differences are stable

over time, they may not pose a problem for comparing changes in wage distributions.

However, if labor-force participation changes differentially over time between low-

exposure and high-exposure states, then sample selection may also contaminate the

difference-in-difference analysis. For males with 9 or more years of education, labor-

force participation rates are very similar in low-exposure and high-exposure states. For

low-education males, labor-force participation rates are higher in high-exposure states

and these differences appear to increase over time. This suggests the data are missing

more low-wage workers in low-exposure state than in high-exposure states, which would

tend to compress the estimated difference in wage distributions for the two groups of

states. Further, since the relative fraction of missing low-wage workers in low-exposure

states rises over time, my estimates would tend to understate the full extend of the change

in relative wages between the two groups of states over time.

       To deal with sample selection associated with labor-force participation, I apply

Lee’s (2004) technique for trimming observations to make them comparable across

samples (which may vary by region, time, or some other dimension). The idea is that if

both wages and labor-force participation are monotonically increasing in the unobserved

component of wages, then it is possible to make two samples comparable in terms of the

distribution of unobservables by trimming low-wage observations in the group that has

higher labor force participation. We can’t add low-wage workers who don’t work into

the sample in the low-labor-force participation group, but we can drop from the sample

low-wage workers in the high-labor-force participation group (who presumably wouldn’t




                                                                                        26
work if they were to be placed in the other group). I trim low-wage workers from the

high-labor-force participation group until I obtain two samples that are identical in terms

of the fraction of wage earners included. Figures 17 and 18 redo Figures 13 and 14

applying Lee’s trimming procedure. It remains the case that wages deteriorate by more

in low-exposure states. Income in high-exposure states increases relative to income in

low-exposure states, which appears as shift in mass in the double density difference from

the lower half of the distribution to the upper half of the distribution. This is further

evidence that during Mexico’s globalization decade individuals born in states with high-

exposure to globalization have done relatively well in terms of their labor earnings.



4.4 Parametric Results

       While the non-parametric results a strong increase in relative incomes in states

with high exposure to globalization they give no sense of the statistical precision of these

estimates.   As a check on the statistical significance of the results, Table 5 shows

estimation results for equation (10). The dependent variable is log average hourly labor

earnings. The regressors are dummy variables for educational attainment, a quadratic in

age, a dummy variable for the year 2000 and its interaction with the age and education

variables, a dummy variable for having been born in a state with high-exposure to

globalization and its interaction with the age and education variables, dummy variables

for the state, and the interaction of the year 2000 and high-exposure-to-globalization

dummy variables. This last variable captures the differential change in wage growth in

high-exposure states relative to low-exposure states. Standard errors are adjusted for

correlation across observations within the same state.




                                                                                         27
       Panel (a) of Table 5 shows that during the 1990’s the cohort of individuals born in

states with high exposure to globalization enjoyed labor earnings growth that was 7.9 to

9.2 log points higher than earnings growth for individuals born in low-exposure states.

These coefficients are precisely estimated. This is consistent with the counterfactual

density estimates and again suggests than individuals in high-exposure states enjoyed

higher growth in labor income that individuals in low-exposure states. The second two

columns of Table 5 show results where the year200/high-exposure interaction is

interacted with a dummy variable for an individual having completed a secondary

education. This term allows relative earnings growth to be larger for more-educated

workers. The interaction term is negative, but imprecisely estimated.

       Panel (b) of Table 5 redoes the estimation, trimming observations across the

samples to account for possible self-selection into work. Estimated relative wage growth

for high-exposure states is higher using this estimation method, with individuals born in

high-exposure states enjoying labor earnings growth 9.0 to 10.9 log points higher than for

individuals born in low-exposure states. In the second two columns, the interaction

between the year200/high-exposure interaction and the dummy variable for secondary

education is negative, precisely estimated, and similar in absolute value to the main effect

(the year 2000/high-exposure interaction). This suggests that on average most of the

relative wage growth for individuals born in high-exposure states went to individuals

with low levels of schooling. The income gains in moving from low-exposure to high-

exposure states appear to be largest for low-wage workers.




                                                                                         28
5. Conclusion

       In this paper, I examine the change in the distribution of labor income across

regions of Mexico during the country’s decade of globalization in the 1990’s. I focus the

analysis on men born in states with either high-exposure to globalization or in states with

low-exposure to globalization, as measured by the share of foreign direct investment,

imports, and export assembly in state GDP during the 1990’s. Mexican states with high

exposure to globalization are located along the U.S. border and in the relatively skill-

abundant center-west region of the country; states with low exposure to globalization are

primarily located in more rural southern Mexico. I exclude from the analysis individuals

born in states with intermediate exposure to globalization.

       Controlling for regional differences in the distribution of observable

characteristics and for initial differences in regional incomes, the distribution of labor

income in high-exposure states shifted to the right relative to the distribution of income in

low-exposure states. This change in regional relative incomes was the result of a shift in

mass in the income distribution of low-exposure states from upper-middle income earners

to lower income earners. Labor income in low-exposure states fell relative to high-

exposure states by 8-12% and the incidence of wage poverty (the fraction of wage earners

whose labor income would not sustain a family of four at above-poverty consumption

levels) increased in low-exposure states relative to high-exposure states by 7%.

       There are several possible interpretations of these results. One is that trade and

investment liberalization raised incomes in states with high exposure to the global

economy relative to states with low exposure to the global economy. However, trade and

investment reforms were by no means the only shocks to the Mexican economy during




                                                                                          29
the 1990’s. The Mexican peso crisis in 1995 was another important event. The results

are also consistent with states that were more integrated into the global markets being

better able to weather the large devaluation of the peso, the banking crisis, and the

contraction in economic activity that occurred in Mexico during the mid 1990’s. High-

exposure states are relatively specialized in export production and would potentially

benefit from a depreciation of the currency.

       Other policy changes, such as the privatization and deregulation of Mexican

industry or the reform of Mexico’s land-tenure system, may also have had differential

regional impacts in Mexico. Privatization and deregulation appeared to weaken Mexico’s

unions and lower wage premiums enjoyed by workers in these sectors (Fairris, 2003).

Since more heavily unionized industries are concentrated in Mexico’s north and center,

and relatively absent in Mexico’s south (Chiquiar, 2003), we might expect a loss in union

power to lower relatives incomes in states with higher exposure to globalization, contrary

to what we observe in the data. The reform of Mexico’s land-tenure system allowed

individuals to sell agricultural land previously held in cooperative ownership.         In

principal we might expect this opportunity to raise relative incomes in rural southern

Mexico, where agriculture accounts for a relatively high share of employment and output.

Again, this is contrary to what we observe in the data.

       Another possibility is that income growth in high-exposure states merely reflects

continuing trends unrelated to globalization. This also does not appear to be the case. As

seen in Figure 6, poorer states, which includes seven of the ten states with low-exposure

to globalization, had faster growth in per capita income than richer states, which includes

six of the seven high-exposure states. The process of income convergence in Mexico




                                                                                        30
came to a halt in 1985, coinciding with the onset of trade liberalization. Since 1985,

regional incomes have diverged in the country. The pattern of income growth I uncover

does not appear to have been evident in the early 1980s or before.

       A brief review of Mexico’s other policy reforms during the 1990’s does not

suggest any obvious reason why they should account for the observed increase in relative

incomes in states with high-exposure to globalization. Still, it is important to be cautious

about ascribing shifts in regional relative incomes to specific policy changes. In the end,

we can only say that I find suggestive evidence that globalization has increased relative

incomes in Mexican states that are more exposed to global markets.




                                                                                         31
                                      References

Ariola, Jim and Chinhui Juhn.      2003.   “Wage Inequality in Post-Reform Mexico.”
Mimeo, University of Houston.

Athey, Susan and Guido Imbens. 2003. “Identification and Inference in Nonlinear
Difference-In-Difference Models,” mimeo, Stanford University.

Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelopi Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik. 2004. “Trade Reforms and Wage
Inequality in Colombia.” Journal of Development Economics, 74: 331-366.

Behrman, Jere, Nancy Birdsall, and Miguel Szekely. 2003. “Economic Policy and Wage
Differentials in Latin America.” Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Chiquiar, Daniel. 2003. Essays on the Regional Implications of Globalization: The Case of
Mexico. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, San Diego.

Chiquiar, Daniel. 2004. “Why Mexico’s Regional Income Convergence Broke Down.”
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.

Cortes, Fernando, Daniel Hernandez, Enrique Hernandez Laos, Miguel Szekely, and Hadid
Vera Llamas. 2003. “Evolucion y Caracteristicas de la Pobreza en Mexico en la Ultima
Decada del Siglo XX.” Economia Mexicana, XII(2): 295-328.

Cragg, Michael I. and Mario Epelbaum. 1996. “The Premium for Skills in LDCs:
Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 51(1): 99-116.

Currie, Janet, and Ann Harrison. 1997. “Trade Reform and Labor Market Adjustment in
Morocco.” Journal of Labor Economics, 15: S44-71.

Deaton, Angus and J. Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behavior. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

DiNardo, John, M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and
the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica
64(5): 1001-1044.
Durand, Jorge, Douglas S. Massey, and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. “Mexican Immigration
in the United States.” Latin American Research Review 36(1): 107-127.

Fairris, David H. 2003. Unions and Wage Inequality in Mexico. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 56(3): 481-97.

Feliciano, Zadia. 2001. “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms
in Mexico on Wages and Employment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(1): 95-
115.



                                                                                      32
Feenstra, Robert C. 1998. “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
Global Economy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12: 31-50.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. “Foreign Direct Investment and
Relative Wages: Evidence from Mexico'  s Maquiladoras.” Journal of International
Economics, 42(3-4): 371-394.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 2003. “Global Production and Inequality:
A Survey of Trade and Wages,” in James Harrigan, ed., Handbook of International
Trade, Basil Blackwell.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “Productivity Measurement and the
Impact of Trade and Technology on Wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1972-1990,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 114:907-940.

Freeman, Richard B., “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 9(1995):15-32.

Freeman, Richard B. 2003. “Trade Wars: The Exaggerated Impact of Trade in Economic
Debate.” NBER Working Paper no. 10000.

Goldberg, Pinelopi, and Nina Pavcnik. 2004. “Trade, Inequality, and Poverty: What Do
We Know? Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries.”
NBER Working Paper no. 10593.

Hansen, Niles. 1981. The Border Economy: Regional Development in the Southwest.
Austin: University of Texas Press.

Hanson, Gordon. 2004. “What Has Happened to Wages in Mexico since NAFTA?”, in
Toni Estevadeordal, Dani Rodrik, Alan Taylor, Andres Velasco, eds., FTAA and Beyond:
Prospects for Integration in the Americas, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann E. Harrison. 1999. Trade, Technology, and Wage Inequality
in Mexico. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(2): 271-288.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai. 2003. “The Impact of Outsourcing to China on Hong Kong’s Labor
Market,” Mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Katz, Lawrence F. and David Autor, “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1999, 1463-1555.

Lee, David. 2004. “Trimming for Bounds on Treatment Effects with Missing
Outcomes.” Mimeo, UC Berkeley.




                                                                                    33
Leibbrandt, Murray, James Levinsohn, and Justin McCrary. 2004. “Incomes in South
Africa since the Fall of Apartheid.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Nicita, Alessandro. 2004. “Who Benefited from Trade Liberalization in Mexico?
Measuring the Effects on Household Welfare.” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper No. 3265.

Pavcnik, Nina. 2003. “What Explains Skill Upgrading in Less Developed Countries?”
Journal of Development Economics, 71: 311-328.

Revenga, Anna L. 1997. Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The
Case of Mexican Manufacturing. Journal of Labor Economics 15(3): S20-43.

Richardson, J. David. 1995. “Income Inequality and Trade: How to Think, What to
Conclude.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9: 33-56.

Robertson, Raymond. 2000. “Wage Shocks and North American Labor Market
Integration.” American Economic Review 90(4): 742-764.

Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay. 2004. “Trade Liberalization
and Poverty: The Evidence So Far.” Journal of Economic Literature 42: 72-115.




                                                                              34
Table 1: Percent of Mexico’s Population with Per Capita Income below Threshold
Needed to Achieve Minimum Caloric Intake


           Area            1992        1994         1996      1998      2000
           Urban
           Households      10.2        7.2          20.1      16.4      9.8

           Rural
           Households      29.5        30           43.3      43.8      34.1
           Source: Cortés, et.al (2003).


Table 2: Correlation Matrix for Measures of Exposure to Globalization Across
Mexican States in the 1990’s


                        Maquiladora         Foreign Direct                Share of State
                        Value Added/         Investment/      Imports/ Population Migrating
                         State GDP            State GDP      State GDP  to US, 1995-2000

   Maquiladora
   Value Added/
    State GDP

   Foreign Direct          0.381
    Investment/
     State GDP

      Imports/             -0.008               0.582
     State GDP

   Share of State          -0.129              -0.371         -0.257
Population Migrating
 to US, 1995-2000

Notes: Shares of state GDP (maquiladora value added, foreign direct investment,
imports) are averages over the period 1993-1999. Correlations are weighted by state
share of the national population (averaged over 1990 to 2000).




                                                                                    35
 Table 3: Categorizing Mexican States by Exposure to Globalization in the 1990’s

                                      Average               Share of State GDP
                       State           Rank         FDI          Imports     Maquiladoras
                  Baja California       30         0.070          0.018         0.246
   High             Chihuahua           28         0.030          0.018         0.214
 Exposure          Nuevo Leon           28         0.039          0.027         0.023
     to               Sonora            27         0.015          0.034         0.088
Globalization         Jalisco           25         0.018          0.027         0.029
                   Tamaulipas           25         0.035          0.013         0.181
                  Aguascalientes        25         0.015          0.014         0.046

                       DF               22         0.055         0.058          0.000
                     Coahuila           22         0.011         0.014          0.077
                     Yucatan            21         0.005         0.023          0.031
                      Puebla            19         0.009         0.015          0.015
                Baja California Sur     19         0.032         0.011          0.008
 Intermediate    San Luis Potosi        18         0.028         0.011          0.013
     States        Guanajuato           18         0.009         0.014          0.008
                     Sinaloa            17         0.005         0.027          0.001
                     Tlaxcala           17         0.019         0.010          0.020
                    Queretaro           16         0.013         0.011          0.011
                     Durango            16         0.001         0.012          0.035
                     Tabasco            16         0.010         0.017          0.000
                     Morelos            15         0.024         0.010          0.005
                     Mexico             15         0.031         0.008          0.004
                    Michoacan           15         0.000         0.016          0.000

                   Zacatecas            15         0.003         0.013          0.008
    Low           Quintana Roo          12         0.006         0.011          0.000
 Exposure           Nayarit             10         0.006         0.011          0.000
     to             Colima               9         0.002         0.014          0.000
Globalization       Guerrero             9         0.004         0.007          0.002
                   Veracruz              8         -0.004        0.012          0.000
                    Chiapas              6         0.000         0.011          0.000
                   Campeche              5         0.001         0.008          0.000
                    Hidalgo              4         0.000         0.007          0.000
                    Oaxaca               2         0.000         0.005          0.000

Notes: Shares of state GDP (foreign direct investment, imports, maquiladora value
added) are averages over the period 1993-1999.


                                                                               36
                             Table 4: Summary Statistics


                                       High Exposure to           Low Exposure to
  Year                    Variable        Globalization             Globalization
                                       Mean St. Dev.              Mean      St. Dev.
  1990                       Age         33.6      5.9             33.9        5.9
           High Grade          0        0.055     0.229           0.132      0.338
               of           1 to 5      0.185     0.388           0.285      0.452
           Schooling        6 to 8      0.273     0.445           0.255      0.436
           Completed       9 to 11      0.208     0.406           0.141      0.348
                           12 to 15     0.139     0.346           0.100      0.300
                             16+        0.140     0.347           0.087      0.282
                            Wage        2.590     2.610           1.781      2.073
                              N        13,771                     19,352

  2000                       Age         43.0      5.7             43.2        5.8
           High Grade          0        0.036     0.187           0.093       0.290
               of           1 to 5      0.178     0.383           0.255       0.436
           Schooling        6 to 8      0.259     0.438           0.259       0.438
           Completed       9 to 11      0.207     0.405           0.157       0.364
                           12 to 15     0.142     0.349           0.109       0.312
                             16+        0.177     0.382           0.128       0.334
                            Wage        2.656     2.798           1.674       1.965
                              N        11,807                     17,967

Note: Sample is men with positive labor earnings aged 25-55 in 1990 or 35-65 in 2000
born in states with either high-exposure to globalization or low-exposure to globalization.
Wages are average hourly levels in 2000 U.S. dollars.




                                                                                        37
                              Table 5: Regression Results

                                                 Workers w/                      Workers w/
                                   All           20-80 Hour         All          20-80 Hour
                                  Workers        Work Week         Workers       Work Week

                                         (a) Full Sample of Workers

 Year 2000*High Exposure            0.092           0.079           0.115            0.116
                                   (0.039)         (0.033)         (0.053)          (0.050)

      Year 2000*High
        Exposure*                                                   -0.050           -0.079
    Secondary Education                                            (0.042)          (0.046)

              R                    0.337           0.373            0.337           0.373
              N                    45,012          42,298           45,012          42,298



                                   (b) Trimmed Sample to Account for Sample Selection

 Year 2000*High Exposure            0.109           0.090           0.159            0.153
                                   (0.029)         (0.025)         (0.040)          (0.039)

 Year 2000*High Exposure                                            -0.106           -0.130
  *Secondary Education                                             (0.031)          (0.034)

              R                     0.380           0.417            0.380           0.418
              N                    42,711          40,224           42,711          40,224

Notes: The dependent variable is log average hourly labor earnings. In columns 1 and 3,
the sample is non-self-employed males born in states with high exposure to globalization
or states with low exposure to globalization; in columns 2 and 4, the sample includes only
the non-self-employed who report working 20-80 hours a week. Other regressors
(quadratic in age, dummies for year of education, and their interactions with year 2000
dummy and with High Exposure dummy; year 2000 dummy variable; state dummy
variables) are not shown. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted for
correlation across observations within birth states. In panel (a), the sample is working
males in all states and time periods; in panel (b), I trim low-wage workers in high-labor-
force-participation state/year groups until the fraction of wage-earners is the same in low-
exposure and high-exposure states and in the two years.




                                                                                         38
                                                            Maquila Employment                 Maquila Value Added

                                                                                                                     1500
                                      1250


                                                                                                                     1250
                                      1000
    (000s of Workers)




                                                                                                                            (Millions of 94$)
                                                                                                                             Value Addedd
       Employment




                                                                                                                     1000

                                      750

                                                                                                                     750

                                      500
                                                                                                                     500


                                      250
                                                                                                                     250
                                                    1985              1990              1995              2000
                                                           Employment and Value Added in Mexico's Maquiladoras


                                                                         Figure 1



                               1.00
Share of National Employment




                               0.95




                               0.90




                               0.85




                               0.80
                                             1985                   1990               1995                 2000
                                                           Share of Maquiladora Employment in Border States


                                                                         Figure 2



                                                                                                                      39
                                     .3


                                          Baja Cal
Maquiladora Share of GDP, 1993-9




                                                   Chihuahu

                                     .2
                                          Tamaulip




                                     .1                   Sonora
                                                          Coahuila


                                                                                Aguascal
                                                                             Durango                                                                         Yucatan
                                                                                       Jalisco
                                                       Nu evo Le                                       T laxcala
                                                                              Sa n L uis Queretar         Puebla
                                                                           Zacateca Guanajua            Morelos          Baja Cal
                                                                                                    Mexico
                                                                                         Sin alo aMichoaca
                                                                                                  Hidalgo
                                                                                                      Nayarit
                                                                                                      DF Colima    GuerreroOaxaca Ta basco Chiapas Campeche
                                                                                                              Veracruz                                 Quintana
                                     0
                                             0                       500                  1000            1500                      2000                 2500
                                                                                          Kilometers to US Border

                                                                                          Figure 3



                                   .075
                                                                                                                                          Baja Cal




                                              DF
 FDI Share of GDP, 1994-99




                                    .05

                                                     Nuevo Le

                                                                                                                 T amaulip
                                             Baj a Cal
                                             Mexico
                                                                                                                             Chihuahu
                                               San Luis

                                   .025      Mor elo s

                                                   T laxcJalisc
                                                          ala o
                                                              Aguasc al         Sono ra
                                               Queretar
                                                                           Coahuila
                                          T abas co
                                             Guanajua
                                                 Puebla
                                           Quintana
                                            Nayarit
                                            Sinaloa
                                            Guerr ero  Yuc ata n
                                              Zacateca
                                            Colima      Dur ango
                                          Campeche
                                          Michoaca
                                           Chiapas
                                           Hidalgo
                                            Oaxaca
                                     0
                                           Verac ruz


                                              0                                     .1                        .2                                                 .3
                                                                                  Maquiladora Share of GDP, 1993-9

                                                                                          Figure 4


                                                                                                                                                                 40
                             .075
                                                                  B aja Cal




                                                                                                              DF
FD I Share of GDP, 1994-99




                              .05

                                                                                       Nuevo Le
                                                      T amaulip
                                                 Bo
                                              Mexic aja Cal
                                                                  Chi huah u
                                                  S an Luis

                             .025                 Morelos

                                                 T laxc ala                            J alis c o
                                                        A guas c al                                 S onora
                                                 Queretar
                                                         Co ahuila
                                                        Guanajua
                                                           P uebT abas
                                                                   la c o
                                                   Quintana
                                                  Nayarit
                                           Guerrero Zac atec a                 Yuc a tanS inaloa
                                                         Colima
                                                     Dur ango
                                          HiCam
                                              a pec
                                            dalgo
                                        Oaxac    Chiapas
                                                    he      Mi c ho ac a
                               0
                                                    V erac ruz


                                    0                                   .02                      .04               .06
                                                                        Import Share of GDP, 1993-99



                                                                              Figure 5




                                                                                                                   41
                                  Annual Growth 1970-1985 vs. Initial GDP
                          0.06

                          0.05




       Growth 1970-1985
                          0.04

                          0.03

                          0.02

                          0.01

                             0
                                 8.0     8.4     8.8     9.2     9.6        10.0
                                               Log GDP 1970



                                  Annual Growth 1985-2001 vs. Initial GDP
                          0.04

                          0.03
     Growth 1985-2001




                          0.02

                          0.01

                          0.00

                          -0.01

                          -0.02
                                  8.4    8.8     9.2      9.6    10.0       10.4
                                                Log GDP 1985


Figure 6: Growth in Log GDP across Mexican States, 1970-2001




                                                                                   42
                                                           Zacateca
                                         .15

                                                      Michoaca
Househlds w/ Migrant in US, 2000


                                                                    Guanajua


                                          .1
                                                        Durango
                                                                               Aguascal
                                                      Hidalgo                                     Morelo s Luis
                                                                                                       San
                                                                 Nayarit
                                                                                      J alisco
                                                              Guerrero
                                                          Colima
                                                                              Queretar
                                                      Oaxac a
                                         .05                        Puebla
                                                                                                        Chihuahu
                                                              Sinaloa
                                               Veracruz                                                        T amaulip
                                                                           Coahuila    T laxcala           Mexico
                                                                                                                     Nuevo Le           Baja Cal
                                                                                 Sonora                                            DF
                                                                                                               Baja Cal
                                                      CampecYucatan
                                                       Chiapashe
                                                              Quintana
                                                                   T abasco

                                          0
                                                          0                                         .025                    .05                  .075
                                                                                                   FDI Share of GDP, 1994-99

                                                                                                    Figure 7




                                                                             Zacateca
                                         .15

                                                                                  Mi cho aca
      Househlds w/ Migrant in US, 2000




                                                                               Guanajua


                                          .1
                                                                          Durango
                                                                             Aguascal
                                                                HidalgoMorelos
                                                                       San Luis
                                                                        Nayarit
                                                                                                            Jalisco
                                                                Guerrero
                                                                               Colima
                                                                         Queretar
                                                           Oaxaca
                                         .05                                         Chi huah u
                                                                                 Pueb la
                                                                                                           Sinaloa
                                                                         Veracruz
                                                                           T amaulip
                                                                   Mexico
                                                                     T laxcalaCo ahuila
                                                                                     Baja Cal              Nuevo Le
                                                                                                                          Sonora            DF
                                                                     Baja Cal
                                                                 Campeche                           Yuca tan
                                                                     Chiapas
                                                                      Quintana        T abasco

                                           0
                                                  0                                              .02                      .04                    .06
                                                                                                 Import Share of GDP, 1993-99

                                                                                                    Figure 8




                                                                                                                                                        43
         Figure 9: Density of Hourly Labor Income in States with
     High Exposure and Low Exposure to Globalization, 1990 and 2000


.6
.4
.2
0




     -4              -2              0              2                 4
                                    lnw

                            High 1990          Low 1990
.6
.4
.2
0




     -4              -2              0              2                 4
                                    lnw

                            High 2000          Low 2000
Figure 10: Cumulative Distribution of Hourly Labor Income in States with
    High Exposure and Low Exposure to Globalization, 1990 and 200


 1
 .8
 .6
 .4
 .2
 0




      -4            -2               0               2               4
                                    lnw

                           High 1990           Low 1990
 1
 .8
 .6
 .4
 .2
 0




      -4            -2               0               2               4
                                    lnw

                           High 2000           Low 2000




                                                                           45
                                  Figure 11:
Counterfactual Income Densities, High and Low-Exposure States, 1990 and 2000

 .6
 .4
 .2
 0




      -4              -2               0                2                4
                                      lnw

                             High 1990           Low 1990
 .6
 .4
 .2
 0




      -4              -2               0                2                4
                                      lnw

                             High 2000           Low 2000



                                                                             46
          Figure 12: Counterfactual Cumulative Income Distributions,
                 High and Low-Exposure States, 1990 and 2000


1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     -4                -2               0               2              4
                                       lnw

                              High 1990           Low 1990
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     -4                -2               0               2              4
                                       lnw

                              High 2000           Low 2000




                                                                           47
                                           Figure 13: Estimated Change in Labor Income Densities, 1990 to 2000

 .04
 .02
 0
 -.02
 -.04
 -.06




                                               -4                        -2                     0            2                    4
                                                                                               lnw

                                                                   Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]          Density Diff: [00Lo-90Lo]




                                                              Figure 14: Double Difference in Labor Income Densities
                                                   .06
 Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]-[00Lo-90Lo], 90Hi base case
-.04      -.02         0        .02       .04




                                                         -4                -2                    0            2                   4
                                                                                                lnw


                                                                                                                                      48
Figure 15: Double Difference in Labor Income Densities (Alternative Base Case)


 Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]-[00Lo-90Lo], 90Lo base case
  -.02      -.01       0        .01      .02     .03




                                                         -4              -2              0               2              4
                                                                                        lnw


                                                         Figure 16: Double Difference in Total Labor Income Densities
                                                   .06
 Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]-[00Lo-90Lo], 90Hi base case
  -.04       -.02       0        .02      .04




                                                         0           2            4            6             8          10
                                                                                        lnw




                                                                                                                             49
  Figure 17: Estimated Change in Labor Income Densities, 1990 to 2000,
      with Observations Trimmed to Account for Selection into Work


.15
.1
.05
0
-.05




                                                               0                      1                2                       3
                                                                                               lnw

                                                                   Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]         Density Diff: [00Lo-90Lo]



                                                 Figure 18: Double Difference in Labor Income Densities,
                                              with Observations Trimmed to Account for Selection into Work
                                                         .05
     Density Diff: [00Hi-90Hi]-[00Lo-90Lo], 90Hi base case
   -.1                -.05              0




                                                                   0                      1            2                   3
                                                                                               lnw



                                                                                                                                   50
