NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM-SPECIFIC CAPITAL, NOMINAL RIGIDITIES
AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
David Altig
Lawrence J. Christiano
Martin Eichenbaum
Jesper Linde
Working Paper 11034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11034
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

We are grateful for the comments of David Andolfatto, Gadi Barlevy, Andy Levin and Harald Uhlig. In
addition we have benefitted from the reactions of the participants in the Third Banco de Portugal Conference
in Monetary Economics, Lisbon, Portugal, June 10, 2004, as well as in the conference on Dynamic Models
and Monetary Policymaking, September 22-24, 2004, held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. We
are also grateful for the comments of the participants in the ‘Impulses and Propagations’ workshop of the
NBER Summer Institute in the week of July 19, 2004. Finally, we are particularly grateful for the insights
and for the research assistance of Riccardo DiCecio. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by David Altig, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
David Altig, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde
NBER Working Paper No. 11034
January 2005
JEL No. E3, E4, E5
ABSTRACT
Macroeconomic and microeconomic data paint conflicting pictures of price behavior.
Macroeconomic data suggest that inflation is inertial. Microeconomic data indicate that firms change
prices frequently. We formulate and estimate a model which resolves this apparent micro - macro
conflict. Our model is consistent with post-war U.S. evidence on inflation inertia even though firms
re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters. The key feature of our model is that capital
is firm-specific and pre-determined within a period.
David Altig
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
david.e.altig@clev.frb.org
Lawrence Christiano
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
Jesper Linde
Sveriges Riksbank
jesper.linde@riksbank.se

1. Introduction
Microeconomic and macroeconomic and data paint conflicting pictures of price behavior.
Microeconomic data indicate that firms change prices frequently. Macroeconomic data suggest that inflation is inertial. The conflict is obvious in recent macroeconomic models which
account for inflation inertia by assuming that firms re-optimize their prices every six quarters or even less often.1 The assumption in these models seems implausible to us. We are
sympathetic to the view taken by Bils and Klenow (2004), Golosov and Lucas (2003) and
Klenow and Kryvtsov (2004) that firms re-optimize prices more frequently than once every
2 quarters.2
We formulate and estimate a model which resolves the apparent micro-macro pricing
conflict. Our model is consistent with the evidence of inflation inertia even though firms
re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters. In addition, our model accounts for
the dynamic response of 10 key U.S. macro time series to monetary policy shocks, neutral
technology shocks and capital embodied shocks.3
In our model aggregate inflation is inertial despite the fact that firms change prices frequently. The inertia reflects that when they do change prices, they do so by a small amount.
Firms change prices by a small amount because each firm’s short run marginal cost curve is
increasing in its own output.4 This positive dependency reflects our assumption that in any
given period, a firm’s capital stock is predetermined. In standard equilibrium business cycle
models a firm’s capital stock is not pre-determined and all factors of production, including capital, can be instantaneously transferred across firms, without any cost, in perfectly
competitive markets. These assumptions are empirically unrealistic but are defended on the
grounds of tractability. The hope is that these assumptions are innocuous and do not aﬀect
major model properties. In fact these assumptions matter a lot.
In our model, a firm’s capital is pre-determined and can only be changed over time by
varying the rate of investment. These properties follow from our assumption that capital is
completely firm-specific.5 Our assumptions about capital imply that a firm’s marginal cost
1

For example, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004) find that estimated versions
of standard Calvo pricing models imply that firms re-optimize prices roughly once every six quarters. Smets
and Wouters’ (2003) estimate that firms re-optimize prices on average once every nine quarters.
2
For example, in calibrating their model to the micro data, Golosov and Lucas (2003, Table 1, page 20)
select parameters to ensure that firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters.
3
See also DiCecio (2004) for a multi-sectoral general equilibrium model which allows for the same three
shocks that we consider. Also, Edge (2004) considers a general equilibrium model with two types of technology shocks.
4
For early discussions of this idea, see Ball and Romer (1990) and Kimball (1995).
5
See, for example, Sbordone (2002) for an early example of a dynamic general equilibrium model with
firm-specific capital. Unlike our model, Sbordone assumes that a firm can never change the quantity of
its capital. Our approach follows Woodford (2003, 2004) most closely, in allowing for firm-specific capital
and the possibility of investment. Other recent work which allows for firm-specific capital includes Coenen

2

curve depends positively on its output level.6 To see the impact of this dependence on pricing
decisions, consider a firm that contemplates raising its price. The firm understands that a
higher price implies less demand and less output. A lower level of output reduces marginal
cost, which other things equal, induces a firm to post a lower price. Thus, the dependence of
marginal cost on firm-level output acts as a countervailing influence on a firm’s incentives to
raise price. This countervailing influence is why aggregate inflation responds less to a given
aggregate marginal cost shock when capital is firm-specific.
Anything, including firm-specificity of some other factor of production or adjustment
costs in labor, which causes a firm’s marginal cost to be an increasing function of its output
works in the same direction as firm-specificity of capital. This fact is important because our
assumption that the firm’s entire stock of capital is predetermined probably goes too far
from an empirical standpoint.
We conduct our analysis using two versions of the model analyzed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005): in one, capital is homogeneous whereas in the other, it is firmspecific. We refer to these models as the homogeneous and firm-specific capital models,
respectively. We show that the only diﬀerence between the log-linearized equations characterizing equilibrium in the two models pertains to the equation relating inflation to marginal
costs. The form of this equation is identical in both models: inflation at time t is equal to
discounted expected inflation at time t + 1 plus a reduced form coeﬃcient, γ, multiplying
time t economy-wide average real marginal cost. The diﬀerence between the two models lies
in the mapping between the structural parameters and γ.
In the homogeneous capital model, γ depends only on agents’ discount rates and on the
fraction, 1 − ξ p , of firms that re-optimize prices within the quarter. In the firm-specific
capital model, γ is a function of a broader set of the structural parameters. For example, the
more costly it is for a firm to vary capital utilization, the steeper is its marginal cost curve
and hence the smaller is γ. A diﬀerent example is that in the firm-specific capital model,
the parameter γ is smaller the more elastic is the firm’s demand curve.7 This result reflects
that the more elastic is a firm’s demand, the greater is the reduction in demand and output
in response to a given price increase. A bigger fall in output implies a bigger fall in marginal
cost which reduces a firm’s incentive to raise its price.
The only way that ξ p enters into the reduced form of the two models is via this parameter’s
impact on γ. If we parameterize the two models in terms of γ rather than ξ p , they have
identical implications for all aggregate quantities and prices. This observational equivalence
and Levin (2004), de Walque Smets and Wouters (2004), Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004), Sveen and Weinke
(2004a,b).
6
A closely related assumption is that capital is not firm-specific, but there are internal costs of adjusting
capital
7
See Ball and Romer (1990) and Kimball (1995) for an early discussion of this point.

3

result implies that we can estimate the model in terms of γ without taking a stand on
whether capital is firm-specific or homogeneous.
The observational equivalence result also implies that we cannot assess the relative plausibility of the homogeneous and firm-specific capital models using macro data. However, the
two models have very diﬀerent implications for micro data. To assess the relative plausibility
of the two models, we focus on the mean time between price re-optimization, and the dynamic response of the cross - firm distribution of production and prices to aggregate shocks.
These implications depend on the parameters of the model, which we estimate.
We follow Christiano et al (2005) in choosing model parameter values to minimize the
diﬀerences between the dynamic response to shocks in the model and the analog objects
estimated using a vector autoregressive representation of 10 post-war quarterly U.S. time
series. To compute vector autoregression (VAR) based impulse response functions, we use
identification assumptions satisfied by our economic model: the only shocks that aﬀect
productivity in the long run are innovations to neutral and capital-embodied technology;
the only shock that aﬀects the price of investment goods in the long run is an innovation to
capital-embodied technology;8 monetary policy shocks have a contemporaneous impact on
the interest rate, but they do not have a contemporaneous impact on aggregate quantities
and prices. We estimate that together these three shocks account for almost 50 percent of
cyclical fluctuations in aggregate output and other aggregate quantities.
We now discuss the key properties of our estimated model. First, the model does a
good job of accounting for the estimated response of the economy to both monetary policy
and technology shocks. Second, according to our point estimates, households re-optimize
wages on average once every 3.6 quarters. Third, our point estimate of γ is 0.040. In the
homogeneous capital version of the model, this value of γ implies that firms change prices
on average once every 5.6 quarters. But in the firm-specific capital model, this value of γ
implies that firms change price on average once every 1.5 quarters. The reason why the
models have such diﬀerent implications for firms’ pricing behavior is that according to our
estimates, firms’ demand curves are highly elastic and their marginal cost curves are very
steep.
Finally, we show that the two versions of the model diﬀer sharply in terms of their
implications for the cross-sectional distribution of production. In the homogeneous capital
model, a very small fraction of firms produce the bulk of the economy’s output in the
periods after a monetary policy shock. The implications of the firm-specific model are much
less extreme. We conclude that both the homogeneous and firm-specific capital models
can account for inflation inertia and the response of the economy to monetary policy and
technology shocks. But only the firm-specific model can reconcile the micro-macro pricing
8

Our strategy for identifying technology shocks follows Fisher (2003).

4

conflict without obviously unpalatable micro implications.
The quality of our estimation strategy depends on the ability of identified VARs to
generate reliable estimates of the dynamic response of economic variables to shocks. The
literature reports several examples in which VAR methods for estimating dynamic response
functions are inaccurate.9 In Appendix A we discuss the reliability of VAR methods in our
application. We assess these methods using Monte Carlo simulation methods. We proceed
by generating artificial data using our estimated equilibrium model. Because there are only
three shocks in our model, we must introduce additional sources of variation in the data
generating mechanism to estimate our 10-variable VAR with artificial data. The way these
disturbances are selected has an important impact on the outcome of the Monte Carlo
simulations.10 Our estimated VAR provides a natural estimate of this source of variation.
We find that in terms of bias and sampling uncertainty, the Monte Carlo performance of our
VAR based estimates of impulse response functions is very good.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe our basic model economy.
Section 3 describes our VAR-based estimation procedure. Section 4 presents our VAR-based
impulse response functions and their properties. Sections 5 and 6 present and analyze the
results of estimating our model. Section 7 discusses the implications of the homogeneous
and firm-specific capital models for the cross-firm distribution of prices and production in
the wake of a monetary policy shock. Section 8 discusses the accuracy of our VAR based
estimator of impulse response functions. Section 9 concludes.

2. The Model Economy
In this section we describe the homogeneous and firm-specific capital models.
2.1. The homogeneous capital Model
The model economy is populated by goods-producing firms, households and the government.
2.1.1. Final Good Firms
At time t, a final consumption good, Yt , is produced by a perfectly competitive, representative
firm. The firm produces the final good by combining a continuum of intermediate goods,
9

See, for example, Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2004), Cooley and Dwyer (1998), and Erceg, Guerrieri
and Gust (2003).
10
For example, Erceg, Guerrieri and Gust (2003) suggest that if the shocks excluded from the model
analysis have persistent (though not permanent) eﬀects on labor productivity, VAR methods will, in small
samples, tend to confound the eﬀects of these with the eﬀects of neutral and capital-embodied technology
shocks.

5

indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], using the technology
∙Z 1
¸λf
1
λf
Yt =
yt (i) di
,

(2.1)

0

where 1 ≤ λf < ∞ and yt (i) denotes the time t input of intermediate good i. The firm takes
its output price, Pt , and its input prices, Pt (i), as given and beyond its control. The first
order necessary condition for profit maximization is:
µ

Pt
Pt (i)

¶ λλf−1
f

=

yt (i)
.
Yt

(2.2)

Integrating (2.2) and imposing (2.1), we obtain the following relationship between the price
of the final good and the price of the intermediate good:
Pt =

∙Z

1

Pt (i)

1
1−λf

0

¸(1−λf )
di
.

(2.3)

2.1.2. Intermediate Good Firms
Intermediate good i ∈ (0, 1) is produced by a monopolist using the following technology:
yt (i) =

½

Kt (i)α (zt ht (i))1−α − φzt∗ if Kt (i)α (zt ht (i))1−α ≥ φzt∗
0
otherwise

(2.4)

where 0 < α < 1. Here, ht (i) and Kt (i) denote time t labor and capital services used
to produce the ith intermediate good. The variable, zt , represents a time t shock to the
technology for producing intermediate output. We refer to zt as a neutral technology shock
and denote its growth rate, zt /zt−1 , by µzt . The non-negative scalar, φ, parameterizes fixed
costs of production. The variable, zt∗ , is given by:
α

zt∗ = Υt1−α zt ,

(2.5)

where Υt represents a time t shock to capital embodied technology. We choose the structure
of the firm’s fixed cost in (2.5) to ensure that the nonstochastic steady state of the economy
exhibits balanced growth path. We denote the growth rate of zt∗ and Υt by µzt∗ and µΥt
respectively, so that:
¡
¢ α
µz∗ ,t = µΥ,t 1−α µz,t
(2.6)

Throughout, we rule out entry into and exit from the production of intermediate good i.
Let µ̂z,t denote (µz,t − µz )/µz , where µz is the growth rate of µz,t in non-stochastic steady
state. We define all variables with a hat in an analogous manner. The variables µ̂z,t evolves
according to:
µ̂z,t = ρµz µ̂z,t−1 + εµz ,t
(2.7)
6

where |ρµZ | < 1 and εµZ ,t is uncorrelated over time and with all other shocks in the model.
We denote the standard deviation of εµZ ,t by σ µz . Similarly, we assume:
µ̂Υ,t = ρµΥ µ̂Υ,t−1 + εµΥ ,t ,

(2.8)

where εµΥ ,t has the same properties as εµz ,t . We denote the standard deviation of εµΥ ,t by
σ µΥ .
Intermediate good firms rent capital and labor in perfectly competitive factor markets.
Profits are distributed to households at the end of each time period. Let Pt rtk and Pt wt denote
the nominal rental rate on capital services and the wage rate, respectively. We assume that
the firm must borrow the wage bill in advance at the gross interest rate, Rt .
Firms set prices according to a variant of the mechanism spelled out in Calvo (1983). In
each period, an intermediate goods firm faces a constant probability, 1 − ξ p , of being able to
re-optimize its nominal price. The ability to re-optimize prices is independent across firms
and time. As in Christiano et al (2005), we assume that a firm which cannot re-optimize its
price sets Pt (i) according to:
Pt (i) = π t−1 Pt−1 (i).
(2.9)
Here, πt denotes aggregate inflation, Pt /Pt−1 .
An intermediate goods firm’s objective function is:
Et

∞
X
j=0

¢¤
£
¡
k
β j υ t+j Pt+j (i)yt+j (i) − Pt+j wt+j Rt+j ht+j (i) + rt+j
Kt+j (i) ,

(2.10)

where Et is the expectation operator conditioned on time zero information. The term,
β t υ t+j , is proportional to the state-contingent marginal value of a dollar to a household.11
Also, β is a scalar between zero and unity. The timing of events for a firm is as follows.
At the beginning of period t, the firm observes the technology shocks and sets its price,
Pt (i). Then, a shock to monetary policy is realized, as is the demand for the firm’s product.
The firm then chooses productive inputs to satisfy this demand. The problem of the ith
intermediate good firm is to choose prices, employment and capital services, subject to the
timing and other constraints described above, to maximize (2.10).
2.1.3. Households
There is a continuum of households, indexed by j ∈ (0, 1). The sequence of events in a
period for a household is as follows. First, the technology shocks are realized. Second,
the household makes its consumption and investment decisions; decides how many units
of capital services to supply to rental markets; and purchases securities whose payoﬀs are
11

The constant of proportionality is the probability of the relevant state of the world.

7

contingent upon whether it can re-optimize its wage decision. Third, the household sets its
wage rate. Fourth, the monetary policy shock is realized. Finally, the household allocates
its beginning of period cash between deposits at the financial intermediary and cash to be
used in consumption transactions.
Each household is a monopoly supplier of a diﬀerentiated labor service, and sets its wage
subject to Calvo-style wage frictions. In general, households earn diﬀerent wage rates and
work diﬀerent amounts. A straightforward extension of arguments in Erceg, Henderson,
and Levin (2000) and Woodford (1996) establishes that in the presence of state contingent
securities, households are homogeneous with respect to consumption and asset holdings. Our
notation reflects this result.
The preferences of the j th household are given by:
∙
¸
∞
X
h2j,t+l
j
l−t
Et
log (Ct+l − bCt+l−1 ) − ψL
β
,
(2.11)
2
l=0
where ψL ≥ 0 and Etj is the time t expectation operator, conditional on household j’s time t
information set. The variable, Ct , denotes time t consumption and hjt denotes time t hours
worked. When b > 0, (2.11) exhibits habit formation in consumption preferences.
The household’s asset evolution equation is given by:
Mt+1 = Rt [Mt − Qt + (xt − 1)Mta ] + Aj,t + Qt + Wj,t hj,t
¡
¢
It + a(ut )K̄t .
+Pt rtk ut K̄t + Dt − (1 + η (Vt )) Pt Ct − Pt Υ−1
t

(2.12)

Here, Mt , Qt and Wj,t denote the household’s beginning of period t stock of money, cash
balances and time t nominal wage rate, respectively. In addition, K̄t , ut , Dt and Aj,t denote,
the household’s physical stock of capital, the capital utilization rate, firm profits and the
net cash inflow from participating in state-contingent securities at time t. The variable xt
represents the gross growth rate of the economy-wide per capita stock of money, Mta . The
quantity (xt − 1)Mta is a lump-sum payment made to households by the monetary authority.
The household deposits Mt − Qt + (xt − 1)Mta with a financial intermediary. The variable,
Rt , denotes the gross interest rate.
The variable, Vt , denotes the time t velocity of the household’s cash balances:
Vt =

Pt Ct
,
Qt

(2.13)

where η(Vt ) is increasing and convex. The function η(Vt ) captures the role of cash balances
in facilitating transactions. Similar specifications have been used by a variety of authors
including Sims (1994) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004). For the quantitative analysis
of our model, we require the level and the first two derivatives of the transactions function,
η(V ), evaluated in steady state. We denote these by η, η 0 , and η 00 , respectively.
8

We now discuss how we parametrize η(V ). Our model implies that in steady state,
πµz∗
= R,
β

(2.14)

where a variable without a time subscript denotes its non-stochastic steady state value. In
addition, the first order condition for Qt is:
µ
¶µ
¶2
Pt Ct
Pt Ct
0
Rt = 1 + η
.
(2.15)
Qt
Qt
Let

t

denote the interest semi-elasticity of money demand:
t

t
100 × d log( Q
)
Pt
≡−
.
400 × dRt

(2.16)

Denote the curvature of η by ϕ:

η 00 V
ϕ= 0 .
(2.17)
η
Then, the first order condition for Qt implies that the interest semi-elasticity of money
demand in steady state is:
µ
¶µ
¶
1
1
1
=
.
(2.18)
4 R−1
2+ϕ

We parameterize η (·) indirectly using values for , V and η.
The remaining terms in (2.12) pertain to the household’s capital related income. The
services of capital, Kt , are related to stock of physical capital, K̄t , by
Kt = ut K̄t .

(2.19)

The term Pt rtk ut K̄t represents the household’s earnings from supplying capital services. The
function a(ut )K̄t denotes the cost, in investment goods, of setting the utilization rate to ut .
We assume a(ut ) is increasing and convex. These assumptions capture the idea that the
more intensely the stock of capital is utilized, the higher are maintenance costs in terms of
investment goods. We assume that ut = 1 in steady state and a(1) = 0. To implement our
log-linear solution method, we must specify a value for the curvature of a in steady state,
σ a = a00 (1)/a0 (1) ≥ 0. Although the steady state of the model does not depend on the value
of σa , the dynamics do. Given our solution procedure, we do not need to specify any other
features of the function a.
The household’s stock of physical capital evolves according to:
K̄t+1 = (1 − δ)K̄t + F (It , It−1 ),

(2.20)

where δ denotes the physical rate of depreciation and It denotes time t investment goods.
The function F summarizes the technology that transforms current and past investment into
9

installed capital for use in the following period. As in Christiano et al (2005), we assume
that investment adjustment costs are given by:
¶
µ
It
F (It , It−1 ) = (1 − S
)It .
(2.21)
It−1

The function S is assumed to be increasing, convex and satisfies: S = S 0 = 0, and S 00 > 0,
in steady state. Although the steady state of the model does not depend on the value of S 00 ,
the dynamics do. Given our solution procedure, we do not need to specify any other features
of the function S.
Note that in households’ budget constraint, the price of investment goods relative to
consumption goods is given by Υ−1
which we assume is an exogenous stochastic process.
t
One way to rationalize this assumption is that agents transform final goods into investment
goods using a linear technology with slope Υt . This rationalization also underlies why we
refer to Υt as capital embodied technological progress.
2.1.4. The Wage Decision
As in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), we assume that the j th household is a monopoly
supplier of a diﬀerentiated labor service, hjt . It sells this service to a representative, competitive firm that transforms it into an aggregate labor input, Lt , using the technology:
∙Z 1 1 ¸λw
λw
Ht =
hj,t
dj
, 1 ≤ λw < ∞.
(2.22)
0

The demand curve for hj,t is given by:

hj,t =

µ

Wt
Wjt

¶ λλw−1
w

Ht .

(2.23)

Here, Wt is the aggregate wage rate, i.e., the nominal price of Ht . It is straightforward to
show that Wt is related to Wj,t via the relationship:
∙Z 1
¸1−λw
1
1−λ
Wt =
(Wj,t ) w dj
.
(2.24)
0

The household takes Ht and Wt as given.
Households set their nominal wage according to a variant of the mechanism by which
intermediate good firms set prices. In each period, a household faces a constant probability,
1−ξ w , of being able to re-optimize its nominal wage. The ability to re-optimize is independent
across households and time. If a household cannot re-optimize its wage at time t, it sets Wjt
according to:
Wj,t = π t−1 µz∗ Wj,t−1 .
(2.25)

The presence of µz∗ in (2.25) implies that there are no distortions from wage dispersion along
the steady state growth path.
10

2.1.5. Monetary and Fiscal Policy
We adopt the following specification of monetary policy:
x̂t = x̂zt + x̂Υt + x̂Mt .
Here xt represents the gross growth rate of money, Mt /Mt−1 .We assume that
x̂M,t = ρxM x̂M,t−1 + εM,t

(2.26)

x̂z,t = ρxz x̂z,t−1 + cz εz,t + cpz εz,t−1
x̂Υ,t = ρxΥ x̂Υ,t−1 + cΥ εΥ,t + cpΥ εΥ,t−1
Here, εM,t represents a shock to monetary policy. We denote the standard deviation of εM,t
by σ M . The dynamic response of x̂M,t to εM,t is characterized by a first order autoregression,
so that ρjxM is the response of Et x̂t+j to a one-unit time t monetary policy shock. The term
x̂z,t captures the response of monetary policy to an innovation in neutral technology, εz,t .
We assume that x̂z,t is characterized by an ARMA(1,1) process. The term, x̂Υ,t , captures
the response of monetary policy to an innovation in capital embodied technology, εΥ,t . We
assume that x̂Υ,t is also characterized by an ARMA (1,1) process.
Finally, we assume that the government adjusts lump sum taxes to ensure that its intertemporal budget constraint holds.
2.1.6. Loan Market Clearing, Final Goods Market Clearing and Equilibrium
Financial intermediaries receive Mt − Qt + (xt − 1) Mt from the household. Our notation
reflects the equilibrium condition, Mta = Mt . Financial intermediaries lend all of their money
to intermediate good firms, which use the funds to pay labor wages. Loan market clearing
requires that:
Wt Ht = xt Mt − Qt .
(2.27)
The aggregate resource constraint is:
£
¤
(1 + η(Vt ))Ct + Υ−1
+
a(u
)
K̄
I
≤ Yt .
t
t
t
t

(2.28)

We adopt a standard sequence-of-markets equilibrium concept. In an appendix available
upon request, we discuss our computational strategy for approximating that equilibrium.
This strategy involves taking a linear approximation about the non-stochastic steady state
of the economy and using the solution method discussed in Christiano (2002).

11

2.2. The Firm - Specific Capital Model
In this model, firms own their own capital. The capital that the firm begins the period with
cannot be adjusted during the period. The firm can change its stock of capital by varying its
rate of investment. In all other respects the problem of intermediate good firms is the same
as before. In particular, they face the same demand curve, (2.2), production technology,
(2.4)-(2.8), and Calvo-style pricing frictions, including the updating rule given by (2.9).
The technology for accumulating physical capital by intermediate good firm i is given by
¶
µ
It (i)
F (It (i), It−1 (i)) = (1 − S
)It (i),
(2.29)
It−1 (i)
and
K̄t+1 (i) = (1 − δ)K̄t (i) + F (It (i), It−1 (i)).

(2.30)

The present discounted value of the ith intermediate good’s net cash flow is given by:
Et

∞
X
j=0

©
£
¤ª
β j υ t+j Pt+j (i)yt+j (i) − Pt+j Rt+j wt+j (i)ht (i) − Pt+j Υ−1
.
t+j It+j (i) + a (ut+j (i)) K̄(i)t+j

(2.31)
Time t net cash flow equals sales, less labor costs (inclusive of interest charges) less the costs
associated with capital utilization and capital accumulation.
The sequence of events as it pertains to the ith firm is as follows. At the beginning of
period t, the firm has a stock of physical capital, K̄t (i), which it takes as given. After observing the technology shocks, the firm sets its price, Pt (i), subject to the Calvo-style frictions
described above. The firm also makes its investment and capital utilization decisions, It (i)
and ut (i), respectively. The time t monetary policy shock then occurs and the demand for
the firm’s product is realized. The firm then purchases labor to satisfy the demand for its
output. Subject to these timing and other constraints, the problem of the firm is to choose
prices, employment, the level of investment and utilization to maximize net discounted cash
flow.
2.3. Implications for Inflation
The equations which characterize equilibrium for the homogenous and firm-specific capital
model are identical except for the equation which characterizes aggregate inflation dynamics.
This equation is of the form:
∆π̂ t = E [β∆π̂t+1 + γŝt |Ωt ] ,
where

¡
¢¡
¢
1 − ξ p 1 − βξ p
γ=
χ,
ξp
12

(2.32)

and ∆ is the first diﬀerence operator. The information set Ωt includes the current realization
of the technology shocks, but not the current realization of the innovation to monetary policy.
The variable st denotes the economy-wide average marginal cost of production, in units of
the final good.
In Altig et al. (2004) we establish the following12 :
Proposition 1 (i) In the homogeneous capital model, χ = 1; (ii) In the firm-specific capital
model, χ is a particular non-linear function of the parameters of the model.
We parameterize the firm-specific and homogeneous capital model in terms of γ, rather
than ξ p . Consequently, the list of parameters for the two models remains identical. Given
values for these parameters, the two models are observationally equivalent with respect to
aggregate prices and quantities. This means that we do not need to take a stand on which
version of the model we are working with at the estimation stage of our analysis.

3. Econometric Methodology
To estimate and evaluate the empirical plausibility of our model, we employ a variant of
the limited information strategy used in Christiano et al. (2005) (see also Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997)). The idea is to impose a subset of the assumptions made in our equilibrium
model to estimate the impulse response functions of 10 key macroeconomic variables to
neutral technology shocks, capital embodied technology shocks and monetary policy shocks.
We then choose model parameters to minimize the distance between the estimated impulse
response functions and the analogous objects in our model.
To discuss our econometric methodology, we define the ten dimensional vector, Yt :
⎞
⎛
⎞ ⎛
∆ ln (relative price of investmentt )
∆pIt
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜ |{z}
∆ ln (GDPt /Hourst )
⎜
⎟ ⎜ 1×1 ⎟
⎜
⎜
⎟
∆ ln (GDP deflatort )
∆at ⎟
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜ |{z}
⎜
⎟ ⎜ 1×1 ⎟
Capacity
Utilization
t
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎟ ⎜ Y1t ⎟
ln (Hourst )
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
(3.1)
Yt = ⎜
⎟
⎟ = ⎜ |{z}
|{z}
ln
(GDP
/Hours
)
−
ln
(W
/P
)
t
t
t
t
6×1
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
10×1
⎜
⎟ ⎜ Rt ⎟
ln (Ct /GDPt )
⎜
⎟ ⎜ |{z} ⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜ 1×1 ⎟
ln
(I
/GDP
)
t
t
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎝
⎠ ⎝ Y2t ⎠
Federal Funds Ratet
|{z}
ln(GDP deflatort ) + ln (GDPt ) − ln (MZMt )
1×1
We embed our identifying assumptions as restrictions on the parameters of the following
reduced form VAR:
12

See Christiano (2004) for a discussion of the solution to firm-specific capital models in simpler settings.

13

Yt = α + B(L)Yt−1 + ut ,
Eut u0t

(3.2)

= V,

where B(L) is a pth -ordered polynomial in the lag operator, L. The “fundamental” economic
shocks, εt , are related to ut as follows:
ut = Cεt , Eεt ε0t = I,

(3.3)

where C is a square matrix and I is the identity matrix. We require B(L) and the ith column
of C, Ci ,to calculate the dynamic response of Yt to a disturbance in the ith fundamental shock,
εit ,
According to our economic model, the variables in Yt , defined in (3.1), are stationary
stochastic processes. We partition εt conformably with the partitioning of Yt :
¶0
µ
εΥ,t εz,t ε01t εM,t ε2t
εt = |{z} |{z} |{z} |{z} |{z}
.
(3.4)
1×1

1×6

1×1

1×1

1×1

Here, εz,t is the innovation to a neutral technology shock, εΥ,t is the innovation in capitalembodied technology, and εM,t is the monetary policy shock.

3.1. Identification of Impulse Responses
To identify the monetary policy shock, we use the recursive approach of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999). Specifically, we assume that policy makers set the interest rate so
that the following rule is satisfied:
Rt = f (Ωt ) + ωεM,t ,

(3.5)

where εM,t is the monetary policy shock with unit variance and ω is a positive coeﬃcient.
We interpret (3.5) as a reduced form Taylor rule. To ensure identification of the monetary
policy shock, we assume f is linear, Ωt contains Yt−1 , ..., Yt−q and the only date t variables
in Ωt are {∆at , ∆pIt , Y1t }. Finally, we assume that εMt is orthogonal to Ωt .
To identify the shocks to technology, we adopt the strategy used by Fisher (2003) to
identify neutral and capital embodied shocks to technology. We assume that innovations to
technology (both neutral and capital embodied) are the only shocks which aﬀect the level of
labor productivity in the long run. In addition, we assume that capital embodied technology
shocks are the only shocks that aﬀect the price of investment goods relative to consumption
goods in the long run. These assumptions are satisfied in our model.
To compute the responses of Yt to εΥ,t , εz,t , and εM,t , we require estimates of the parameters in B(L), as well as the 1st , 2nd and 9th columns of C. We obtain these estimates using
14

a suitably modified variant of the instrumental variables strategy proposed by Shapiro and
Watson (1988). The structural form representation of our VAR system is:
A0 Yt = A(L)Yt−1 + εt .

(3.6)

The parameters of the reduced form are related to those of the structural form by:
−1
C = A−1
0 , B(L) = A0 A(L).

(3.7)

We obtain impulse responses by first estimating the parameters of the structural form and
executing (3.7), and then simulating the reduced form, (3.2). The assumptions we make to
identity the monetary policy shock impose zero restrictions on A0 . In particular, the entries
in the first nine rows of the tenth column of A0 and the first eight rows of the ninth column
of A0 are zero. In all cases but one, the parameters of the rows of (3.6) are estimated by
instrumental variables. The ninth equation, which corresponds to (3.5), is the exception and
it is estimated by ordinary least squares. The matrix, C, and the shocks, εt , are identified
up to a particular transformation. To see this, define the ten by ten orthonormal matrix W
by:
⎡
⎤
I
0
0
⎢ 2×2 2×6 2×2 ⎥
0
w
0 ⎥
(3.8)
W =⎢
⎣ 6×2 6×6 6×2 ⎦ ,
0
0
I
2×2

2×6

2×2

where w is orthonormal, i.e., ww0 = w0 w = I, the 6×6 identity matrix. Also, let Ĉ denote our
estimate of C and let ε̂t denote our fitted disturbances. Then the matrix, C̃ and disturbances
ε̃t , also satisfy our identification assumptions and fit the data equally well, where C̃ ≡ ĈW 0
and ε̃t ≡ W ε̂t . Here, W is an arbitrary orthonormal matrix satisfying (3.8). As a result, the
individual components of ε1t and their dynamic eﬀects on Yt are not identified. However, the
other shocks in εt are uniquely identified, as are all the columns of C, apart from columns
3 through 8.13 For additional details of our VAR estimation strategy, see Altig, Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Linde (2003), the technical appendix to this paper.
Our VAR analysis decomposes the time series into two orthogonal components: a part
that is driven by our identified shocks and a part that is driven by the shocks we have not
identified. Using (3.4) and the expression for the reduced form VAR disturbance, ut , in (3.3)
we write:
⎛
⎞
µ
¶
εΥ,t
ε
1t
,
ut = Cεt = C1 ⎝ εz,t ⎠ + C2
ε2,t
εMt
13

The last shock, ε2t , in our system is also uniquely identified as a result of the identification assumptions
we place on the policy and technology shocks. We treat this as a curiosity. We have not explored what shock
or combination of shocks, ε2t might correspond to.

15

where C1 is composed of the first, second and ninth columns of C, and C2 is composed of
the other columns. Let YtIdentif ied and YtOther be stochastic processes with the following time
series representations:
⎛
⎞
εΥ,t
Identif ied
YtIdentif ied = B(L)Yt−1
+ C1 ⎝ εz,t ⎠
(3.9)
εMt
µ
¶
ε1t
Other
Other
.
(3.10)
= B(L)Yt−1 + C2
Yt
ε2,t
Our VAR analysis implies that the data, Yt , is the sum of these two orthogonal stochastic
processes:
Yt = YtIdentif ied + YtOther .
(3.11)
Our model estimation exercise fits a model to the data, YtIdentif ied , taking into account that
the actual data, Yt , is composed not just of YtIdentif ied , but also YtOther .
3.2. Estimating the Parameters of the Equilibrium Model
Let ζ denote the model parameters that we estimate and let Ψ(ζ) denote the mapping from
ζ to the model impulse response functions. We denote by Ψ̂ the corresponding estimates
obtained by the strategy described above. We include the first 20 elements of each response
function, excluding those that are zero by assumption. Our estimator of ζ is the solution to:
ζ̂ = arg min(Ψ̂ − Ψ(ζ))0 V −1 (Ψ̂ − Ψ(ζ)).
ζ

(3.12)

Here, V is a diagonal matrix with the sample variances of the Ψ̂’s along the diagonal. These
variances are the ones that were used to construct the confidence intervals displayed in
Figures 1-3. With this choice of V, ζ̂ is the value of ζ which ensures that Ψ(ζ) lies as much
as possible inside the confidence intervals in Figures 1-3. We compute standard errors for ζ̂
using the delta-function method.14
14

Let the criterion in (3.12) be denoted L(ζ, Ψ̂) ≡ (Ψ̂−Ψ(ζ))0 V −1 (Ψ̂−Ψ(ζ)), so that L1 (ζ̂, Ψ̂) = 0. Denote
the mapping in (3.12) by ζ̂ = f (Ψ̂). To obtain the sampling variance of the estimator, ζ̂, as a function of
the sampling variance of Ψ̂, the delta-function method approximates f (Ψ̂) by its linear expansion about the
0
0
0
0
0
true value of Ψ, Ψ0 . That is, f (Ψ̂) ≈ f (Ψ0 ) + f 0 (Ψ
√ )(Ψ̂ − Ψ 0). Here, f (Ψ ) = ζ , where ζ is the true value
of ζ, by the consistency of our estimator. Then, T (ζ̂ T − ζ ) is asymptotically Normally distributed with
mean zero and variance f 0 (Ψ0 )W f 0 (Ψ0 )T , where the √
superscript T indicates the transposition operator, and
W is the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of T (Ψ̂ − Ψ). We use the implicit function theorem to
approximate f 0 (Ψ0 ) by −L11 (ζ 0 , Ψ0 )−1 L12 (ζ 0 , Ψ0 ). This discussion has assumed that V is not random. In
practice, we use the sample-based object discussed in the text. In addition, W is replaced by its sample
estimate, as are ζ 0 and Ψ0 in the expression for f 0 . As noted in the text, V is a diagonal matrix composed
of the diagonal elements of W.

16

4. Estimation Results Based on Identified Vector Autoregressions
In this section we describe the dynamic response of the economy to monetary policy shocks,
neutral technology shocks and capital embodied shocks. In addition, we discuss the quantitative contribution of these shocks to the cyclical fluctuations in aggregate economic activity.
In the first subsection we describe the data used in the analysis. In the second and third
subsections we discuss the impulse response functions and the importance of the shocks to
aggregate fluctuations.
4.1. Data
With the exception of the price of investment and of monetary transactions balances, all data
were taken from the DRI Basic Economics Database.15 The price of investment corresponds
to the ‘total investment’ series constructed and used in Fisher (2003). 16 Our measure of
transactions balances, MZM, was obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’
online database. Our data are quarterly and the sample period is 1959II - 2001IV.17
We work with the monetary aggregate, MZM, for the following reasons. First, MZM is
constructed to be a measure of transactions balances, so it is a natural empirical counterpart
to our model variable, Qt . Second, our statistical procedure requires that the velocity of
money is stationary. The velocity of MZM is reasonably characterized as being stationary. However the stationarity assumption is more problematic for the velocity of monetary
aggregates like the base, M1 and M2 are not stationary.
15

This data base is available online at Northwestern University. Nominal gross output is measured by
GDP, real gross output is measured by GDP Q (real, chain-weighted output). Nominal investment is GCD
(household consumption of durables) plus GP I (gross private domestic investment). Nominal consumption
is measured by GCN (nondurables) plus GCS (services) plus GGE (government expenditures). Our MZM
measure of money was obtained by splicing the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’ measure, ‘M2 minus’ (this
is M2, less small time deposits and has mnemonic M2MSL) with their MZM measure (mnemonic MZMSL).
Both data series are monthly, and were converted to quarterly using end-of-quarter observations. The splice
was accomplished by replacing the M2 minus data with MZM beginning in 1974. No scaling was done to
implement the splice since the two series are essentially the same in 1974. These variables were converted into
per capita terms by P 16, a measure of the US population over age 16. A measure of the aggregate price index
was obtained from the ratio of nominal to real output, GDP/GDP Q. Capacity utilization is measured by
IPXMCA the manufacturing industry’s capacity index (there is a measure for total industry, IPX, but it only
starts in 1967). The interest rate is measured by the federal funds rate, F Y F F. Hours worked is measured
by LBMNU (Nonfarm business hours). Hours were converted to per capita terms using our population
measure. Nominal wages are measured by LBCPU, (nominal hourly non-farm business compensation). This
was converted to real terms by dividing by the aggregate price index.
16
We also re-estimated the VAR and the structural model using as our measure of hours and productivity,
private business hours and business sector productivity, respectively. In these estimation runs, we measure
consumption and output as private sector consumption and private sector output, respectively. Taking
sampling uncertainty, we find that our results are robust to these alternatives data measures.
17
The estimation period for the vector autoregression drops the first 4 quarters, to accommodate the 4
lags.

17

4.2. Estimated Impulse Response Functions
In this subsection we discuss our estimates of the dynamic response of Yt to monetary
policy and technology shocks. To obtain these estimates we set q, the number of lags in
the VAR, to 4. Various indicators suggest that this value of q is large enough to adequately
capture the dynamics in the data. For example, the Akaike, Hannan-Quinn and Schwartz
criteria support a choice of q = 2, 1, 1, respectively.18 We also compute the multivariate
Portmanteau (Q) statistic to test the null hypothesis of zero serial correlation up to lag n
in the VAR disturbances. We consider n = 4, 6, 8, 10. The test statistics are, respectively,
Q = 167, 350, 552, 796. Using conventional asymptotic sampling theory, these Q statistics
all have a p−value very close to zero, indicating a rejection of the null hypothesis. However,
we find evidence that the asymptotic sampling theory rejects the null hypothesis too often.
When we simulate the Q statistic using repeated artificial data sets generated from our
estimated VAR, we find that the p−values of our Q statistics are 89, 92, 83, and 39 percent,
respectively. For these calculations, each artificial data set is of length equal to that of our
actual sample, and is generated by bootstrap sampling from the fitted disturbances in our
estimated VAR. On this basis we do not reject the null hypothesis that the disturbance terms
in a VAR with q = 4 are serially uncorrelated.
Figure 1 displays the response of the variables in our analysis to a one standard deviation
monetary policy shock (roughly 60 basis points). In each case, there is a solid line in the
center of a gray area. The gray area represents a 95 percent confidence interval, and the solid
line represents the point estimates.19 Except for inflation and the interest rate, all variables
are expressed in percent terms. So, for example, the peak response of output is a little over
0.2 percent. The Federal Funds rate is expressed in units of percentage points, at an annual
rate. Inflation is expressed in units of percentage points, at a quarterly rate.
Six features of Figure 1 are worth noting. First, the eﬀect of a policy shock on the money
growth rate and the interest rate is completed within roughly one year. The other variables
respond over a longer period of time. Second, there is a significant liquidity eﬀect, i.e. the
interest rate and money growth move in opposite directions after a policy shock. Third,
after an initial fall, inflation rises before reaching its peak response in roughly two years.
Fourth, output, consumption, investment, hours worked and capacity utilization all display
hump-shaped responses, which peak after roughly one year. Fifth, velocity co-moves with
the interest rate. Both fall in response to a monetary policy shock, and then rise. Finally,
18

See Bierens (2004) for the formulas used and for a discussion of the asymptotic properties of the lag
length selection criteria.
19
The confidence intervals are symmetric about our point estimates. They are obtained by adding and
subtracting 1.96 times our estimate of the standard errors of the coeﬃcients in the impulse response functions.
These standard errors were computed by bootstrap simulation of the estimated model.

18

the real wage and the price of investment do not respond significantly to a monetary policy
shock.
Figure 2 displays the response of the variables in our analysis to a positive, one standard
deviation shock in neutral technology, ezt . By construction, the impact of this technology
shock on output, labor productivity, consumption, investment and the real wage can be
permanent. Because the roots of our estimated VAR are stable, the impact of a neutral
technology shock on the variables whose levels appear in Yt must be temporary. These
variables are the Federal Funds rate, capacity utilization, hours worked and inflation.
We note that a positive, neutral technology shock leads to a persistent rise in output
with a peak rise of roughly 0.6 percent over the period displayed. In addition, hours worked,
investment and consumption display strong, statistically significant responses to the technology shock. Capacity utilization also rises but the response is not statistically significant.
Both velocity and the price of investment show marginally significant drops in response to
the shock. Finally notice that a neutral technology shock leads to a sharp, persistent fall in
the inflation rate.20 . Overall, these eﬀects are broadly consistent with what a student of real
business cycle models might expect. The rise in hours worked contrasts with the findings
in other recent papers which make the same identifying assumptions about a neutral technology shock as we do here (see for example Gali (1999) and Francis and Ramey (2002)).
However, these papers argue that hours worked fall in the wake of a positive, neutral technology shock. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2003a, 2003b) argue that the reason
for this diﬀerence is that Gali (1999) and Francis and Ramey (2001) work with the first
diﬀerence rather than the level of hours worked. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson
(2003a, 2003b) argue on statistical grounds that first diﬀerencing hours worked amounts to
a specification error, and that the quantitative findings in those papers can be explained by
this error.21
Figure 3 displays the response of the variables in our analysis to a one standard deviation
positive capital embodied technology shock, eΥ,t . This shock leads to marginally significant
rises in output, hours worked and the federal funds rate. In contrast, investment responds
strongly to the shock in eΥ,t , with an initial peak response of over 2 percent. In addition,
the shock leads to an initial fall in the price of investment of roughly 0.3 percent, followed
by an ongoing significant decline.
20

Alves (2004) also finds that inflation drops after a positive neutral technology shocks using data for
non-U.S. G7 countries
21
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Vigfusson (2003a) also argue against findings that hours worked fall after
a positive technology shock, based on analyses in which hours worked is detrended using a quadratic trend.

19

4.3. The Contribution of Monetary Policy and Technology Shocks to Aggregate
Fluctuations
We now briefly discuss the contribution of monetary policy and technology shocks to the
cyclical fluctuations in economic activity. Table 1 summarizes the contribution of the three
shocks to the variables in our analysis. We define business cycle frequencies as the components of a time series with periods of 8 to 32 quarters. The columns in Table 1 report the
fraction of the variance in the cyclical frequencies accounted for by our three shocks. Each
row corresponds to a diﬀerent variable. We calculate the fractions as follows. Let f i (ω)
denote the spectral density at frequency ω of a given variable, when only shock i is active.
That is, the variance of all shocks in εt , apart from the ith , are set to zero and the variance of
the ith shock in εt is set to unity. Let f (ω) denote the corresponding spectral density when
the variance of each element of εt is set to unity. The contribution of shock i to variance in
the business cycle frequencies is then defined as:
R ω2 i
f (ω)dω
2π
2π
Rωω12
, ω2 =
.
, ω1 =
32
8
f (ω)dω
ω1

We compute the spectral densities f and f i using our estimated VAR.22 Numbers in parentheses are the standard errors, which we estimate by bootstrap methods. Finally, the fraction
of the variance accounted for by all three shocks is just the sum of the individual fractions
of the variance.
Table 1 shows that the three shocks together account for a substantial portion of the
cyclical variance in the aggregate quantities. For example, they account for nearly 50 percent
of the variation in aggregate output, with the three shocks contributing roughly the same
amount. Interestingly, the shocks account for very little of the cyclical variation in real
wages.

5. Estimation Results for the Equilibrium Model
In this section we discuss the estimated parameter values. In addition, we assess the ability
of the estimated model to account for the impulse response functions discussed in Section 4.
22
We found that the analog statistics computed using the Hodrick-Prescott filter yielded essentially the
same results. We computed this as follows:
Rπ
g(ω)f i (ω)dω
R0π
,
g(ω)f (ω)dω
0

where g(ω) is the frequency-domain representation of the Hodrick-Prescott filter with λ = 1600.

20

5.1. Benchmark Parameter Estimates
We partition the parameters of the model into three groups. The first group of parameters,
ζ 1 , are:
ζ 1 = [β, α, δ, φ, ψ L , λw , µΥ , µz , x, V, η] .
The second of parameters, ζ 2 , pertain to the ‘non-stochastic part’ of the model:
ζ 2 = [λf , ξ w , γ, σ a , b, S 00 , ] .
The third set of parameters, ζ 3 , pertain to the stochastic part of the model:
£
¤
ζ 3 = ρxM , σ M , ρµz , σ µz , ρxz , cz , cpz , ρµΥ , σ µΥ , ρxΥ , cΥ , cpΥ .

The first two parameters in ζ 3 characterize the monetary policy shock (see (2.26).) The next
five parameters in ζ 3 characterize the evolution of the disembodied technical shock, as well
as the monetary policy response to that shock. The last five parameters are the analogous
objects that correspond to the embodied shock to technology. In all, we have to estimate 19
parameters.
We estimate the values of ζ 2 and ζ 3 and set the values of ζ 1 a priori. We assume
β = 1.03−0.25 , which implies a steady state annualized real interest rate of 3 percent. We set
α = 0.36, which corresponds to a steady state share of capital income equal to roughly 36
percent.23 We set δ = 0.025, which implies an annual rate of depreciation on capital equal
to 10 percent. This value of δ is roughly equal to the estimate reported in Christiano and
Eichenbaum (1992). The parameter, φ, is set to guarantee that profits are zero in steady
state.24 As in Christiano et al. (2005), we set the parameter, λw , to 1.05.
We set the parameter µΥ to 1.0042. This corresponds to the negative of the average
growth rate of the price of investment relative to the GDP deflator which fell at an annual
average rate of 1.68 percent over our sample period. The steady state growth of real per
capita GDP, µy , is given by
¡ ¢ α
µy = µΥ 1−α µz .
(5.1)
The average growth rate of per capita GDP in our sample implies µy = 1.0045. Solving the
previous equation for µz yields µz = 1.00013, .which is the value of µz we use in our analysis.
The average growth rate of money, µx , was set equal to 1.017. This value corresponds to the
average quarterly growth rate of money (MZM ) over our sample period.

23
In our model, the steady state share of labor income in total output is 1 − α. This result reflects our
assumption that profits are zero in steady state.
24
See Basu and Fernald (1994), Hall (1988), and Rotemberg and Woodford (1995) for a discussion of the
relationship between φ and steady state profits.

21

We set the parameters V and η to 0.45 and 0.036, respectively. The value of V corresponds
to the average value of Pt Ct /Qt in our sample, where Qt is measured by MZM. We chose η
so that in conjunction with the other parameter values of our model, the steady state value
of ηC/Y is 0.025. This corresponds to the percent of value-added in the finance, insurance
and real estate industry (see Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2003)).
The row labeled ‘benchmark’ in Table 2 summarizes our point estimates of the parameters
in the vector ζ 1 . Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The lower bound of unity is
binding on λf . So we simply set λf to 1.01 when we estimate the model. Our point estimate
of ξ w implies that wage contracts are re-optimized, on average, once every 3.6 quarters.
To interpret our point estimate of γ, we recall that in the homogeneous capital model,
γ = (1 − ξ p )(1 − βξ p )/ξ p . So our point estimate of γ implies a value of ξ p equal to 0.82. This
implies that firms re-optimize prices roughly every 5.6 quarters (see Table 4). This value is
much larger than the value used by Golosov and Lucas (2003) who calibrate their model to
micro data to ensure that the firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters.
Table 3 shows that if we adopt the assumption that capital is firm-specific, then our
estimates imply that firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters.25 So the
assumption that capital is firm-specific has a large impact on inference about the frequency
at which firms re-optimize price.
To interpret the estimated value of σ a , we consider the homogeneous capital model.
Linearizing the household’s first order condition for capital utilization about steady state
yields:
½
¾
1 k
E ( r̂t − ût )|Ωt = 0.
(5.2)
σa
According to this expression, 1/σ a is the elasticity of capital utilization with respect to the
rental rate of capital. Our estimate of σ a is larger than the value estimated by Christiano et
al. (2005) and indicates that it is relatively costly for firms to vary the utilization of capital.
Our point estimate of the habit parameter b is 0.65. This value is close to the point
estimate of 0.66, reported in Christiano et al. (2005) and the value of 0.7 reported in Boldrin,
Christiano, and Fisher (2001). The latter authors argue that the ability of standard general
equilibrium models to account for the equity premium and other asset market statistics is
considerably enhanced by the presence of habit formation in preferences.
We now discuss our point estimate of S 00 . Suppose we denote by Pk0 ,t the shadow price of
one unit of k̄t+1 ,in terms of output. The variable Pk0 ,t is what the price of installed capital
would be in the homogeneous capital model if there were a market for k̄t+1 at the beginning
of period t. Proceeding as in Christiano et al. (2005), it is straightforward to show that the
25

This number was obtained using the algorithm discussed in Altig et al. (2004).

22

household’s first order condition for investment implies:
ı̂t = ı̂t−1 +

∞
1 X j
β E[P̂k0 ,t+j |Ωt ].
S 00 j=0

(5.3)

According to this expression, 1/S 00 is the elasticity of investment with respect to a one percent
temporary increase in the current price of installed capital. Our point estimate implies that
this elasticity is equal to 0.45. The more persistent is the change in the price of capital,
the larger is the percentage change in investment. This is because adjustment costs induce
agents to be forward looking.
Our point estimate of is roughly unity. That is, a one percentage point increase in the
annualized rate of interest induces a one percent decline in real transactions balances. This
elasticity is smaller than what Lucas (1988) and others obtain when they estimate static
money demand equations. We suspect that we obtain a lower value of than Lucas because
our estimation criterion places relatively more weight on the high frequency movements in
money and interest rates.
Table 3 reports the estimated values of the parameters pertaining to the stochastic part
of the model. With these values, the laws of motion for the neutral and capital embodied
technology shocks are:
µ̂Υ,t = 0.24 µ̂Υ,t−1 + εµΥ ,t , 100 × σ µΥ = 0.30

(5.4)

µ̂z,t = 0.90 µ̂z,t−1 + εµz ,t , 100 × σ µz = 0.07

(5.5)

(0.22)

(0.04)

(0.11)

(0.04)

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Our estimates imply that a one-standard deviation neutral technology shock drives zt up by 0.07 percent in the period of the shock and
by 0.70 (= 0.07/(1 − 0.90)) percent in the long run. A one-standard deviation shock to
embodied technology drives Υt up by 0.30 percent immediately and by 0.39 percent in the
long run. Our estimates imply that shocks to neutral technology exhibit a high degree of
serial correlation, while shocks to capital embodied technology do not.
It is interesting to compare our results for µ̂z,t with the ones reported in Prescott (1986),
who estimates the properties of the technology shock process using the Solow residual. He
finds that the shock is roughly a random walk and its growth rate has a standard deviation
of roughly 1 percent.26 By contrast, our estimates imply that the unconditional standard
p
deviation of the growth rate of neutral technology is roughly 0.16 (= 0.07/ (1 − 0.92 ))
26

Prescott (1986) actually reports a standard deviation of 0.763 percent. However, he adopts a diﬀerent
normalization for the technology shock than we do, by placing it in front of the production function. By
assumption, the technology shock multiplies labor directly in the production and is taken to a power of
labor’s share. The value of labor’s share that Prescott uses is 0.70. When we translate Prescott’s estimate
into the one relevant for our normalization, we obtain 0.763/.7 ≈ 1.

23

percent. So we find that technology shocks are substantially less volatile but more persistent
than those estimated by Prescott. In principle, these diﬀerences reflect two factors. First,
from the perspective of our model, Prescott’s estimate of technology confounds technology
with variable capital utilization. Second, our analysis is based on diﬀerent data sets and
diﬀerent identifying assumptions than Prescott’s.
To understand the implications of our point estimates of the parameters of monetary
policy, it is useful to consider the dotted lines in the bottom right-hand corners of Figures
1 through 3. There, we display the response of total money growth, i.e., Mt+1 /Mt , to
a monetary policy shock, a neutral technology, and a capital-embodied technology shock,
respectively. We note a number of features of the estimated policy rules. First, the response
of total money growth to a policy shock is short-lived. Second, total money growth responds
positively and persistently, to a neutral technology shock. So, consistent with results in
Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2003), we find that monetary policy is accommodative with
respect to this shock. Third, total money growth also increases in a very persistent manner
in response to a capital embodied technology shock.
5.2. Properties of the Estimated Model
The dotted lines in Figures 1 through 3 display the impulse response functions of the estimated model to monetary policy, neutral technology shocks and capital embodied shocks,
respectively. Recall that the solid lines and the associated confidence intervals (the gray
areas) pertain to the impulse response functions from the estimated, identified VARs.
5.2.1. Response to a Monetary Policy Shock
We begin by discussing the model’s performance with respect to a monetary policy shock (see
Figure 1). First, consistent with results in Christiano et al. (2005), the model does well at
accounting for the dynamic response of the U.S. economy to a monetary policy shock. Most
of the model responses lie within the two-standard deviation confidence interval computed
from the data. We note that the model succeeds in accounting for the inertial response of
inflation. Indeed, there is no noticeable rise in inflation until roughly a year after the policy
shock. This is true even though firms in the firm-specific capital version of the model change
prices on average once every 1.5 quarters.
Second, the model generates a very persistent response in output. The peak eﬀect occurs
roughly one year after the shock. The output response is positive for roughly two years.
Third, the model accounts for the dynamic response of the interest rate to a monetary
policy shock. Consistent with the data, an expansionary monetary policy shock induces a
sharp decline in the interest rate which then returns to its pre-shock level within a year.

24

We also note that according to the model, the growth rate of transactions balances rises
for a brief period of time after the policy shock, but then quickly reverts to its pre-shock
level. Figure 1 shows that the eﬀects of a policy shock on aggregate economic activity persist
beyond the eﬀects on the policy variable itself. This property reflects the strong internal
propagation mechanisms in the model.
Fourth, as in the data, the real wage remains essentially unaﬀected by the policy shock.
Fifth, consumption, investment, and hours worked exhibit persistent, hump-shaped rises that
are consistent with our VAR-based estimates. Sixth, consistent with the data, velocity falls
after the expansionary policy shock. This fall reflects the rise in money demand associated
with the initial fall in the interest rate. As the interest rate begins to move towards its
pre-shock level and consumption rises, velocity also rises. However, these forces are not sufficiently strong to render the model consistent with the strong rise in velocity estimated from
the identified VAR roughly five quarters after the policy shock. Seventh, by construction,
the relative price of investment is not aﬀected by a policy shock in the model. At least for
the first two years after the policy shock, this lack of response is consistent with the response
of the relative price of investment to a policy shock in the identified VAR. Finally, capacity
utilization in the model rises by only a very small amount, and understates the rise that is
estimated to occur in the data.
5.2.2. Response to a Neutral Technology Shock
We now discuss the model’s performance with respect to a neutral technology shock (see
Figure 2). First, the model does well at accounting for the dynamic response of the U.S.
economy to a neutral technology shock. Specifically, the model accounts for the rise in
aggregate output, hours worked, investment, consumption and the real wage. Second, the
model understates the decline in velocity as well as the price of investment that occur after
an expansionary neutral technology shock. Third, the model does not capture the fall in
inflation that occurs after the shock. To some extent the small response of inflation in the
model reflects the strong response of money growth after a neutral technology shock. This
strong response of money growth is necessary to allow the model to capture the general
rise in economic activity after the neutral technology shock. We reach this conclusion by
computing the response of the model economy to a positive, neutral technology shock under
the assumption that money growth remains unchanged from its steady state level. We find
that absent monetary accommodation the output response is weak, hours worked fall and
inflation declines. The estimation criterion prefers to match the output and employment
response at the cost of doing less well with respect to the response of inflation.
Figure 2 shows that in terms of quantity variables, the model economy responds qualitatively to a neutral technology shock in the same way that a real business analyst would
25

anticipate. Ironically, according to our model, the strong, short run expansionary eﬀects of
a neutral technology shock are due to the accommodative nature of monetary policy. This
is consistent with the findings in Gali et al. (2002).
5.2.3. Response to a Capital Embodied Technology Shock
We now discuss the model’s performance with respect to a capital embodied technology
shock (see Figure 3). The model does very well in accounting for the response of the U.S.
economy to this shock, except that it understates the rise in capacity utilization.
Figure 3 indicates that monetary policy is accommodative with respect to a capital
embodied technology shock. To see the importance of monetary policy in the transmission
of capital embodied technology shocks, we compute the response of the model economy
to a positive, capital embodied neutral, technology shock under the assumption that money
growth remains unchanged from its steady state level. We find that output and hours worked
rise by much less, while inflation falls compared to what happens when monetary policy is
accommodative. We conclude that, as with neutral technology shocks, monetary policy plays
an important role in the transmission of capital embodied technology shocks.

6. The Key Features of the Model
In this section we discuss the features of the data driving our estimates of the parameters
determining the implications of the firm-specific and homogeneous capital models for the
frequency at which firms re-optimize prices.
Our point estimate of γ (0.040) implies that a temporary one percent change in marginal
cost results in only a 0.031 percent change in the aggregate price level.27 The small value of γ
lies at the heart of the tension between the micro and macro implications of the homogeneous
capital model.
We now argue that any reasonable estimate of γ must be low. In Figure 4a we plot
∆π̂t − β∆π̂ t+1 against our measure of the log of marginal cost, ŝt .28 The distribution of
∆π̂t − β∆π̂ t+1 is at best weakly related to the magnitude of ŝt .29 The relatively flat curve
in Figure 4a has a slope equal to our point estimate of γ (0.040). Significantly, this curve
passes through the central tendency of the data. The steeper curve in Figure 4a is drawn for
a value of γ equal to 0.9, a value which implies that in the homogeneous capital model firms
27

This estimate is consistent with results in the literature. See Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004) and the
references therein.
28
We set β = 1.03−.25 . Also, we measure marginal productivity by labor’s share in GDP. In our model this
is the correct measure if fixed costs are zero. This measure is approximately correct here, since our estimate
of φ is close to zero.
29
Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004) argue that their estimates of γ are robust to alternative measures of
marginal cost.

26

change prices roughly once every 1.5 quarters. Figure 4a show that raising γ to 0.9 leads to
a drastic deterioration in fit.
Equation (2.32) implies that the magnitude of the residuals from the lines in Figure 4a
cannot be used a formal measure of model fit. We should focus on the size of residuals when
the data are replaced by their projection onto date t information, because then (2.32) implies
that least squares consistently recovers the true value of γ. Figure 4b is the analog to Figure
4a, with variables replaced by their projection onto zt ≡ {∆π t−s − β∆π t+1−s , ŝt−s ; s = 1, 2}.
We note that Figures 4a and 4b are very similar. Our conclusions are unchanged: the data
on inflation and marginal cost suggest that γ is small.30
The low estimated value of γ provides a diﬀerent perspective on the inflation inertia
puzzle, particularly the weak response of inflation to monetary policy shocks. Solving (2.32)
forward we obtain
∞
X
∆π̂t = γ
β j Et ŝt+j .
(6.1)
j=0

This relation makes clear why many authors incorporate features like variable capital utilization and sticky wages into their models. These features can reduce the response of expected
marginal cost to shocks.31 Relation (6.1) reveals another way to account for inflation inertia:
assign a small value to γ. The evidence in Figure 4a and 4b indicates that a small value of
γ must be part of any successful resolution of the inflation inertia puzzle.
A low value of γ is clearly a problem for the homogeneous capital model. This is because
the model then implies that firms re-optimize prices very infrequently, e.g., at intervals
of roughly six quarters.32 So to get the macro data right (i.e., a low γ) we must make
assumptions about the frequency at which firms re-optimize prices that seem implausible in
light of the micro data. In contrast, suppose we adopt the more plausible assumption that
firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters. Then the homogeneous capital
model implies γ = 0.9. But this means that the model gets the macro data wrong.
To explain how the firm-specific capital model is able to resolve the micro-macro pricing
conflict, we recall the intuition discussed in the introduction. In the firm-specific capital
model, marginal cost is increasing in output. In the homogeneous capital model marginal
cost is constant. Figure 5 displays the initial marginal cost curves of the homogeneous and
firm-specific capital models, denoted by MC0,h and MC0,f . Both of these curves intersect
the marginal revenue curve at point A. So, both firms produce the same amount, Q0 , and
set the same price, P0 . We now suppose that an exogenous shock pushes both marginal cost
30

We obtain the same results whether we work with ∆π̂ t or with π̂t .
See, for example, Ball and Romer (1990), Christiano et al. (2005), Dotsey and King (2001) and Smets
and Wouters (2003).
32
This is a straightforward implication of the homogeneous capital model discussed above, according to
which γ = (1 − ξ p )(1 − βξ p )/ξ p .
31

27

curves up in a parallel way, by the same amount, to MC1,h and MC1,f . In the homogeneous
capital model, the marginal revenue and new marginal cost curves intersect at the point,
B. The firm chooses the new price P1 . In the firm-specific capital model, the intersection of
marginal cost and revenue occurs at B 0 and a firm chooses a price, P2 . We note that P1 > P2 .
The steeper is the slope of the marginal cost curve, the lower is P2 . Since the aggregate price
level is just the average of individual firm prices, this intuition explains why increasing the
slope of the marginal cost curve reduces the value of γ.
The key parameter which governs the slope of the marginal cost curve is σ a . The larger is
this parameter, the steeper is the marginal cost curve. The logic in the previous paragraph
suggests that for a fixed value of ξ p , the larger is σ a , the lower is γ. But other things equal,
a lower ξ p implies a higher γ. These observation suggest that for a given value of γ, ξ p is a
decreasing function of σ a . In fact, our point estimate of σ a is large which helps explain why
the value of ξ p implied by the firm-specific model is low.
What is it about the data that leads to a large point estimate for σ a ? We recompute the
impulse responses implied by our model, holding all but one of the model parameters at their
estimated values. The exception is σ a which we set to 0.01. The new value of σ a has two
eﬀects on the model impulse response functions. First, the responses of capital utilization to
both technology shocks are stronger. The responses are so strong that, at several horizons,
they lie outside the corresponding empirical confidence intervals. Second, investment falls
after a neutral technology shock. The reason for this decline is that when σ a is small, the
rise in capital utilization that occurs after a positive neutral technology shock leads to a
fall in the rate of return on investment which generates a fall in investment.33 This fall in
investment is inconsistent with our VAR-based estimate that investment rises after a neutral
shock (see Figure 2). The two eﬀects of a smaller value of σ a explain why our estimation
criterion settles on a high value of σ a .
In Table 2 and 3 we report the results of estimating the model subject to the constraint
that σ a is a small number, 0.01. Table 4 shows that consistent with our intuition, the homogeneous and firm-specific capital model now yield similar implications for the frequency
with which firms re-optimize prices.
To verify our intuition about why our benchmark estimate of σ a is high, we re-estimate
the model including only the responses to a monetary policy shock in the criterion. We
report our results in Tables 2 and 4. Our point estimate of σ a falls from 2.01 to 0.007.
33

To understand this observation, consider a simplified version of our economy in which the resource
constraint is:
¡
¢α
Ct + K̄t+1 ≡ ut K̄t zt1−α + (1 − δ − a(ut ))K̄t .

In this economy, the rate of return on investment is M PK,t + (1 − δ − a(ut )). It is easy to verify that this
expression is decreasing in ut , once we take into account the eﬃciency condition associated with the optimal
choice of ut .

28

This is consistent with the estimates in Christiano et al. (2005). The lower value of σ a
allows the model to better capture the estimated rise in capital utilization that occurs after
a monetary policy shock, without paying a penalty for the counterfactual implication that
investment falls after a neutral technology shock.34 We note that with a higher value of
σ a , the homogeneous and firm- specific models both imply that firms re-optimize prices on
average roughly once every 3.5 quarters.
To pursue our intuition about the benchmark estimate of σ a we also re-estimate the model
including only a capital embodied technology shock in the estimation criterion. Tables 2, 3
and 4 show that our results are similar to the benchmark results except that our estimate of
σ a is higher. The higher value of σ a dampens the response of capital utilization to a capital
embodied technology shock, bringing the model response closer to the VAR-based response.
With a higher value of σ a , the implications of the homogeneous and firm-specific capital
models are even more diﬀerent than those corresponding to our benchmark estimates.
We also re-estimate the model including only a neutral technology shock in the estimation
criterion. Table 2 shows that our estimate of σa is extremely high. This high value of σ a allows
the model to account for the rise in investment that occurs after a neutral technology shock.
Tables 2 and 4 also indicate that the estimation criterion chooses values for the structural
parameters which imply that firms re-optimize prizes on average once every quarter. This
allows the model to account for the drop in inflation that occurs after a positive neutral
technology shock (see Figure 2).
Figure 5 suggests that a high elasticity of demand also works to reduce a firm’s incentive
to raise price after an exogenous increase in marginal cost, i.e. a low value of λf reduces γ.
While our estimation criterion is very insensitive to λf , it weakly prefers a very low value for
this variable. To examine the role played by λf , we re-estimate the model imposing λf = 1.04
and 1.20. The first of these values of λf corresponds to Bowman’s (2003) estimate for the
economy as a whole. The second value of λf is equal to the point estimate in Christiano, et
al (2005). Table 2 shows that imposing diﬀerent values of λf has very little impact on the
estimated values of the key structural parameters of the model. Table 4 shows that the main
eﬀect of a higher value of λf is to reduce the frequency with which firms re-optimize prices in
the firm-specific capital model. For example, when λf = 1.20, firms model re-optimize prices
on average once every 3.5 quarters. We conclude that to resolve the micro - macro pricing
puzzle in our framework we are compelled to take the view that λf is close to one. This last
result may reflect our assumption that intermediate goods firms face a constant elasticity of
demand. Other specifications of demand, like the one proposed in Kimball (1995), break the
link between the steady state markup and the elasticity of demand away from steady state.
34

This reconciles our results with those reported in Christiano et al. (2005) who report a low estimated
value of σ a based on an estimation criterion that includes only the responses to a monetary policy shock.

29

Incorporating changes like these may make it possible to rationalize a low γ with a low value
of ξ p and a higher value of λf .
Finally, we assess the robustness of our results to the lag length in the VAR underlying
our structural estimates, setting q = 6, rather than 4. Table 2 and 3 show that, taking
sampling uncertainty into account, our basic results are unaﬀected. Table 4 indicates that in
the homogeneous and firm-specific capital models, firms re-optimize prices on average once
every 1.12 and 3.13 quarters respectively.

7. Choosing Between the Homogeneous and Firm-Specific Capital
Models
The homogeneous and firm-specific capital models imply that firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 and 5.6 quarters, respectively. In the introduction we argue that these
results point in favor of firm-specific capital model. We now document an even more powerful reason for preferring that model: the estimated homogeneous capital model predicts,
implausibly, that a small subset of firms produce the bulk of total output after a monetary
policy shock. The firm-specific capital model does not suﬀer from this shortcoming.
To document these findings, we consider the cross-firm distribution of prices and output
after a monetary policy shock. We suppose that the economy is in a steady state up until
period 0. In the steady state, each firm’s price and quantity is the same. An expansionary
monetary policy shock occurs in period 1. Given the timing convention in our model, prices
and output levels are the same across firms at the end of period 1. In period 2, a fraction,
1 − ξ p , of firms re-optimize their price. The other firms firms update their price according
¡
¢2
to (2.9). In period 3 there are four types of firms: (i) a fraction, 1 − ξ p , of firms that
re-optimize in periods 2 and 3; (ii) a fraction, ξ 2p , of firms that do not re-optimize in periods
¡
¢
2 or 3; (iii) a fraction, 1 − ξ p ξ p , which re-optimize in period 2 and not in period 3; and
¡
¢
(iv) a fraction, ξ p 1 − ξ p , of firms that do not re-optimize in period 2, but do re-optimize
in period 3. In period s there are 2s−1 diﬀerent types of firms.
We calculate the distribution of output and relative prices across firms in period s = 4.
Figures 6a and 6b summarize our findings for the homogeneous capital version of the model.
Consider the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the horizontal axes of these figures. The first of
these integers pertains to firms that did not re-optimize their price in periods 2, 3 and 4.
The integers j = 2, 3 and 4, pertain to firms who last re-optimized in period j. Figure 6a
shows the share of output (black bars) and the fraction of firms (grey bars) produced by the
diﬀerent types of firms. (In the homogeneous capital model, the price and output levels of
all firms within each of these four groups are the same.) Figure 6b shows the log deviation
of price of the firms in each group from the aggregate price.
30

We note several features of Figure 6a and 6b. First, a small fraction of the firms are
producing a disproportionate share of the output. Indeed, our linearized solution implies
a small subset of firms produce more than 100 percent of output. Firms who re-optimize
set their price so high that their output is negative. This is clearly a nonsensical solution
indicating that the log linear solution algorithm breaks down. Firms who are predicted to
produce negative output would actually produce zero output, close down or change their
nominal price.
A key factor driving the implication that a small subset of firms produce more than one
hundred percent of output is the high elasticity of demand for a firm’s output (λf is small)
in the estimated benchmark model. It would be possible to overturn this implication by
imposing a higher value of λf . But in our view this is not a satisfactory way to rescue the
homogeneous capital model: when we impose λf = 1.20 and re-estimate the model, we find
that firms re-optimize prices an intervals of time that are implausibly high. (see Tables 2
and 4)
We now turn to the firm-specific capital model. Figures 6c and 6c are the analogs to
Figures 6a and 6b. Figure 6c shows that the dramatic degree of inequality of production
associated with the homogeneous capital model no longer obtains and firms are not predicted to produce negative amounts of output. Still, there is some inequality in the level
of production at individual firms. The average level of production by firms in a particular
category corresponds to the ratio of the black bar (total production in that group) to the
grey bar (number of firms in that group). In period 4, these averages are 3.3, 2.1, 1.3, and
0.6 for firms that last optimized in periods 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. So, the typical firm
that has not been able to re-optimize its price since the monetary policy shock produces over
5 times as much as a firm that has not been able to re-optimize since the shock occurred. In
later periods, the extent of the inequality in production is substantially mitigated.35
We conclude that the microeconomic implications of the estimated homogeneous capital
model are much less plausible than those of the firm-specific capital model. Since the two
models have the same implications for macro data, we prefer the firm-specific capital model.
To formally assess the micro implications of the firm-specific capital discussed above we
would have to have data on the response of the actual cross-firm distribution of output and
prices to a monetary policy shock. Unfortunately, these data are not available.
35

One measure of the degree of inequality in production is provided by the Gini coeﬃcient. In periods 4,
8 and 16, these are 0.24, 0.40 and 0.68 for firm-specific capital version of the model.

31

8. Conclusion
We construct a dynamic general equilibrium model of cyclical fluctuations that accounts for
inflation inertia even though firms re-optimize prices on average once every 1.5 quarters.
To obtain this result we assume that capital is firm-specific. If we assume that capital is
homogenous we can account for inflation inertia. However, this version of the model has
micro implications that are implausible: firms re-optimize their prices on average once every
5.6 quarters and a monetary policy shock induces extreme dispersion in prices and output
across firms. These considerations lead us to strongly prefer the firm-specific capital model.
We conclude by noting an important shortcoming of our model. Under our identifying
assumptions, inflation responds very slowly to a monetary policy shock but quickly drops
after a positive neutral technology shock. So inflation is inertial with respect to monetary
policy shocks, but not with respect to technology shocks. Our structural economic model can
account for the first observation but not the second observation. We suspect that modifying
the model so that firms have direct information about persistent technology shocks but have
diﬃculty distinguishing monetary policy shocks from transitory idiosyncratic demand shocks
would be a useful way of remedying this shortcoming of our model.36 We leave this task to
future research.
36

Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2004) obtain a closely related result in a rational inattention model where
price setting firms optimally decide what to observe, subject to a constraint on information flow.

32

References
[1] Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. 2003.
“The Role of Monetary Policy in the Propagation of Technology Shocks.” Manuscript,
Northwestern University.
[2] Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. 2004.
Technical Appendix to “Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business
Cycle.” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
[3] Alves, Nuno. 2004. “Nominal Wage Inertia in General Equilibrium Models.” 2004. Bank
of Portugal, Working Paper 15 - 04.
[4] Ball, Laurence and David Romer. 1990. “Real Rigidities and the Non-neutrality of
Money.” Review of Economic Studies. 57 (April): 183-203.
[5] Basu, Susanto, and John Fernald. 1994. “Constant returns and small markups in U.S.
manufacturing.” Working paper, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 483, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[6] Bierens, Herman J.. 2004. “Information Criteria and Model Selection.” Manuscript,
Penn State University.
[7] Bils, Mark, and Pete Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
Prices.” Journal of Political Economy. 112 (October): 947-985.
[8] Boldrin, Michele, Christiano, Lawrence J., and Jonas Fisher. 2001. “Habit Persistence,
Asset Returns and the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review. 91 (March): 149166.
[9] Bowman, David. 2003. “Market and Inflation.” International Finance Discussion Papers,
Number 783, October.
[10] Calvo, Guillermo. 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal
of Monetary Economics. 12 (September): 383-98.
[11] Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan. 2004. “Are Structural VARs Useful
Guides for Developing Business Cycle Theories?”Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.
[12] Christiano, Lawrence J. 2002. “Solving Dynamic Equilibrium Models by a Method of
Undetermined Coeﬃcients.” Computational Economics. 20 (October): 21 - 55..
33

[13] Christiano,
Lawrence
J.
2004.
“Firm-Specific
Capital
and
Aggregate
Inflation
Dynamics
in
Woodford’s
Model.”
manuscript,
http://www.faculty.econ.northwestern.edu/faculty/christiano/research/firmspecific/svensson.pdf.
[14] Christiano, Lawrence J., and Martin Eichenbaum. 1992. “Current Real-Business-Cycle
Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review. 82
(June): 430-50.
[15] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 1999. “Monetary
Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?”. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1A, edited by Michael Woodford and John Taylor, Amsterdam; New York
and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
[16] Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.”. Forthcoming, Journal of
Political Economy.
[17] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson. 2003a.“What Happens After a Technology Shock?” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
[18] Christiano, Lawrence J., Eichenbaum, Martin, and Robert Vigfusson. 2003b. “The Response of Hours to a Technology Shock: Evidence Based on Direct Measures of Technology.” Journal of the European Economic Association. 2 (May): 381-395.
[19] Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2003. “The Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 35, no. 6, pt. 2 (December): 1119-1198.
[20] Coenen, Gunter, and Andrew Levin. 2004. “Identifying the Influences of Real and Nominal Rigidities in Aggregate Price-Setting Behavior.” Manuscript, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.
[21] Cooley, Thomas, and Dwyer. 1998. “Business Cycle Analysis Without Much Theory: A
Look at Structural VARs.” Journal of Econometrics. 83 (March): 57-88.
[22] de Walque, Gregory, Frank Smets, and Raf Wouters. 2004. “Price Setting in General
Equilibrium: Alternative Specifications.” Manuscript, European Central Bank.
[23] DiCecio, Riccardo. 2004. “Comovement: it’s not a puzzle.” Manuscript, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis.

34

[24] Dotsey, Michael, and Robert King. 2001. “Pricing, Production and Persistence.” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 8407.
[25] Edge, Rochelle M.. 2004. “The Responses of Wages and Prices to Technology Shocks.”
Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[26] Edge, Rochelle M., Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2004. “Learning and Shifts
in Long-run Productivity Growth.” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
[27] Eichenbaum, Martin, and Jonas Fisher. 2004. “Evaluating the Calvo Model of Sticky
Prices.”’ National Bureau of Economic Research working paper number 10617.
[28] Erceg, Christopher J., Henderson, Dale, W., and Andrew T. Levin. 2000. “Optimal
Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46 (October): 281-313.
[29] Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust. 2003. “Can Long-Run Restrictions Identify Technology Shocks?”. Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
[30] Fisher, Jonas. 2003. “Technology Shocks Matter.” Chicago Federal Reserve Bank working paper, 2001-14.
[31] Francis, Neville, and Valerie A. Ramey. 2002. “Is the Technology-Driven Real Business Cycle Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations Revisited.” NBER
Working Paper number 8726.
[32] Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric
Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 44 (October): 195-222.
[33] Gali, Jordi. 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review. 89 (March): 249271.
[34] Gali, Jordi, J. David Lopez-Salido, and Javier Valles. 2003. “Technology Shocks and
Monetary Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance.” Journal of Monetary Economics.
50 (May): 723 - 743.
[35] Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr.. 2003. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.”
NBER Working Paper number 10187.
[36] Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
New Jersey.
35

[37] Hall, Robert, 1988. “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry.”
Journal of Political Economy. 96 (October): 921—47.
[38] Kimball, Miles. 1995. “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27(4), part II: 1241-1277.
[39] Klenow, Peter, and Oleg Kryvtsov. 2004. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
Does it Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation.”Manuscript, Stanford University.
[40] Lucas, Robert E., Jr.. 1988. “Money Demand in the United States: A Quantitative
Review,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29 (Autumn): 137 167.
[41] Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2004. “Optimal Sticky Prices Under Rational Inattention.” Manucsript, Humboldt University, Berlin.
[42] Prescott, Edward. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 10 (Fall): 9-22.
[43] Sveen, Tommy, and Lutz Weinke. 2004a. “Pitfalls in the Modeling of Forward-Looking
Price Setting and Investment Decisions.” Manuscript, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[44] Sveen, Tommy, and Lutz Weinke. 2004b. “New Perspectives on Capital and Sticky
Prices.” Norges Bank Working Paper 2004/3.
[45] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael M. Woodford. 1995. “Dynamic General Equilibrium
Models with Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets.” In Frontiers of Business Cycle
Research, edited by Thomas F. Cooley. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[46] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael M. Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Macroeconomics Annual 1997, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[47] Sbordone, Argia. 2002. “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (2): 265-292.
[48] Shapiro, Matthew, and Mark Watson. 1988. “Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations.”
NBER, Macroeconomics Annual 1988, edited by Stanley Fischer. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
[49] Sims, Christopher. 1994. “A Simple Model for the Determination of the Price Level and
the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” Economic Theory, 4: 381-399.
36

[50] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters. 2003. “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association
1 (September): 1123-1175.
[51] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters. 2004. “Price Setting in General Equilibrium: Alternative Specifications.” Manuscript, European Central Bank.
[52] Schmitt-Grohe, Stefanie, and Martin Uribe. 2004. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Under Sticky Prices.” Journal of Economic Theory 114 (February): 198-230.
[53] Sveen, Tommy, and Lutz Weinke. 2004. “Pitfalls in the Modeling of Forward-Looking
Price Setting and Investment Decisions.” Manuscript, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[54] Woodford, Michael M.. 1996. “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price
Stability.” NBER Working Paper number 5684.
[55] Woodford, Michael M.. 2003. Interest and Prices, Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton University Press.
[56] Woodford, Michael M.. 2004. “Inflation and Output Dynamics with Firm-Specific Investment.” Manuscript, Princeton University.

37

9. Appendix A: Accuracy of Impulse Response Functions
Estimates of the dynamic response of aggregate variables to policy and technology shocks
play a key role in our analysis. In this appendix we present evidence on the sampling
properties of our VAR-based estimator of impulse response functions. We begin by generating
a large number of artificial data sets, each having the same length as our U.S. sample. We
then feed the artificial data to the same VAR estimation program that we apply to the
U.S. data. The analysis allows us to study the bias and variance properties of our impulse
response function estimator.
The first step in constructing the artificial data sets is to generate data on the model
counterpart of (3.1) using our estimated equilibrium model. Denote these data by {YtModel }.
The perspective taken in our analysis is that the actual data, Yt , are an orthogonal sum of
data driven by the identified shocks plus data driven by the other shocks in the economy
(see (3.11)). Consistent with this perspective, the data we feed to our VAR is Ỹt , where
Ỹt = YtModel + YtOther .
To generate artificial data on YtOther we use (3.10), where B(L) and C2 are set to their
estimated values. The innovations driving YtModel were drawn from the Normal distribution,
while the innovations driving YtOther were sampled from their fitted counterparts.
The results are reported in Figures 7. Solid lines are the true impulse response functions,
by which we mean the response in the equilibrium model used to generate YtModel . The
dotted line is the median, in repeated samples of 160 artificial observations each, of the
impulse response functions obtained by estimating a 4-lag, 10 variable VAR. The grey area
is the 95 confidence interval.37
We note that there is very little small sample bias in our estimator. Two exceptions occur
in the response of output and consumption to a neutral technology shock. This discrepancy
is reduced when we extend the number of lags in the VAR to six. This reduction in the
discrepancy is why re-estimate the parameters of our structural model using the impulse response functions and associated variance covariance matrix from a six lag VAR. As discussed
in the text our basic results are unaﬀected by working with the six lag VAR (see Tables 2,
3 and 4).

37

The confidence interval for a given lag impulse response was computed as follows. Responses across
1,000 artificial data sets were ordered from smallest to largest. The 95 percent confidence interval is defined
by the 25th and the 975th elements in this ordering.

38

Variable
Output

Table 1: Decomposition of Variance, Business Cycle Frequencies
Monetary Policy Shocks Neutral Shocks
Embodied Technology Shocks
14
13
15
[6]

[10]

MZM Growth

20
[6]

[5]

[6]

Inflation

14

16

12

Fed Funds

18

Capacity Util.

14
[6]

[8]

Avg. Hours

14

13

Real Wage

[6]
[6]

[6]

3

[3]

2

[9]

[7]

4

[7]

6

[9]

2

9

[9]

16

[10]

16

[10]

16

[10]

3

[10]

[6]

21

12

Consumption

16

Investment

13
[6]

[9]

9

15

Velocity

21

4

10

Price of Inv.

[6]

[7]

7

[4]

[12]

[6]

2

[6]

[9]
[9]
[8]

53

[15]

Notes: Numbers are the fraction of variance in the business cycle frequencies accounted
for by the indicated shock; number in square brackets is an estimate of the standard error (see text).
All variables, except MZM growth, inflation and Fed Funds, are measured in log-levels.

Model
Benchmark

TABLE 2: ESTIMATED PARAMETER VALUES ζ 1
λf
ξw
γ
σa
b
1.01 0.72
0.040
2.02
0.70

Monetary Shocks Only
Neutral Technology Shocks Only

1.08

(0.10)

2.05

(n.a.)

Embodied Technology Shocks Only

1.01

Low Cost of Varying
Capital Utilization
Intermediate Markup

(1.93)

High Markup

1.20

Benchmark (6 lag VAR)

1.01

1.46

1.04

(0.13)

(0.020)

0.62

0.106

(0.07)

0.93

(n.a.)

(0.061)

(2.32)

0.01

(0.01)

(n.a.)

(n.a.)

0.033
(0.020)

(8.03)

0.69

0.050

.01

0.72

0.042

0.69

0.050
(0.031)

(1.93)

0.93

0.152

10.54

(0.12)
(0.13)
(0.12)
(0.07)

0.73

(0.05)

9.5e + 006 2.3e + 046 0.054

0.70

(0.36)

(0.04)

(0.031)
(0.022)

(0.229)

5.84

1.91

(2.23)

1.46

(28.11)

(n.a.)

0.23

(0.29)

0.69

(0.05)

0.70

(0.04)

0.69

S 00
3.28

(1.69)

3.63

(1.73)

1.00

(n.a.)

0.90

(0.73)

2.79

(1.47)

3.18

(1.65)

2.79

(0.05)

(1.47)

0.72

2413.49

(0.06)

(7368.62)

0.80

(0.21)

0.82

(0.19)

0.97

(n.a.)

1.24

(0.71)

0.79

(0.21)

0.80

(0.21)

0.79

(0.21)

0.81

(0.20)

Figure 1: Response to a monetary policy shock (o - Model, - VAR, grey area - 95 % Confidence Interval)

Output

MZM Growth (Q)

Inflation

0.4
2

0.2

0.2
0.1

0

0

0

-0.2

-0.1

-2

-0.4
0

5

10

15

0

Federal Funds Rate

5

10

15

Capacity Utilization

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

-0.5
10

15

0

Real Wage

5

10

15

-0.2
10

15

10

15

0
-1

-0.2
5

5

1

0

-0.1

15

Investment

0.2

0

0

Consumption

0

10

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

0

5

5

Average Hours

0.5

0

0

0

Velocity

5

10

15

0

Investment Good Price

5

10

15

Total money growth (M)
2

1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5

0.2
0.1

0

0
-0.1
0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

5

10
Quarters

15

-2

0

5

10
Quarters

15

20

Figure 2: Response to a neutral technology shock (o - Model, - VAR, grey area - 95 % Confidence Interval)

Output

MZM Growth (Q)

Inflation
0

0.8
1

0.6

-0.2
-0.4

0.4

0

-0.6

0.2

-0.8

-1
0

5

10

15

0

Federal Funds Rate

5

10

15

Capacity Utilization

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4

-0.5
10

15

0

Real Wage

5

10

15

0

Consumption

15

5

10

15

Investment

1

2

0.4
0.2

10

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

5

5

Average Hours

0.5

0

0

1

0.5

0

0
0

5

10

15

0

Velocity

5

10

15

0

Investment Good Price

10

15

Total money growth (M)
1

0.2
0
-1
-2
-3

5

0
0.5

-0.2
-0.4
0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

0

5

10
Quarters

15

20

Figure 3: Response to an embodied technology shock (o - Model, - VAR, grey area - 95 % Confidence Interval)

Output

MZM Growth (Q)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

Inflation

1

0.4
0.2

0

0
-1
0

5

10

15

-0.2
0

Federal Funds Rate

5

10

15

Capacity Utilization

-1
10

15

10

15

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

0

5

5

Average Hours

1

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0

0

0

Real Wage

5

10

15

0

Consumption

5

10

15

Investment
3

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0

5

10

15

2
1
0
0

Velocity

5

10

15

Investment Good Price

0

-0.4

-1

-0.6

-2
5

10
Quarters

15

5

10

15

Total money growth (M)
0.5

-0.2

1

0

0

0

5

10
Quarters

15

0

0

5

10
Quarters

15

20

TABLE 3: ESTIMATED PARAMETER VALUES ζ 2
ρxM
σM
ρµz
σ µz ρxz
cz
cpz
ρµΥ
σ µΥ ρxΥ cΥ
Benchmark Model
−0.03 0.33 0.90
0.07 0.33 3.00 1.42
0.24 0.30 0.82 0.25
(0.11)

(0.08)

(0.11)

(0.04)

(0.25)

−0.04

0.33

n.a.

n.a.

Monetary Shocks Only
n.a. n.a. n.a.
n.a.

n.a.

(0.09)

n.a.

(0.08)

(0.12)

(0.21)

(0.21)

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Neutral Technology Shocks Only
−0.20 0.27 1.00 0.88 −1.00 n.a. n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.
.22

(.13)

−0.03

n.a.

0.39

−0.24

.25

(.06)

0.33

n.a.
.87

(.05)

0.90

(n.a.)

(.02)

−0.04

0.33

0.89

0.07

0.29

(0.07)

(.19)

(1.72)

(.94)

(.23)

High Markup λf = 1.04
0.07 0.32 2.99 1.43
0.23

(0.04)

0.05

(0.25)

(1.93)

(1.00)

(0.23)

High Markup λf = 1.20
0.31 2.93 1.46
0.20

(0.12)

(0.04)

0.87

Benchmark (6 lag VAR)
0.06 0.23 1.61 1.32
0.80

(0.06)

(0.05)

Low Cost of Varying Capital Utilization
.06
.35 3.60 1.55
−.10 .30

(0.11)

(0.12)

(n.a)

(0.19)

(0.08)

(0.09)

(n.a.)

(0.22)

Embodied Technology Shocks Only
n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
0.30 0.30

(0.11)

(0.11)

(n.a.)

(0.99)

0.13

(0.04)

(n.a.)

(1.92)

cpΥ

(0.02)

(0.26)

(0.27)

(1.98)

(0.85)

(1.03)

(0.76)

(0.24)

(0.14)

(.06)

0.30

(0.04)

0.31

(0.04)

0.10

(0.05)

0.93

(0.06)

.73

(.19)

0.82

(0.12)

0.83

(0.11)

0.80

(0.11)

(0.24)

.36

(.27)

0.25

(0.21)

0.27

(0.23)

.21

(.17)

0.13

(0.21)

0.09

(0.20)

(0.20)

0.76

−0.23

(0.62)

(0.52)

TABLE 4: IMPLIED AVERAGE TIME (Quarters) BETWEEN RE-OPTIMIZATION
1
1−ξ P

Model
Firm-Specific Capital Model
Benchmark
1.51
Benchmark (6 lag VAR)
1.12
Monetary Shocks Only
3.59
Neutral Technology Shocks Only
1.00
Embodied Technology Shocks Only
1.46
Low Cost of Varying
2.33
Capital Utilization
Intermediate Markup λf = 1.04
2.24
High Markup λf = 1.20
3.48

Homogeneous Capital Model
5.60
3.13
3.64
1.00
6.10
2.34
5.52
5.04

Figure 4a: Quasi First Difference of Change in Inflation Versus Log, Marginal Cost
0.04

∆ π t - β ∆ π t+1

0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

st - hat
Figure 4b: Projection of Quasi First Difference of the Change in Inflation Versus Projection of Log, Marginal Cost
0.04

P[∆ π t - β ∆ π t+1 |Ω t]

0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

P[st - hat|Ω t]

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

Figure 5: Firm-Specific Capital and the
Response of Price to Marginal Cost Shocks

MC1,f
MC0,f

P1
P2

MC1,h
B

P0
B′

MC0,h
A

Q0

Q

Figure 6: Features of the Distribution of Output and Prices Across Firms
Figure 6b: Average relative price in Period 4
Homogeneous Capital Model

Figure 6a: Share of output and firms in Period 4
Homogeneous Capital Model
200
0.04
150

0.03

Percent

0.02
100

0.01
0

50

−0.01
−0.02

0

−0.03
−50

1

2
3
4
Period of most recent optimization

1

Figure 6c: Share of output and firms in Period 4
Firm−specific Capital Model

2
3
4
Period of most recent optimization

Figure 6d: Average relative price in Period 4
Firm−specific Capital Model

100
0.04
80

0.03

Percent

0.02
60

0.01
0

40

−0.01
−0.02

20

−0.03
0

1

2
3
4
Period of most recent optimization

1

2
3
4
Period of most recent optimization

Figure 7: Accuracy of Estimated Impulse Response Functions
Output

Output

Output
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
M2 Growth

M2 Growth

2
1
0
−1

M2 Growth

1
0
−1

1
0
−1

Inflation

Inflation

Inflation
0.2
0
−0.2

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
Fed Funds

Fed Funds

0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4

Fed Funds
0.2
0
−0.2

0.2
0
−0.2
Capacity Util

Capacity Util

Capacity Util

0.5
0
−0.5

0.5
0
−0.5

0.5
0
−0.5

Avg Hours

Avg Hours

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

Avg Hours
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
Real Wage

Real Wage

Real Wage
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
Consumption

Consumption

0.2
0
−0.2

Consumption

0.2
0
−0.2

0.4
0.2
0

Investment

Investment

Investment

1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5

1
0.5
0
−0.5

1
0
−1

Velocity

Velocity

1
0.5
0
−0.5

Velocity
1
0
−1

1
0
−1
Price of investment

Price of investment

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1

Price of investment
0.2
0
−0.2

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
0

5

10
Monetary Policy Shock

15

0

5

10

Embodied Technology Shock

15

0

5

10

Neutral Technology Shock

15

