                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INSURING AGAINST TERRORISM:
                                   THE POLICY CHALLENGE

                                              Kent Smetters

                                          Working Paper 11038
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11038


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




This paper was prepared for January 8-9, 2004, Conference of the Brookings – Wharton Papers on Financial
Services and was published in the 2004 Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services Activity. I have
benefited from previous conversations with David Cummins, and Neil Doherty. Jeffrey Brown and the
discussant, Howard Kunreuther, provided valuable and detailed comments, as did other participants at the
Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insuring Against Terrorism: The Policy Challenge
Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 11038
January 2005
JEL No. H0, H2

                                            ABSTRACT

Terrorist attacks worldwide during the past several years have spurned an interest in understanding

not only how governments can mitigate terrorism risk but also how governments might help finance

future losses. This interest was buttressed by the seemingly failure of the private insurance market

to provide coverage for terrorism losses after the attack on September 11, 2001. This paper surveys

the evidence of the supposed private market failures after 9/11 and the arguments for government

provision of terrorism insurance. The paper argues that mostly unfettered insurance and capital

markets are capable of insuring large terrorism losses. If there is any "failure," it rests with

government tax, accounting, and regulatory policies that have made it costly for insurers to hold

surplus capital. Government policy has also hindered the implementation of instruments that could

securitize the underlying risks. Correcting these policies would likely enable private insurers to cover

both terrorism and war risks.

Kent Smetters
The Wharton School
3302 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
smetters@wahrton.upenn.edu
                                      1. Introduction

       The terrorist attacks during the past decade in London, Israel, the United States

and elsewhere have spurned an interest in understanding not only how governments can

mitigate terrorism risk but also how governments might help finance future losses. A

burgeoning academic literature – and, not surprisingly, an intense lobbying effort by

various industries -- has argued that government assistance is needed due to a host of

problems: The large size of potential losses; the difficulty of pricing the losses; the

government’s already-existing role as the guarantor of last resort; asymmetric

information; the relationship between terrorism losses and government military policies;

and other reasons. These arguments served as an important catalyst for the Terrorism

Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) that President Bush signed into law in November, 2002.

Although TRIA’s passage was held up in Congress for almost a year over a debate on

limiting tort actions, TRIA was supported by Democratic and Republican leaders.

       Over the past 50 years, the public has accepted a larger role for the government in

insuring natural catastrophic losses (Moss, 1999, 2002). The general acceptance of the

U.S. government’s role in financing non-natural terrorist losses, therefore, is probably

not surprising, especially since the losses are partly in the government’s control.

       This paper takes a contrarian view. I argue that mostly unfettered insurance and

capital markets are capable of insuring large terrorism losses, even losses 10 times larger

than the $40 billion loss that occurred on September 11, 2001. A $400 billion loss in

capital markets is common. U.S. capital markets alone routinely gain or lose $100 billion

on a daily basis, and often several trillion dollars on a monthly basis. Moreover, a

significant amount of these risks can be traced to new companies that have very little




                                              1
history or close substitutes with which investors can accurately assess future earnings.

Furthermore, a significant amount of net earnings of most corporations are influenced by

the government’s non-military policies through a vast sea of tax regulations, oversight

regulations and torts. Despite these numerous problems and government policy risks,

investors provide enormous liquidity to U.S. firms, producing one of the most efficient

mechanisms for financing risks that has ever existed in the history of the world. Product

and environmental liability markets have also remained vibrant despite shifting court

standards during the 1970s and 1980s that generated large, correlated losses to insurers.

Indeed, shifts in legal standards are probably less predictable than many terrorist acts.

       So why do insurers appear to have a hard time providing insurance against a large

loss that is “chicken scratch” in comparison to daily losses in other capital markets? This

paper argues that capital and insurance markets are not the blame. Rather, if there is any

“failure,” it rests with government policies. Government tax, accounting, and regulatory

policies have made it costly for insurers to hold surplus capital. They have also hindered

the implementation of instruments that could securitize the underlying risks. In other

words, the “market failures” that appear to justify government intervention into the

terrorism insurance market could be best viewed as “government failures.” Correcting

these policies would likely enable private insurers to cover both terrorism and war risks.

       To be clear, the purpose of this paper is not to be provocative. In general, I

believe that government policy -- including progressive income taxation -- can sometimes

play an important role in enhancing risk sharing (Nishiyama and Smetters, 2003).

Indeed, one of the justifications for the government’s largest historic intrusion into

insurance markets -- the creation of the Social Security system -- is that people are either




                                              2
too myopic (if they don’t anticipate retirement) or too smart (if they strategically under-

save in order to rely on public aid) for their own good or the good of society. But the

idea that government tax and regulatory policies could frustrate the development of

insurance markets and securitization should not be surprising. For example, whereas the

Commercial Mortgage Back Securities market was very small a decade ago, deregulation

and tax reforms played an important role in its phenomenal growth over time (Riddiough

and Chiang, 2003), reaching a new record issuance of almost $100 billion in 2001.

       Rather than adopting a particular political view, I approach this topic with an eye

toward identifying deviations from the First Welfare Theorem (FWT) of economics. The

FWT shows that the private market without government is Pareto efficient unless

property rights fail (e.g., externalities), or if trading markets are incomplete – such

deviations are generically referred to as “market failures.” Section II documents many of

the ways that private insurance markets appeared to have “failed” after September 11,

2001, which helped motivate the creation of the TRIA legislation, which is discussed in

Section III. The market reaction to TRIA is then discussed in Section IV.

       Section V critiques several theoretical arguments in favor of government-

subsidized terrorism insurance. The most common arguments lack a clear explanation of

why the FWT theorem fails and how the government can cover terrorism losses more

efficiently: To rationalize government intervention, it is not enough to simply argue that

the private market has a difficult time insuring terrorism losses. Probably the most

compelling argument for government intervention stems from incomplete markets

between generations. But, even here, general-equilibrium considerations suggest that the




                                              3
government’s optimal policy might be radically different – in fact, completely opposite --

from the subsidized insurance approach taken in TRIA. Section VI concludes.



             II. Insurance Markets Before and After September 11, 2001

       In theory, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 was a response to the

inability of the insurance industry to provide coverage against terrorist acts. Before

turning to how the insurance industry reacted to the terrorist acts of September 11, 2001,

this section first discusses the provision of terrorism insurance before these attacks.



The Insurance Industry Prior to September 11, 2001

       It has often been noted that terrorism coverage was essentially provided for “free”

before September 11, 2001 as a part of standard commercial property-causality policies

since these policies did not contain specific terrorism exclusions.1 This claim was

buttressed by Warren Buffet’s admission in a letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders

that he and management did not even price terrorism losses into its premium structure.2

       It is not obvious, however, that major insurers, much less Mr. Buffet, failed so

miserably. Indeed, Buffet already had some experience with large catastrophic (cat)

exposures in the past: Just five years earlier in 1996, he wrote a $1.5 billion reinsurance

contract that provided reinsurance to the Californian Earthquake Authority. It is

especially unimaginable that any insurer of the World Trade Center (WTC) itself would

have never considered the possibility of another attack. Just 8½ years earlier on February

26, 1993, a 1,200 pound bomb exploded inside of a rented Ryder van positioned in the

WTC’s parking garage, producing about $550 million in insured losses. When the attack




                                              4
mastermind, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, was eventually captured in February, 1995, he

announced his only regret: The 110-story tower did not collapse into its twin tower as

planned. The entire WTC complex, therefore, was clearly a marked target for terrorists.

The second WTC bombing in 2001 was also the culmination of over a dozen terrorist

attacks on U.S. interests, although mostly foreign, during the previous decade.

       One possible explanation of the insurance industry’s ex post “plea of ignorance”

following September 11, 2001, was that it was an integral part of their lobbying strategy

to secure a government subsidy to finance future losses. After all, it is hard to argue for a

government subsidy for losses that are “hard to predict” if you rationally anticipated the

vicious attacks on that day. But, in light of the earlier bombing, this plea seems to lack

credibility unless insurers believed that they were not on the hook for a larger loss.

       Another complementary explanation, therefore, is that, prior to September 11,

2001, insurers believed that a larger and more coordinated attack, like the one that

actually occurred on September 11th, could have only been a bi-product of a larger “act of

war” that is expressly excluded under most commercial general liability policies. Since

the Vietnam War, war exclusions have been written very broadly by including “declared

or undeclared” sub-clauses intended to bar claims even if the U.S. Congress does not

formally declare war under the Article I, Section 8, of The U.S. Constitution. Most war

exclusions also include sub-clauses such as “warlike operations” that attempt to exclude

the types of acts that would normally be part of a war, such as a large coordinated attack.

       The legal applicability of war exclusion clauses appears to hinge on whether the

violent action was taken under the direction or knowledge of a sovereign nation. (Pan

American World Airways, Inc. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 505 F.2d 989, 2nd Circuit




                                              5
1974, applying New York law; Holiday Inns, Inc. v. Aetna Insurance Co., 571 F. Supp.

1460, 1499 – 1503 S.D.N.Y. 1983). In particular, the U.S. 2nd Circuit Count found in Pan

American that the hijackers of a single aircraft “were the agents of a radical political

group, rather than a sovereign government” (Id. at 1015) (upheld on appeal).

       In the case of September 11, 2001, insurers could have argued, maybe consistent

with their expectations, that such a large and coordinated attack did, in fact, require and

receive the help of a sovereign nation. The Afghanistan Taliban government was clearly

complicit in the actions of Osama Bin Ladin and al-Qaeda by providing them with land

and the resources to train for terrorist attacks. For example, President Clinton signed an

Executive Order in 1999 prohibiting transactions with the Taliban “for allowing territory

under its control in Afghanistan to be used as a safe haven and base of operations for

Usama bin Ladin and the Al-Qaida organization who have committed and threaten to

continue to commit acts of violence against the United States and its nationals.”3 The

Taliban always understood that al-Qaeda intended to harm the U.S. While in

Afghanistan, Bin Ladin issued numerous Fatwahs before 2001 urging attacks on the U.S.:

       “We -- with God'
                      s help -- call on every Muslim who believes in God and wishes

       to be rewarded to comply with God'
                                        s order to kill the Americans and plunder their

       money wherever and whenever they find it. We also call on Muslim ulema,

       leaders, youths, and soldiers to launch the raid on Satan'
                                                                s U.S. troops and the

       devil'
            s supporters allying with them, and to displace those who are behind them so

       that they may learn a lesson.” (In Al-Quds al-'
                                                     Arabi, February 23, 1998.)




                                              6
       The relationship between the Taliban and Bin Ladin was certainly less than arms

length. Although Bin Ladin has never been directly tied to the 1993 WTC bombing,

evidence linked him to 1997 truck bombing of the U.S. military barracks in Khobar,

Saudi Arabia, and some earlier attacks. After a retaliatory attack by the U.S. military on

Afghan training camps as well as a Sudan pharmaceutical plant in 1998, the Taliban

leadership demoted Bin Ladin’s status from an “official guest” to simply a “guest.”

However, the change in rhetoric rang hallow with the rest of the world: While Mullah

Mohammed Omar was the Taliban’s spiritual leader, it is widely accepted that Bin Ladin

was the movement’s financier and de facto political leader.4 After the 2001 U.S. attack,

Omar along with the Supreme Council continued to accept Bin Ladin as a guest even

though it ensured a war with the U.S. The Taliban prepared the Afghanistan people:

       "Stay united and prepare for jihad against U.S. invaders" (Taliban'
                                                                         s Bakhtar News

       Agency reported, quote by The Associated Press, September 18, 2001)



       For insurance policy purposes, the Taliban appears to have been “a sovereign

government” at the time of the 2001 attack. To be sure, the United States has never

officially recognized the Taliban as the rulers of Afghanistan. However, thirty years

earlier, the U.S. government also did not officially recognize the North Vietnamese

government during the Vietnam War, a conflict that motivated much of the broad

language in the modern war exclusions. Moreover, the 1999 Clinton Executive Order

noted above gives de facto political status to the Taliban: “the term ‘the Taliban’ means

the political/military entity headquartered in Kandahar, Afghanistan that as of the date of

this order exercises de facto control over the territory of Afghanistan…”5




                                             7
       Indeed, there seems to be little material difference between the Taliban and the

“cult-like” Japanese Imperial government in power 62 years ago during the attack on

Pearl Harbor. After both attacks, the sitting U.S. President described each one as an “act

of war.”6 Moreover, Presidents Roosevelt and Bush received Congressional approval for

war, authorizations that would have not been required for defending the country from a

gang of terrorists without at least de facto legal standing. In fact, the Afghanistan War

had more legal standing with Congress than the Vietnam conflict.

       If there was any “failure” on the part of insurers, it was probably their lack of

understanding how difficult it would be to enforce war exclusions ex-post in the presence

of some potential ambiguity regarding their meaning. First, ambiguity tends to be

resolved by courts in favor of the insured rather than insurers, and so insurers were not

guaranteed a victory despite the strong connection between the Taliban and al-Qaeda.

Insurers, therefore, were not willing to risk a loss in face of a potential enormous public

backlash. Indeed, insurance companies are generally very sensitive to public perception

about them. For example, after the Vietnam War ended, most life insurers dropped war

exclusions from their policies and, for example, paid death benefits to families of military

personnel killed during the Gulf War. After the WTC attack, insurers had no real choice

but to take the “high ground,” a decision for which they received only limited fanfare --

mostly self-generated in the form of newspaper ads. If I were an insurer, I would have

unquestionably also paid the claims. Second, insurers received pressure from the

Administration along with hope for a subsidized backdrop for future losses.




                                              8
Reaction of Insurance Market after September 11, 2001

       After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, an extreme “hard market” for

terrorism-related losses emerged. By February, 2002, 45 states had approved terrorist

loss exclusions in commercial policies; the exceptions were California, Florida, Georgia,

New York, and Texas (GAO, 2002a). Fire losses produced by terrorists’ acts, though,

were not excluded. For other lines such as workers compensation and personal lines such

as life insurance, exemptions were not typically allowed. The approved commercial

terrorism exclusions formalized what many insurers had probably previously taken for

granted: They were not responsible for losses caused by “warlike” actions.

       While major insurers of small and medium-sized risks with annual premiums

below $1 million, including Travelers Inc., typically did not write terrorism exclusions

into property-causality policies for non-landmark properties,7 exclusions began to be

routinely enforced in 2002 for larger and more obvious targets. An anonymous survey by

the Real Estate Roundtable (2002), a proponent of a government subsidy, “identified”

$15.5 billion in real-estate transactions as of September, 2002, that were delayed or

cancelled due to concerns about terrorism insurance: 24 office projects, 10 retail projects,

8 apartment buildings, 6 hotel and industrial projects, and 3 mixed-use developments.

       To be sure, it is likely that many of the postponed projects were on the verge of

being delayed anyway due a sharp reduction in commercial fixed investment before

September 11, 2001:8 increased insurance costs were probably at most “tip factors” for

delay. Moreover, even if this suspended activity was mostly due to terrorism concerns, it

constituted only a small fraction of the almost $4 trillion in annual commercial and

residential combined construction. Still, commercial construction activity had started to




                                             9
shrink before September 11, 2001, and so the terrorist attacks only seemed to make things

worse. The President argued that “300,000 jobs” hung in the balance unless Congress

passed a government backdrop.9 New York Democratic Senators Chuck Schumer and

Hilary Clinton also had a vested interest in government action.

       Not only were some new projects cancelled or put on hold, some existing ones

found it hard to obtain terrorism coverage when they renewed their policies in 2002. A

2002 survey by The Risk and Insurance Management Society, which represents larger

companies and is a leading proponent of a federal government terrorism insurance

backdrop, found that two-thirds of its respondents (about 14% of those surveyed) had no

terrorism coverage. The Miami Dolphins and New York Giants and some other NFL

teams were unable to insure their stadiums. Amtrak also went without terrorism coverage

when its $500 million property insurance policy came up for renewal on December 1,

2001. Amtrak claimed that it was not able to get enough coverage at reasonable rates.

       In many other cases, terrorism coverage was eventually obtained but at much

higher premium costs and with less coverage. Just days before the Salt Lake City Games

were to begin on February 9th, 2002, the U.S. Olympic Committee (USOC), for example,

was able to secure terrorism coverage equal to only five percent of its expiring general

liability limit. Yet it paid the full price of its former broader coverage, for about a 20-

fold increase in cost per dollar of coverage. It agreed to these terms only because 40

different insurance companies previously refused coverage. The Mall of America was

finally able to re-obtain terrorism coverage in March, 2002, but with severely restricted

limits and at much higher costs (the owner is prohibited from discussing exact details).

While, as the old legalese cliché goes, “hard cases make bad law,” the seemingly




                                              10
uninsurable nature of some of the nation’s preexisting commercial and non-commercial

landmarks provided further motivation for a government subsidy.

       While the prices of commercial property-liability insurance were beginning to rise

prior to September 11, 2001,10 the terrorist attacks appeared to harden the general liability

market even more. The Golden Gate Park, for example, was unable to obtain terrorism

coverage and yet saw its premiums for non-terrorism coverage rise to $1.1 million in

2002 from $500,000 in 2001. Moreover, coverage was reduced from $125 million to $25

million. The magnitudes of this price increase and coverage reduction, however, were

not common in most other commercial policies that where less obvious terrorist targets.

Insurers likely sharply increased premiums even for non-terrorism losses for potential

targets like The Golden Gate Park because of the potential legal ambiguity of loss

classification ex-post. Insurers are understandably cautious. During the previous two

decades, insurers suffered large environment liability losses when courts began limiting

the applicability of “sudden and accidental” clauses that were intended to exclude fairly

predictable and, hence, non-insurable toxic emissions (e.g., City of Albion v. Guaranty

National Insurance Co., No. 1:98-XC-676 [W.D. Mich. Oct., 15, 1999]). Similarly, many

insurers would reasonably be concerned that they would be forced to pay for a seemingly

violent act that they believed was excluded under their policies.



Toward the Creation of a Federal Backdrop

       With just a few days after September 11, 2001, insurance company officials met

with U.S. Treasury officials and then with the President at the White House. Being one

of the few Treasury officials in the first consultative meeting with the insurance




                                             11
executives, it was fairly clear to me that the initial mood among policymakers within

Congress and the Administration was quite favorable toward providing a government

backdrop, with only a couple exceptions. The insurance executives understood that as

well. Since prominent members of both of the major political parties, including

Democratic then-Senate Majority Leader Daschle and the President, agreed on the need

for a backdrop including, its creation was not really in doubt early on.11

       This initial optimism was dimmed somewhat by a House-Senate disagreement

that emerged on tort liability. The Republican-majority House wanted to limit tort

actions while the Democrat-majority Senate objected. Republicans hoped that prominent

Democratic senators from states with large cities would eventually blink. Senate

Democrats, however, recognized that the federal backdrop was an integral part of the

President’s job creation program. Since Democrats were not in a hurry to secure an

agreement before the 2002 midterm elections, they wanted the Republicans to concede.

In the end, Democrats essentially won: The language on tort limitations was eased in

conference committee after the midterm elections -- even though Republicans knew at

that point they would soon control both chambers, in January, 2003. The President

signed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002 on November 26, 2002.



But Did Insurance Markets Really Fail So Badly?

       A major part of the impetus in Washington toward reaching an agreement in the

fall of 2002 was a major lobbying effort by representatives of construction unions,

business executives, realtors, and insurers armed with “evidence” of higher premiums

and lower coverage levels such as the anecdotes mentioned above. Often their facts were




                                             12
outdated or misleading. For example, an often-cited September 4, 2002, survey by the

Real Estate Roundtable claimed that terrorism coverage accounted for 42 percent of

insurance premiums among “survey respondents who reported being able to obtain

terrorism coverage.”12 The Real Estate Roundtable, however, failed to disclose in their

press release that their “survey” was unscientific (almost anyone can answer Roundtable

surveys by going to their website) and not even remotely representative of the market

conditions in September, 2002. Other industry groups -- The Financial Services

Roundtable, the American Insurance Association, and the Coalition to Insure Against

Terrorism -- also presented gloomy statistics, often focusing on isolated “hard cases.”13

       A more objective reading of the facts, however, paints a very different picture.

By September, 2002, premiums dropped as much as 75 percent per unit of coverage from

the beginning of the year. Limits as high as $1 billion were available and were increasing

over time.14 At least 10 startup insurers were formed (Guy Carpenter, 2003) and other

insurers continued to add capital. Two months before TRIA become law in November,

2002, insurers already added $30 billion of capital with another $10 billion in new issues

pending. Moreover, even the Building Owners and Managers Association, a proponent

of TRIA, acknowledged that three-quarters of larger commercial and residential building

owners had secured terrorism coverage.15 The Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee,

an independent group of leading U.S. academic scholars and experts, concluded,

       “private insurance, reinsurance, and lending markets have made and are

       continuing to make substantial progress in adjusting to the post-September 11

       world. Given those developments, the case for a federal backstop for terrorism

       insurance, which was not clear-cut late last year, is certainly less compelling




                                            13
       now.” (Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee, Statement No. 182, “A

       Proposed Federal Backstop for Terrorism Insurance and Reinsurance”, 9-23-02)



       It was not even clear that the supply restrictions in early 2002 provided much

evidence of an insurance market failure as opposed to a government failure. Quite

impressively, insurers raised $21 billion only three months after September 11, 2001 in

order to replace lost capital (Morgan Stanley, 2001). But the appearance of a general

agreement of a government backdrop in late 2001 likely slowed the entry of even more

capital into the insurance industry, thereby itself creating “evidence” in support of the

need for the backdrop – a “self-fulfilling prophecy.” Taxes on insurer’s capital income

alone would naturally discourage insurers from raising much capital “just in case”

Congress failed to pass a backdrop. Moreover, as discussed later, the inability to have

previously securitized these risks created added pressure. A similar type of “expectations

effect” had previously been a concern with the investment tax incentives – i.e.,

anticipation of future incentives reduces investments immediately -- that were passed

earlier in 2001. The Bush Administration dealt with this problem by allowing the tax

incentives to cover investments in 2001 done prior to the passage of the legislation. No

clear mechanism existed, however, for government-backed terrorism reinsurance.

       A sharp short-term reduction in insurance supply also followed Hurricane Andrew

in August 1992 which caused $15.5 billion in insured losses (Froot and O’Connell,

1999). Reinsurance rates increased 75 percent between January 1992 and July 1994.

Primary insurers and state regulators lobbied Congress and the Clinton Administration

intensely for a federal backstop (CBO, 2001). Five Congressional bills were introduced




                                             14
over the next several years -- which likely slowed the inflow of capital into the market --

although none became law. Within five years, though, the capacity available for paying

for catastrophes was almost double relative to before Andrew.

       While landmark targets, in particular, faced higher premiums after September

11th, it’s not obvious that even these “hard cases” reflected a market failure. Indeed,

theoretically, insurance supply restrictions can be an efficient short-run response of

insurers operating within a dynamic setting with implicit contracts if moral hazard exists

in the loss adjustment phase (Doherty and Posey, 1977; Doherty, Lamm-Tennant and

Starks, 2003). Such “ex-post moral hazard” could be especially relevant for the almost

$10 billion in business interruption claims produced by the WTC attack (Morgan Stanley,

2001) that are difficult to verify. Three additional factors are worth considering.

       First, soon after September 11, 2001, insurers increased their subjective priors of

another attack. Even fair premiums would be expected to significantly increase if

insurers believed that the world fundamentally changed on September 11, 2001, as did

many Americans. Insurers were likely especially averse to the short-run ambiguity about

the underlying loss probability distribution (Kunreuther, et al, 1995; Cummins and

Lewis, 2003), which could produce even higher premiums (although Froot and Posner,

2002, argue that this secondary effect is probably small for some cat exposurers). This

aversion is not itself inefficient unless the government can more accurately estimate loss

distributions, which I doubt (Section V). While large insurers could have quoted higher

premiums for landmark properties – the values of the properties themselves being

obvious upper bounds -- insurers would have been accused of “price gouging,” which

might have triggered a regulatory response. Already many states started to regulate




                                             15
terrorism premiums in commercial lines; it made little sense to antagonize the regulators

even more.16 Hence, insurers chose to “close the pumps” rather than sell “gas at $10 a

gallon.” Large insurers could also then be victims instead of victimizers. Very few large

insurers defected from this strategy in the short run.

       Second, after September 11th but before TRIA, the government might have bailed

out uninsured landmarks if yet another attack occurred (although see the caveats

discussed in Section V). This type of moral hazard was first referred to as the

“Samaritan’s dilemma” by Nobel laureate James Buchanan (1975) and has received a

large amount of attention in the subsequent public finance and insurance literature. The

idea is as follows. The “Good Samaritan” (here, the government) wants to help after a

loss, but, in so doing, creates a moral hazard problem by encouraging inefficient risk

taking by those who are implicitly insured – hence, the “dilemma.” The possibility for

ex-post financing of losses by the government would have reduced the shadow premiums

that property owners were willing to pay to a level below the minimum reservation price

across insurers. It, therefore, might have made little sense for insurers to offer policies –

even if fairly priced -- that would likely be rejected by property owners, especially when

the offers themselves could be potentially detrimental to the image of insurers.

       Third, and probably most importantly, some of the evidence of a “supply

restriction” based on low take-up rates might be better interpreted as evidence of low

demand. Indeed, it is likely that it is not even efficient for many property owners to

purchase terrorism insurance. Most landmark and large properties are owned by

diversified shareholders whose demand for insurance mainly stems from asymmetric

information problems and the costs associated with financial distress. As discussed in




                                             16
Section V, these motives are less important for terrorism risks relative to other risks, and

they are likely to be dominated by large underwriting and loss adjustment costs. Indeed,

as discussed in Section III, the demand for terrorism insurance has not increased much

even after the TRIA subsidy even though the pricing has been fairly good.



                      III. The Creation of a U.S. Federal Backdrop

       This section outlines the TRIA bill that was signed into law in November of 2002

as well as potential alternatives that were also considered.



The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002

       Although The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002 does not impose any

pricing requirements on insurance companies, it does require them to provide coverage

for “certified”17 foreign acts of terrorism in property and causality lines under the same

conditions as the underlying policy. For example, if the policy covers business

interruption for non-terrorism losses then it must provide the same coverage for terrorist

losses. Although TRIA gave the Treasury Secretary discretion to extend this mandatory

coverage to group life contracts, Treasury announced on August 15, 2003, that it did not

see a need to do so (United States Treasury, 2003). Moreover, as recently clarified by the

Treasury, the “make available” also rule does not require insurers to provide protection

for chemical, biological or radioactive losses if such exemptions are allowed for non-

terrorism losses under state law or if the insurer is outside direct State regulatory

oversight (Federal Register, 2003). The “make available” rule expires at year-end 2004

but the Treasury Secretary can extend it one year until year-end 2005.




                                              17
       In exchange for this mandate, the federal government agreed to indemnify 90

percent of the insurer’s losses above a retention level equal to 7% of direct earned

premiums in 2002. This retention level is scheduled to increase in 2004 to 10% of 2003

direct earned premiums. In 2005, the retention will increase to 15% of the 2004 direct

earned premiums. Covered losses, however, are limited to $100 billion; Congress can

use its discretion in financing losses above that amount.

       The TRIA subsidy is financed out of general revenue. But, similar to state-level

guarantee funds, the Treasury Secretary can recoup some of the government’s losses with

policyholder surcharges provided that the aggregate value of these charges plus the

retention of insurers falls below $10 billion in 2003; this limit is scheduled to increase to

$12.5 billion in 2004, and to $15 billion in 2005, when TRIA sunsets.

       TRIA contains very few of the restrictions on tort claims that were originally

desired by Republicans. Instead, TRIA established an exclusive federal cause of action

for claims arising from a certified terrorism attack and it consolidates all claims into a

federal district court where the attack occurs. It also bans the federal government from

paying punitive damages awarded by courts in actions certified under TRIA.



Key Elements of TRIA

       The Administration’s original terrorism insurance proposal, which provided the

framework for the bill passed in the Senate (S. 2600), did not include a mechanism for

charging the private sector for any of the government’s liability either ex-ante or ex-post,

which, not surprisingly, drew the ire of academics (e.g., Cummins, 2001). This free

coverage was largely motivated by the Treasury Secretary who made it very clear in




                                             18
public that he viewed the backdrop as a financial obligation of the government stemming

from its war on terrorism. In contrast, the Council of Economic Advisers as well as some

other members of the Administration initially argued for explicit pricing of the coverage.

The Administration, though, was also interested in a “receding” plan that would sunset:

an ex-ante pricing mechanism would require forming a new bureaucracy that could later

attempt to justify its continued existence before Congress -- egged on, of course, by

industry. In sharp contrast, the pre-conference House bill (H.R. 3210) was mostly a loan

program financed by ex-post assessments on insurers as well as premium surcharges,

which eventually mostly found their way into the legislation but with stricter aggregate

caps. While ex-post assessments do not control moral hazard as well as risk-based ex-

ante premiums, they require less government involvement. State-level guarantee funds

(except in New York) also rely on ex-post assessments.

       The Administration’s original proposal did, however, cap covered losses at $100

billion. During the pre-decisional phase, I originally believed that a ceiling on the

government’s liability wasn’t needed because the government would already be “on the

hook” for larger losses. A phone call to David Cummins at The Wharton School,

however, quickly changed things. Cummins pointed out that this reasoning cut both

ways: if the government is really implicitly obligated for large losses anyway, then it

makes more sense to give the government some more flexibility. He suggested a cap of

$100 billion, a feature that was immediately incorporated into the proposal.

       The small deductible in TRIA reflected the Treasury Secretary’s publicly-stated

belief that terrorism coverage was the obligation of the government. In sharp contrast,

the Council of Economic Advisers initially argued for a much larger deductible.




                                             19
       The overarching designing principle of TRIA was that it would only provide help

on a temporary basis to the private insurance market. Whether TRIA will really go away

as planned in 2005, however, is unclear. Not surprisingly, several industry groups hope

that that TRIA will be extended after it officially sunsets. If history is any guide, they

might get their wish. Indeed, TRIA is not so different than the 1957 Price-Anderson Act

(42 U.S.C. 2014) almost a half century earlier which provided third party “public liability

arising from a nuclear accident.” The Price-Anderson Act relied on pro-rata ex-post

assessments on 110 nuclear reactors if damage from a nuclear incident exceeded the $200

million insurance policy limit that each reactor was required to purchase. The Act also

capped the ex-post assessments (at $10 million per reactor) and contained some tort

reforms. This Act was originally designed to last for only 10 years with the hope that the

private sector would eventually provide coverage. But the Act was renewed and

amended in 1966, 1969, 1975, 1988, and eventually expired on August 1, 2002. The

Energy Policy Act of 2003 (H.R. 6) would extend the Price-Anderson Act until 2023.



Possible Alternative Designs

       Shortly after September 11, 2001, insurance executives lobbied the

Administration and Congress for a reinsurance pool (“Pool Re”). In theory, insurers

would agree to create a $10 billion pool; the government would cover terrorism losses

above that amount. The Pool Re approach had some precedence. The British

government, for example, established a Pool Re in 1993 to finance terrorism losses after

terrorist bombings in London in 1992 and 1993 that produced $1 billion and $500 million

in insured damages, respectively. The British Pool Re appears to be working fine,




                                             20
although its efficiency has been questioned (Brice, 1994) and it has never been tested by

a major loss. But the Pool Re model advocated by U.S. insurance executives differed

from the British model in one startlingly way: U.S. insurers evidentially never intended to

actually fund the pool! Their plan omitted a schedule of private sector payments into the

pool, and they were quite cagy when asked about it. Despite getting some initial traction

within the Administration and the Senate, the Pool Re structure was quickly dropped

from serious consideration. The pool became viewed as backdoor excessive-of-loss

policy with no deductible or coinsurance – and a freebie that would likely stick around.

       My own preferred “second best” approach for a government backdrop (the “first

best” being no backdrop) was for the government to sell excess-of-loss contracts similar

to the catastrophic call options that previously traded on the Chicago Board Of Trade.

The payoffs in CBOT contracts were linked to aggregate regional or national insured

losses as determined by the Property Claims Service. To be sure, the CBOT options, in

particular, suffered from “basis risk” due to the imperfect correlation between aggregate

losses and an insurer’s actual losses (Cummins, Lalonde, and Phillips, 2003). They also

suffered from limited capital backing from CBOT, thereby producing credit risk for large

trades. The CBOT market might have also suffered from coordination problems

discussed below. But these problems were less applicable to the government, especially

if they were purchased by reinsurers that held a largely diversified portfolio.

       A similar type of plan had been proposed by the Clinton Administration to deal

with natural catastrophic losses after Hurricane Andrew, and has been analyzed in Lewis

and Murdoch (1996, 1999), Cummins, Lewis and Phillips (1999) and Cummins and

Doherty (2001).18 Like the PCS options, government payouts would have been linked to




                                             21
an aggregate index of losses rather than firm-specific losses, thereby reducing ex-post

moral hazard by eliminating a buyer’s incentive to inflate losses. The government could

also collect money ex-ante for the protection that it provided instead of passing yet

another unfunded liability to future generations in the form a state-contingent guarantee.

Using loss probability estimates by the CBO, Russell (2002) estimates that a bill like

TRIA is not cheap: It is expected to cost about $6 billion, or about $92,000 per job saved!

       Selling excess-of-loss contracts, though, had some practical problems. First, it

would have required new regulations for a new auction. Second, the contracts would

have generated some basis risk unless the contracts were purchased by reinsurers who

were geographically diversified. Most of the larger reinsurers, though, were foreign.

Since these contracts would have likely been subsidized, this approach would not have

sold well with Congress. Third, since the reinsurance market is fairly concentrated,

competitive pressures might have been insufficient to ensure that any subsidy would be

passed to U.S. ceding insurers. Fourth, as Cummins and Doherty (2001) note, foreign

insurers would be hard to audit. Fifth, even if the government collected money ex ante

for the backdrop, the money would likely have been added to the “unified budget

surplus,” thereby allowing Congress to spend it as they had other trust funds (Smetters,

Forthcoming). TRIA’s eventual excess-of-loss design, therefore, was as a compromise

between this ideal market and the Pool Re wanted by insurers.



                      IV. Demand for TRIA Terrorism Insurance

       TRIA was not exactly the legislative outcome desired by U.S. insurers. Their

dissatisfaction with TRIA might explain the startlingly empirical results recently found




                                            22
by Brown, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei (2003). Their paper shows that TRIA appeared to

reduce insurer share prices at key points in the legislation’s consideration, reflecting the

possibility that insurers had hoped for something better than TRIA.



Stylized Facts

        On the demand side, large property owners do not seem particularly impressed

with TRIA either. According to a March, 2003, survey by The Council of Insurance

Agents and Brokers, about half of the respondents indicate that fewer than 20 percent of

their larger property and casualty clients have purchased terrorism coverage. Related, in

June, 2002, Zurich Financial Services, XL Capital Ltd., Swiss Re, Scor, Hannover Re,

and Allianz established a new company to insure property against acts of terrorism. The

company, Special Risk Insurance and Reinsurance Luxembourg SA, was out of business

in just one year due to a low demand for terror coverage. The low take-up rate of TRIA-

subsidized terrorism insurance is sometimes interpreted as a sign of the legislation’s

failure to provide adequate coverage (e.g., Hofmann, 2003).

        High prices probably do not explain the low demand for TRIA insurance,

especially in light of the fairly generous subsidies. 1 To be sure, in late 2002, some

insurers had difficulty purchasing reinsurance to cover their retention and co-payments.

However, by May of 2003, the reinsurance market continued to soften, allowing primary

insurers to generally follow the pricing guidelines for terrorism coverage established by

the Insurance Services Office, an advisory firm to the industry.19 ISO ranks cities into


1
 In fact, since the publication of this paper, the demand for terrorism insurance has almost doubled. See,
Aon, Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Overview, December, 2004. To be sure, based on
conversations with some risk managers, these additional purchases might be, in part, due to an unexpected
softening of prices for non-terrorism insurance, as insurance budgets were often allocated in advance.


                                                    23
three risk tiers. Tier 1 includes cities for which the risk of an attack is 100 times more

than average: New York, Washington, D.C., Chicago and San Francisco. Tier 2 includes

for which the risk of an attack is 5 times more than average: Los Angeles, Philadelphia,

Boston, Seattle and Houston. Tier 3 includes all other cities. As of May, 2003, ISO

recommend a 3 cent premium per $100 worth of terrorism coverage in Tier 1 cities. For

Tier 2 and 3 cities, the recommended premium was 1.8 cents and 0.1 cent, respectively.

An analysis by Marsh Inc. in February, 2003, of about 1,500 accounts representing a

range of risks in terms of type and geography shows that terrorism pricing is between 8 –

10 percent of the all-risk premium. Overall, premiums are viewed as reasonable.20

         Other mechanisms than price, therefore, likely explain the low take-up following

TRIA. One possibility is the Samaritan’s dilemma mentioned earlier. But this theory is

less believable after the government made subsidized catastrophic insurance available.

While policymakers may continue to bail out homeowners without flood insurance after a

flood, they are probably less likely to bail out a large corporation that gambles and loses,

except maybe after a very large cataclysmic shock (e.g., a thermo-nuclear blast). Instead,

we need to first start with a theory of the demand for terrorism insurance.



Theory

         It’s not obvious that many large firms should rationally even purchase terrorism

coverage. Individuals and firms buy insurance for different reasons. Individuals

purchase insurance to hedge an asset (e.g.., their house, body, or car) that is hard to

diversify in the capital market due to moral hazard. But large firms affected by TRIA are

typically owned by diversified shareholders who should place little weight on firm-




                                             24
specific losses. In fact, with perfect insurance and capital markets, insurance is

“spanned” by the portfolio choices made by investors. So, insurance doesn’t increase

shareholder value (Cummins, 1976; Doherty and Tinic, 1981).

       The field of corporate risk management concerns itself with deviations from

perfect markets that might explain why firms owned by diversified shareholders purchase

insurance. The most important motivations (besides tax incentives) for business insurance

focus on a firm’s desire to reduce financial distress costs as well as principal-agent

problems (see surveys in Doherty [2000] and Meulbroek [2002]).

       Financial distress costs include expected bankruptcy costs, which insurance

reduces. Another cost of financial distress includes the premiums that a firm must pay

for the risks that it imposes on parties that have a non-diversified relationship with the

firm (e.g., employees, dedicated suppliers, business customers, and creditors that incurred

large underwriting costs). By reducing the chance of bankruptcy, insurance gives non-

diversified parties more confidence in the firm’s survival, reducing these premiums.

       The most important principal-agent problem that insurance helps alleviate is the

“underpricing effect” that a firm faces if it instead chooses to self-insure and then raise

new capital after a loss. Since shareholders (the principals) cannot perfectly observe the

actions of managers (the agents), shareholders might misinterpret a short-term loss for a

longer-term loss, i.e., that is more correlated over time. Shareholders, therefore, might

incorrectly “underprice” the firm’s value after a temporary shock. As a result, managers

facing a takeover risk tend to insure against losses that are more temporary in nature,

which helps resolve this asymmetric information problem (Doherty and Sinclair, 2003).




                                             25
       High underwriting and loss adjustment costs, however, discourages the purchase

of insurance. Again, personal and business lines of insurance differ dramatically here.

With personal lines of insurance, underwriting and adjustment costs are typically a small

share of the premium. The reason is that human beings, cars, and houses are fairly

homogenous entities. With just a few variables, an accurate premium can be given in

most personal lines, which is why personal insurance can often be purchased over the

Internet. With business insurance, though, underwriting for lines like general liability is

very expensive because the nature of the risks varies dramatically between firms. For

example, GM, Inc., is more worried about product liability than Yahoo!, Inc., whereas

Yahoo!, Inc., is more worried about copyright infringement and denial of service attacks.

Loss adjustment for business insurance, especially business interruption, is also costly.

Underwriting and loss adjustment costs can account for a third or more of the premium.

       Combining these competing forces, a firm owned by diversified shareholders

rationally purchases insurance only if the sum of the benefits from lowering financial

distress and principal-agent costs is larger than the underwriting and adjustment costs.

Otherwise, foregoing terrorism insurance is efficient and not a sign of a market failure.



Terrorism Insurance is Probably not Efficient for Many Companies

       Although I have not yet found exact figures, the marginal costs of underwriting

terrorism insurance and loss adjusting are likely to be larger than for other losses even

though insurers do not have as much incentive to be aggressive in the presence of TRIA.

So, buying terrorism insurance would be rational only if it significantly reduces a firm’s

financial distress costs and underpricing risks – which I doubt. We consider each in turn.




                                             26
       The most important financial distress cost for many firms stems from its creditors.

Traditionally, creditors demanded “full” general liability insurance coverage in order to

ensure repayment. In early 2002, some property owners were in default of their bank

loans because they could not find terrorism coverage. Some property owners, including

the owners of the Mall of America, appealed for court protection because they believe

that the tight market for terrorism insurance was the cause of their non-compliance.

       But within 6 months following the WTC attacks – well before TRIA – creditors

began to yawn at terrorism exclusions that were being written into some commercial

insurance contracts – much like the war exclusions in the past. Indeed, the Federal

Reserve’s Board of Governor’s April 2002 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank

Lending Practices found that most creditors have diversified away most of their high-risk

properties. About 70 percent of domestic lenders indicated that less than 5 percent of the

dollar volume of their commercial real estate loans outstanding (on books or securitized)

is backed by “high profile” or “heavy traffic” commercial real estate properties. Another

20 percent of lenders indicate that such loans comprise between 5 and 10 percent of their

portfolio; the remaining 10 percent of lenders listed such loans as accounting for 10 to 20

percent of their portfolios. The same survey shows that almost three-quarters of domestic

banks require terrorism insurance on less than 10 percent of loans financing even “high

profile” or “heavy traffic” commercial real estate properties. Of the few banks that

generally require terrorism insurance coverage, the most common response to a lack of

coverage was to rewrite the lending contract to require more collateral or to allow for

partial coverage. Terrorism insurance was not required for loans less than $10 million.




                                            27
       The Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities (CMBS) market also seemed to

relatively unphased by terrorism risk. After CMBS issuance reached a record high of $97

billion in 2001, issuance fell to only $36 during the first half of 2002. While some

observers blamed the weak economy and terrorism risk as the main culprits (e.g.,

Muldavin, 2002), the ease at which investors can diversify terrorism risks with CMBS

suggests that most of the blame probably lied with the weak economy. Indeed, in their

Monetary Report to the Congress on July 16, 2002, the Federal Reserve noted that the

low risk spreads observed in the CMBS market “suggests that concerns about terrorism

insurance have not been widespread in the market for commercial mortgages.”21

       Turning now to underpricing, this problem is important in general. It alone

probably motivates corporations to purchase insurance as much if not more than financial

distress costs and tax incentives (e.g., Hoyt and Ho, 2000). But the underpricing effect is

less important for terrorism losses: A terrorist strike will likely be interpreted by investors

precisely for what it is, and not be confused with a larger or shock that is more correlated

over time. Hence, the motivation for purchasing insurance is reduced.



      V. Is there a rational for government provision of terrorism reinsurance?

       A recent and growing literature has examined the potential role of the government

as a reinsurer for large catastrophic and terrorism losses and/or the difficulty that the

private sector has in insuring extreme events. See, for example, Lewis and Murdock

(1996); Priest (1996); Jaffee and Russell (1997); Cummins, Lewis, and Phillips (1999);

Cutler and Zeckhauser (1999); Froot (1999); Froot and O’Connell (1999); Gron (1999);

Kleindorfer and Kunreuther (1999); Lewis and Kevin C. Murdock (1999); CBO (2001);




                                              28
Cummins and Doherty (2001); Froot (2001); Moss (2001); American Academy of

Actuaries (2002); Brown, Kroszner and Jenn (2002); General Accounting Office (2002);

Kunreuther (2002); Russell (2002); Brown, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei (2003); Cummins,

David J. and Christopher Lewis (2003); Doherty, Lamm-Tennant and Starks (2003);

Kunreuther, Michel-Kerjan, Porter and Woo (2003); Kunreuther, Michel-Kerjan, Porter

(2003); and, Woo (2003). Although is not obvious that private insurance markets failed

after September 11th, this section argues that any problems probably stem from a failure

in government policies. A mostly unfettered insurance market combined with sensible

government policy should be able to provide insurance against terrorism and war losses.



Future Losses are Difficult to Forecast

       The most popular argument that has been put in favor of government-subsidized

terrorism insurance is that private insurers have a difficult time constructing loss

distributions for future terrorists due to a lack of reliable time series evidence. The

emphasis on “reliable” is important because a time series on losses from past terrorist

attacks does exist, as documented in Blomberg et al (2003). Unlike most losses, though,

terrorists avoid past techniques in order to increase their likelihood of a costly attack.

These strategic choices render the time series evidence less reliable. In statistical

language, the time series of terrorism losses is fraught with “structural breaks.”

       This argument, however, does not alone support a role for the government since it

does not explain why the government can do a better job financing the losses. The

government’s main advantages stem from its superior access to information and its ability




                                              29
to tax, both of which we consider in more detail below. But the argument that the private

market sector has difficultly insuring losses does not alone rationalize government action.




Prevalence of Other Risky Markets

       Indeed, many private markets seem to work fine despite the apparent lack of

reliable time series evidence. The market for Initial Public Offerings, for example, has

raised trillions of dollars in venture capital even though most IPO underwriters have no

concomitant time series or close substitutes upon which to reply. Furthermore, a

significant amount of net earnings of most corporations are influenced by government

policy. For example, Kemsley and Nissim (2002) show that about 10 percent of the

value of U.S. firms can be traced solely to the tax deductibility of corporate interest

payments on debt. Yet investors provide enormous liquidity to U.S. firms.

       Indeed, capital markets routinely take bets on very novel risks. For example,

while models of hurricane losses are becoming better over time, earthquake models are

still in their infancy. Yet a private market exists for insuring earthquake losses even

outside of state-level subsidies. In 1996, National Indemnity, the super-cat reinsurance

unit of Berkshire Hathaway, underwrote the California Earthquake Authority (CEA),

with a three-year $1.5 billion reinsurance contract.22 Cat bonds have also been devised to

insure against losses earthquake losses in the U.S. Midwest and in Tokyo and other

regions. Commercial aircraft and satellites were insured long before a viable time series

on losses became available (Borch, 1990). The marine insurance market developed long

before accurate weather models became available (Jaffee and Russell, 1997).




                                             30
       Environment liability insurance also operates in a highly uncertainty setting since

courts often change standards, producing large correlated losses for insurers (Viscusi et

al, 1993). Although estimates before 1991 are less reliable,23 estimates of total losses for

abandoned hazardous waste sites and asbestos through just 1995 are as high as $150

billion.24 Most of these payments were indemnified under occurrence-based insurance

contracts written before 1986 and were not reasonably anticipated by insurers.25 Yet the

Commercial General Liability insurance market is still vibrant. To be sure, “absolute”

environmental exclusions are now being routinely written into new CGL policies. But

those exclusions were a response to the courts narrowly interpreting “sudden and

accidental” exclusions intended to exclude pollution that was more deterministic in

nature. Environmental protection is still available through “environmental impairment

liability” policies that cover all emissions whether “sudden and accidental” or not.

       The product liability insurance market also operates in a very unpredictable

environment. This market became very unpredictable ever since the 1981 famous mass

tort case, Grimshaw v. Ford Motor Company, which awarded $128 million ($125 million

in punitive damages), the largest jury verdict ever in a personal injury case at that time.

The jury found Ford negligent by putting aside cost-benefit safety analysis demonstrating

that the cost of a safer gas tank exceeded the marginal benefit. Their reasoning was

upheld on appeal (Grimshaw v. Ford Motor Company [1981] 119 Cal. App. 3d 757):

       "There was evidence that Ford could have corrected the hazardous design defects

       at minimal cost but decided to defer correction of the shortcomings by engaging

       in a cost-benefit analysis balancing human lives and limbs against corporate

       profits. Ford'
                    s institutional mentality was shown to be one of callous indifference




                                             31
       to public safety. There was substantial evidence that Ford'
                                                                 s conduct constituted

       ‘conscious disregard'of the probability of injury to members of the consuming

       public." (Id. at 813)



       The displacement of clear cost-benefit standards in Grimshaw and subsequent

decisions has thrown the product liability insurance market into disarray -- yet the market

still exists. According to the actuary-consulting firm Tillinghast-Towers Perrin (2002),

the inflation-adjusted tort cost per U.S. citizen has grown by over eight times from 1950

to 2001. According to the same study, insured tort claims in the year 2001 alone

amounted to $146.30 billion, a figure that excludes four big ticket items: Payments for

medical malpractice; self-insured losses; “one time” tobacco settlements; and, punitive

damages. Punitive damages in just the largest ten cases in 1997 alone exceeded $100

billion (Thornburgh, 2000). Although punitive damage awards are not insurable in all

states, appeals courts have produced additional uncertainty into the product liability

insurance market by often ignoring the guidelines that the Supreme Court set forth in

BMW of North America Inc. vs. Gore (S Ct. US 1995, 5-4 Decision). This decision,

although admittedly somewhat vague, was intended to limit punitive damages. Only

recently did the Supreme Court “clarified” its position in State Farm Mutual Automobile

Insurance Co. v. Campbell (S Ct. US 2003, 6-3 Decision), which many observers have

interpreted as setting a ceiling on punitive damages equal to nine times actual damages.

       The continued operation of environment and product insurance market should

give proponents of a government terrorism backdrop considerable pause. New legal

precedents produce large and correlated risks to insurers in these markets. My own




                                            32
reading of the historical evidence is that court decisions – acts completely in the

government’s control -- are probably more novel and less predictable than many terrorist

acts, including the 2001 WTC bombing that occurred just 8½ years after the 1993 attack.

       The Ninth Judicial Circuit, the largest circuit court in the nation with jurisdiction

from Arizona to Guam, alone provides ample evidence. Most recently, this court

reinstated a lawsuit against gun manufacture Glock Inc. (Ileto v. Glock Inc., No. 02-

56197). This suit alleges Glock committed “distribution negligence” by selling a gun that

was eventually used in a murder -- even though Glock sold the gun in question to a police

department which later resold it on the open market. The Ninth Circuit found that this

novel theory of negligence could proceed: The plaintiffs could reasonably argue that

Glock should have anticipated the resale of their products! Not surprisingly, the Supreme

Court routinely overturns the Ninth Circuit’s decisions. But even if Glock successfully

defends itself, it will have to incur large litigation costs. According to the Tillinghast-

Towers Perrin survey cited earlier, defense costs -- not including plaintiff costs -- and

administrative costs compose 35% of insured liability costs.



Why is Time Series Evidence Even Useful?

       Not only do many non-terrorism capital and insurance markets operate in a very

risky environment, it is important to recall why time series evidence is even important in

the insurance industry. Historical evidence is especially relevant if an insurer must fund

its losses using ex-ante premiums. In this case, the insurer must accurately assess its total

losses and the distribution of those losses across insured parties (Kunreuther, 2002). Ex-

ante premiums are required, for example, in most personal lines of insurance where the




                                              33
credit risk of the insured party is a major concern. But such projections are less

important for the large firms actually affected by TRIA. (As previously noted, terrorism

exclusions are typically not written into contracts with annual premiums below $1

million.) Large firms have better credit, allowing for more flexibility in contract design.

       For example, either loss-sensitive contracts with retroactive premiums or

reciprocal relationships can be constructed so that ex-post aggregate shocks are shared by

insured firms. The only determination that must be made ex-ante is how to distribute the

weights of ex-post losses among the insured. (One exception is if the contract embeds

loss caps that would pass some risk to the shareholders of the insurance company.) But

assigning these weights only requires estimating the relative differences in expected

losses, which is much easier than estimating the absolute value of expected losses.

Indeed, the tiered city-level risk structure estimated by ISO, as discussed earlier in

Section IV, provides the exact information that is required for determining the weights.

       Consider, for example, two buildings, B1 and B2. Suppose B1 resides in

Washington, D.C., while B2 resides in Manhattan. It might be challenging to estimate

the probability of an attack in either city, making it difficult to rely only on ex-ante

premiums – although not necessarily more difficult for the private sector than the

government. But it would be reasonable for the market to believe, as does ISO, that the

probability of an attack in both cities is similar. So B1 and B2 would receive the same

loss weights per dollar of coverage. If B2, however, resides in Des Moines, Iowa, then

B1 might be assigned a weight 100 times larger than B2. Weights can also be adjusted to

control for moral hazard (e.g., building design) that might be relevant for some types of

attacks. Retro premiums can also be partially sensitive to one’s own losses.




                                              34
Summary

       In sum, capital markets and insurance lines already provide considerable liquidity

under conditions when future losses are very difficult to predict based on time series

evidence. Moreover, the historical record is most useful when the credit risk of the

insured undermines the potential for ex-post risk sharing. Credit risk is a large problem

in personal insurance lines but less of a problem for firms of the size affected by TRIA.



Large risks

       Another common argument for government intervention is that potential terrorist

losses can produce large and correlated losses in relation to the insurance industry’s

capital. Of course, as noted above, changing legal standards also produce large and

correlated risks in the environmental and product liability insurance markets; both

markets appear to continue to operate vigorously. But I will not belabor this point.

       Just how large of a loss can the property and causality insurance industry

currently absorb? The U.S. property and causality surplus stood at $334 billion in 1999

and $290 billion at the end of 2001 (which includes about $10 billion in WTC losses paid

by that point).26 But these estimates alone do not really address insurance capacity

because they ignore the distribution of the capital and limited liability. Cummins,

Doherty and Lo (2002), therefore, use a novel options pricing approach to estimate that

U.S. insurers would be able to finance about 92.8 percent of a $100 billion catastrophic




                                            35
loss. While a majority of a $300 billion loss could probably be paid, it would place a

substantial strain on the industry at current levels of insurance capitalization.

       Of course, the insurance market’s capacity is an endogenous variable that

responds to market conditions. When at least some of losses are funded using ex-ante

premiums, relevant market conditions also include expectations of future losses based on

historical losses. In other words, the supply of insurance capital is not fixed. As

discussed earlier in Section II, catastrophic insurance capacity doubled within five years

after Hurricane Andrew, even though it was probably discouraged by possible legislation

of a government backdrop. Insurers also began to rapidly replace capital that was lost on

September 11th, although TRIA presumably discouraged even more capital inflow.

       Besides providing insurance such as TRIA, government policies, however,

constrain the private market’s effort to increase capital after a loss. Many states, for

example, cap insurance rates or require insurers to underwrite various lines below costs.

Insurers in the United States are particularly hit hard by regulations that require them to

insure terrorist-related workers compensation claims at premiums well below actuarial

costs. Rates are often restricted in other property and causality lines as well. Three

additional types of federal and state policies also make it costly for insurers to hold

capital or to securitize the underlying risks: Taxes, accounting / regulations, and their

concomitant enhancement of agency problems.27



Government Tax Policy Constrains Insurance Capital Accumulation

       The first large capital cost stems from taxes. Shareholders of non-insurance

companies already face a “double tax” in the form of corporate income taxes plus




                                              36
personal taxes (dividends or capital gains). Shareholders of insurance companies face a

“third layer” of taxes on their capital income: The insurer must pay taxes on the capital

income that it receives even though it was already taxed as corporate income. Since the

deadweight loss from taxes increases with the square of the tax rate, the distortion caused

by this “third layer” of taxation is likely larger than the distortion caused the first two

layers combined. While part of this third tax layer can be reduced by holding reserves

offshore in places like Bermuda, this solution is very imperfect since offshore locations

do not provide the same investment opportunities as onshore. For example, an offshore

insurer cannot invest their capital back in the U.S. and escape U.S. taxes. Moreover, if

the insurer is not admitted (licensed to do business) in the U.S. then premiums are subject

to federal excise taxes, and premiums might not be deductible against state income taxes.



Government Accounting Policy Reduces Onshore Securitization

       Tax reform alone, however, will not likely expand catastrophic protection

dramatically. Insurers presumably must also be able to tap into the multi-trillion dollar

capital market by securitizing their risks. Securitization gives investors, in the words of

Cummins (2002), a “pure play” on the underlying insured risk, much like a “tracking

stock.” These tailored risks allow investors to achieve better portfolio diversification

with lower information costs. Also, when the security’s payoff is indexed to aggregate

(not firm) losses or some other trigger outside of the firm’s control, securitization can

reduce ex-post moral hazard that exists between primary insurers and reinsurers (as

documented in Doherty and Smetters, 2002) but at a cost of some basis risk reflecting the

mismatch between aggregate and individual losses (Froot, 1999).




                                              37
        The most important factor inhibiting the development of risk-linked securitization

is state-level regulation. In 1999 and 2001, the NAIC’s Insurance Securitization Working

Group recommended that state insurance regulators encourage alternative sources of

capacity by examining the use of risk-linked securities.28 But only a few states currently

allow a U.S. insurer to include a derivative instrument as a claim-amount recoverable

asset on its balance sheet. But only securities with no basis risk have been allowed, i.e.,

indemnity-based securities. Illinois, for example, gave INEX its permission to complete

its first securitization in 1999 in which Kemper Insurance Group used a special-purpose

vehicle to cover $100 million of top-level New Madrid earthquake exposures in the U.S.

Midwest. Payoffs were paid on an excessive-of-loss basis and have no basis risk.

        The development of a vibrant onshore securitization market in the U.S. might,

though, require the legal acceptance of risk-linked securities that incorporate basis risk,

i.e., non-indemnity securities. These instruments give investors a “super pure play” since

the payoffs depend on more easily-measured indexes and are not subject to moral hazard.

But such a development would require additional regulatory changes in the face of

considerable resistance. While the NAIC Securitization Working Group is also

examining these types of securities, intense lobbying by the Reinsurance Association of

America, for example, have raised concerns about basis risk, which could hamper the

approval of trigger-based risk-linked securities by state regulators.29 Moreover, even the

regulatory jurisdiction of instruments with basis risk is not clear. While the 1945

McCarran-Ferguson Act leaves the primary authority of insurance regulation with the

states, the federal government plays a much more active role in the securities market.

The state jurisdiction over securities with basis risk is not clear since it is not obvious that




                                              38
these instruments satisfy the triplicate standard for insurance set by the Supreme Court in

Union Labor Life Insurance Company v. Pireno 458 U.S. 119 (1982).30 My own reading

is that Court’s tests are probably satisfied but there is certainly some room for debate.



Concerns over Equitable Tax Treatment

       Reinsurers claim to resist onshore securitization, in part, out of concerns that it

could lead to an unequal tax treatment of reinsurance capital and securitized assets,

especially if onshore securitization is given the same tax advantages as offshore

securitization (Klein, Grace, and Phillips [2000]). To be sure, many of these concerns

could be addressed by allowing traditional reinsurers to deduct expected catastrophic

losses, as in some European nations (Jaffee and Russell, 1997), rather than just actual

losses. In the U.S., only reserves allocated to actual (or highly predictable) losses can be

deducted (Bradford and Logue, 1999, outline the impact of tax law on reserve capital).

       But a strong case can be made, at least in the short run, for unequal tax treatment

that gives preference to securitization. The reason is that the current securitization

market likely suffers from a coordination failure. In particular, the relationship between a

reinsurer and a ceding insurer is an implicit long-term contract that is costly to abandon,

maybe due to fixed underwriting costs (see, for example, Doherty and Muermann in the

current volume). A rational ceding insurer will desert this long-term relationship for the

securitization spot market only if the spot market will likely remain liquid in the future,

which, in turn, requires other ceding insurers to make the same choice. In other words,

the securitization spot market is potentially being inhibited by demand externalities that

produce multiple equilibriums: There is little incentive to be the first player in the spot




                                              39
market. The government can use preferential tax treatment in the short run to potentially

move the insurance market from the “inferior” equilibrium, where insurers primarily cede

their risks to traditional reinsurers, toward the “superior” equilibrium with securitization.



Government Tax and Accounting Policies Enhance Agency Problems

       Besides taxes and regulations, insurers also face agency costs when holding

capital produced by asymmetric information between shareholders and managers. Some

agency costs (e.g., potential theft of assets) are no different than with a mutual fund. But

insurer shareholders must additional worry about the insurer’s credit risk in the face of

potential losses and bankruptcy costs since, unlike a mutual fund, an insurer’s losses are

not necessarily fully passed through to the insured ex post using retro premiums, etc.

       Government state regulation is intended to reduce some of these agency costs.

But, ironically, the government tax and regulations discussed above enhances agency

costs by giving insurers incentives to locate offshore outside of the accounting and legal

arm of the U.S. government. As noted above, offshore insurers avoid some of “triple

tax” but at a cost of portfolio restrictions and other taxes. Offshore insurers also have

more latitude to issue risk-linked securities, including those with basis risk.

       To be sure, a firm domiciled in a U.S. state usually cannot purchase insurance

from an offshore insurer unless the insurer is admitted to do business in that state and is

regulated. But an important exception is often granted to alien insurers that finance the

upper layers of large losses if it can be proven that a suitable admitted insurer does not

exist in the state – a very relevant exception in the discussion herein. In particular, excess




                                             40
coverage is often provided by alien insurers outside of the U.S. jurisdiction. At best,

states can attempt to regulate the brokers through which the insurance is purchased.



Summary

       In sum, the capital capacity of insurers is a legitimate concern for financing

terrorism losses. But important frictions can be traced to government policy itself. The

government could significantly increase insurance capacity through a combination of tax

and regulatory reforms that would increase the capacity of traditional insurers and reduce

the barriers toward broader securitization.



Asymmetric Information

       Another potential argument for the government provision of terrorism insurance is

that it has more access to sensitive information relative to the private sector. This

superior information might allow the government to more-accurately assign prices for

reinsurance than a private market reinsurer. Moreover, since the government plays a

unique role in mitigating terrorist risks, a government-subsidized backdrop gives

politicians the incentive to invest in the proper level of loss control: More mitigation

reduces the likelihood of having to make politically unpopular decisions like raising

taxes, cutting other spending, or producing larger deficits after a terrorism loss.



Can the Government Really Construct More Accurate Loss Distributions?

       This line of reasoning, though, raises several issues. First, the argument’s basic

premise is suspect. To be sure, the U.S. government can more easily monitor al-Qaeda




                                              41
“chatter” than the private sector -- although the chatter itself and the costs of associated

with “code orange” security might be the newest form of terrorism. But it is unlikely that

the government holds closely the information that would allow it to systematically

construct superior loss distributions relative to private firms that have money on the line.

       Even the U.S. Department of Defense evidentially doesn’t believe that it has a

monopoly on information as well as the ability to process it better than the private sector.

In July, 2003, the DoD’s Defense Advanced Research Project Agency announced an

initiative, "The Policy Analysis Market," as an attempt to improve its human intelligence.

This market would have allowed participants to bet on futures contracts over various

political and civil outcomes including the assassination of Palestinian leader Yassar

Arafat and a missile attack by North Korea. The DoD defended its plan, saying that a

market system was highly accurate at predicting such outcomes. The plan was

abandoned only after pressure from some members of Congress, including Senator Byron

Dorgan (D-North Dakota) who referred to it as “unbelievably stupid” and Senator Ron

Wyden (D-Oregon) who referred to it as “ridicules and grotesque.”31

       Since the DoD market was not implemented, it is impossible to determine how

well it would have actually worked. But the “Saddam Hussein futures market,” created

by TradeSports Exchange, LTD., in Ireland earlier in the year gives some initial clue. As

of February 10, 2003, it predicted there was only a 43% chance that Hussein would be

disposed as the ruler of Iraq by March 31, 2003, but an 82% chance he would be gone by

May 30, 2003.32 These accurate predictions were made by the market (after 42,000

trades) well before ground troops invaded Iraq in March, 2003, and obviously well before

President Bush declared an end to major military operations in May, 2003.




                                              42
       The widespread belief that the U.S. government secretly holds vastly superior

information was buttressed by media reports after the September 11th attacks suggesting

that the government had access to key information that should have helped it predict

these attacks. To be sure, the Department of Defense’s National Security Agency

collects more information every day than stored in the Library of Congress. But most of

this ex-post criticism of the NSA and FBI – some of it coming from “whistleblowers” –

appears to be “20/20 hindsight,” including the observation that some foreigners of

Arabian background were training at American flight schools. When viewed objectively,

the government likely knew very little more than the private sector about the risks.

       Even the ideas of simultaneously hijacking multiple aircrafts or using an aircraft

as a missile against a U.S. landmark were not novel. Similar missions were previously

attempted but were either of smaller scale or mitigated. In 1994, Islamic terrorists, for

example, hijacked an Air France plane in Algiers with the intention of crashing it into the

Eiffel Tower. In the same year, a small aircraft operator purposely crashed his plane on

the White House grounds with the intent on hitting the White House. In 1995, the

Philippine government uncovered “Project Bojinka” in which Islamic terrorists planned

to blow up 11 American airlines as well as crash an aircraft with explosives into CIA

headquarters. All of these events were widely reported well before September 11th.33

       Private sector anti-terrorism specialists had also discussed the possibility of

crashing aircraft into U.S. landmarks including the World Trade Centers before the actual

attacks. 34 A more personal anecdote relates to a case study that I conducted of the 1993

World Trade Center attack as part of an undergraduate course in 1998, three years before

the 2001 attack. One student, marveling at the fact that the main tower could withstand a




                                             43
1,200 bomb exploded at its base, asked me what would had it taken to bring down one of

the buildings. In response, I conjectured that even flying a jumbo aircraft into the main

tower probably would not have collapsed it. To be sure, I was clearly wrong. But I am

also not an expert in structural engineering, and I was only partly familiar with the

structural details of the WTC. (If the Empire State Building were instead attacked in a

similar fashion, there is a good chance it would have not collapsed given its higher

concentration of cement relative to metal as well as other design differences.) Insurance

companies, though, often hire structural engineers as part of their underwriting.



Exploiting any Informational Advantage Would be Difficult

       There is a second problem with the “asymmetric information justification” for

government-subsidized terrorism insurance. For the sake of argument, suppose that we

accept the premise the government does hold closely superior information that would

allow it construct more-accurate terrorism loss distributions. This information advantage,

however, gives the government an advantage in financing terrorism losses only if the

government attempted to charge ex ante for the reinsurance that it provides, which it did

not in TRIA due to the practical reasons discussed earlier in Section III.

       Even if the government did attempt to price terrorism reinsurance it provides,

considerable care would be needed. For example, the government could not sell this

insurance at auction if it really wanted to take advantage of its superior information. An

efficient auction solution would not depend on the information set of the government

serving as the Walrasian auctioneer of such a market: The auctioneer simply increases or

decreases prices in response to positive or negative excess demands. Achieving a




                                             44
socially efficient auction requires the buyers to have valid information, which, by

assumption, they don’t. For the same reason, a secondary market won’t produce efficient

prices either if the buyers in this market really have inferior information.

       Instead, government bureaucrats would have to construct a system of subsidies or

taxes to ensure that the private market was purchasing enough -- but not too much! --

terrorism coverage. The government’s experience running other insurance backdrops

(e.g., the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation; the Federal Insurance Savings and

Loan Corporation; and, the Federal Emergency Management Agency) gives reason for

considerable pause about the ability of the government to operate so efficiently.



Backdrop Does Not Correctly Align Policymakers Incentives

       Finally, while the government provision of terrorism insurance might appear to

give politicians the incentive to invest in the optimal amount of loss control, it would

likely work in the wrong direction. Policymaker’s already have an enormous amount of

non-diversifiable “human capital” invested in fighting terrorism vis-à-vis their reelection

prospects. Indeed, the rhetoric in Washington after September 11th was that terrorism

should be fought at any cost. For example, The September 11th Victim’s Compensation

Fund, which will pay almost $5 billion to victims of this attack but not previous attacks,

was debated for only 1½ hours by Congress before passage.35 Forcing politicians to raise

taxes, cut spending, or increase deficits after a terrorist loss would likely move mitigation

even further away from a proper weighing of the costs against the benefits.



Time Inconsistent Policies




                                             45
       Another common argument for a subsidized federal backdrop is the Samaritan’s

dilemma noted earlier: Many people will rationally forgo insurance since they believe the

government will bail them out after a major loss. By assumption, the government cannot

credibly commit ex ante to not bailing out the non-insured ex post. In other words, any

such commitment would fail to be subgame perfect. In still other words, a no-bailout

policy is not time consistent, i.e., any “hard knuckles” promise will be broken ex post.

       In theory, subsidized government insurance could encourage some “freeriders”

without insurance to purchase insurance before a loss actually occurs. Many households

and firms, though, may continue to assume that the government will bail them out even if

they don’t buy insurance. Still, subsidized insurance should increase coverage if some

participants believe that they can get a better deal relative to the free bailout. Coverage

could also increase if politicians themselves believe that the provision of cheap insurance

strengthens the popular “moral case” against ex-post bailouts. This latter “defensive”

position, for example, might have motivated some fiscally conservative policymakers to

support TRIA in light of the hardening market for terrorism insurance in 2002. In both

cases, however, a fairly generous subsidy is needed in order to sharply increase coverage.

       While TRIA subsidizes terrorism insurance, the French government mandates

catastrophic coverage as part of virtually every property-liability policy (Moss, 1999). In

other words, the only way to avoid terrorism coverage in the French system is to forgo

coverage altogether, if allowed. This subsection compares both approaches. But, in

doing so, it is critical to distinguish between non-diversifiable and diversifiable risks.



Mandatory Coverage is More Efficient than Price Subsidies for Non-Diversifiable Risks




                                              46
       The Samaritan’s dilemma is an often-cited reason why the U.S. government

subsidizes some forms of insurance including flood, hurricane and earthquake insurance.

But these subsidies are not without problems. For example, as of 2001, the National

Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) had 4½ million policies in force with over $570 billion

in coverage.36 The NFIP loses about $800 million on average each year due to the

subsidy it provides by setting premiums below their actuarially-fair value; much of this

loss comes from “older properties.”37 (Many new properties are effectively covered as

well by “remodeling” existing properties.) While the NFIP technically does not have a

formal appropriation in the budget to cover this shortfall, the surplus is financed with

federal income taxes that distort labor and saving decisions of households. The insurance

also causes adverse selection problems, and encourages the inefficient development of

vacation homes, rental properties, and small businesses in high-risk locations.

       Since most properties, such as houses, covered by the NFIP are hard to diversify

in the private capital market, the purchase of flood insurance is likely rational, especially

since the underwriting costs are pretty low. So a more efficient approach than subsidized

pricing would be to simply mandate coverage for homeowners’ losses stemming from

floods. Mandatory coverage would address the Samaritan’s dilemma without distorting

prices if premiums are actuarially fair. For example, the NFIP has resisted charging fair

prices out of concern that people would select out of the program.38 Mandatory coverage

would prevent this problem. Moreover, mandatory coverage is more efficient than a

subsidy that encourages poor households – as well as wealthy households with vacation

homes -- to build in risky areas; indeed, the NFIP, for example, is now planning to

relocate over 10,000 households to safer geographic locations.




                                             47
       Mandatory coverage is probably the most efficient approach for insuring

hurricane and earthquake losses as well. Indeed, the state-sponsored windstorm pools in

Florida and Texas along with the California Earthquake Authority exist in large part to

deal with the Samaritan’s Dilemma problem. A more efficient solution would simply

mandate coverage from private insurers without any government subsidy.

       Mandatory coverage is not novel. About 170 countries mandate participation in a

social security system (Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin, 1999). Mandatory coverage in this

case prevents people from rationally under-saving for retirement and then relying on the

government for provisions during retirement. Some U.S. states, such as Pennsylvania,

also mandate the purchase of a minimum amount of auto insurance in order to prevent

people from exploiting limited liability protection after causing an automobile accident.

       Interestingly, the decision by some state insurance commissioners to mandate

coverage of terrorist-caused deaths in life insurance policies might have been fortuitous

in light of Congress’ peculiar design of The Victim’s Compensation Fund after

September 11th. The Fund’s payments to severely injured victims or their survivors (in

the case of death) are determined in four steps. First, the lost economic value of the

victim is determined. Second, the victim or survivor is given $250,000 in non-economic

benefits for pain and suffering plus an additional $100,000 for each surviving dependent.

Third, the award is reduced dollar-for-dollar by “collateral income,” which includes a

small Social Security death benefit as well as life insurance policies. Fourth, the Fund’s

Special Master (Kenneth Feinberg) can adjust the awards at his discretion. But the third

step is probably the most problematic: Private life insurance policy distributions are




                                            48
effectively taxed 100% by the government. If allowed, future life insurance policies

could have excluded terrorist losses to reduce costs without reducing ex-post coverage.



No Policy is Probably Most Efficient for Diversifiable Risks

       While mandatory coverage of earthquake, hurricane, and flood losses is probably

the most efficient policy since the underlying assets are non-diversifiable, firms affected

by TRIA tend to be owned by diversified shareholders for whom a loss of a property is

less severe. It follows that it is not even obvious that a Samaritan’s dilemma really exists

for diversified risks. Moreover, the terrorism exclusions before TRIA were generally not

written into policies with annual premiums below $1 million except for rather high-risk

properties. Hence, unlike the NFIP, hurricane, and earthquake state subsidies, terrorism

exclusions did not affect politically-sensitive groups such as farmers and homeowners.

       The Samaritan dilemma justification, therefore, for government intervention into

the terrorism insurance market seems fairly weak to me especially since, unlike the case

of non-diversifiable risks considered above, it is not obvious that the purchase of

insurance is actually rational (Section IV). A subsidized rate could encourage some firms

to purchase insurance even though it is more efficient for their shareholders or creditors

to instead diversify terrorism risk in the capital markets. Indeed, the current low demand

for TRIA coverage documented in Section IV could easily reflect an inefficient excess

demand for terrorism protection, and not an insufficient demand.



Summary




                                             49
       Although subsidized insurance, as in TRIA, is difficult to justify on efficiency

grounds under a wide range of circumstances, mandatory coverage probably makes sense

for certain risks that (i) are hard to diversify in capital markets and (ii) are borne by

interest groups such as homeowners and farmers that are likely to be bailed out after a

significant loss. Before TRIA, terrorism exclusions in U.S. property and casualty

policies, however, did not generally affect shareholders satisfying these conditions.



Myopia

       Another argument for government intervention is that household and firms might

not rationally purchase adequate amounts of terrorism coverage if they suffer from a lack

of foresight, i.e., myopia. Kunreuther et al (1978) and Kunreuther (1996), in particular,

presents compelling evidence that many people apparently need to experience some

previous exposures to losses in order to properly plan for similar future risks. Of course,

when a government backdrop exists, myopia is observationally equivalent to the

Samaritan’s dilemma discussed above unless the “rationality” of the economic agent can

be measured by actions independently of the insurance decision itself. Hence, it is

sometimes difficult to distinguish between evidence of the Samaritan’s dilemma and

myopia. Still, the evidence suggests that many people might indeed be myopic.

       The possibility of myopia can rationalize some paternalistic government policies,

including, for example, controls over the safety of the workplace. While, in theory,

workers in riskier occupations should be compensated with higher wages, many workers

might not have enough foresight to fully investigate the underlying risks. As another

example, compulsory social security programs protect myopic households from entering




                                              50
retirement with too few assets. While myopia cannot rationalize the price distortions

caused by TRIA’s subsidy, one could, in theory, also imagine a role for government

intervention in the terrorism insurance market in the form of mandatory coverage.

       It seems reasonable that paternalism can justify government controls over some

personal decisions such as choice of workplace conditions and retirement savings.

Personal choices are not subjective to the competitive pressures of the marketplace. Nor

can many mistakes be easily corrected in the future: One cannot, for example, learn from

his or her previous inadequate preparation for retirement and try again. Moreover,

personal mistakes can be very costly since the underlying asset, such as a person’s life, is

difficult to diversify. Furthermore, the non-diversifiable nature of the underlying asset

implies that a government requirement to insure the asset will likely be optimal.

       Most business decisions, however, are subject to competition and repetition.

Moreover, the assets of large firms, like those firms mostly affected by TRIA, are owned

by a diversified set of shareholders: Even the bankruptcy of a large firm would have a

small impact on the total rate of return of a broadly diversified portfolio. The

diversifiable nature of those assets also implies that self-insurance might be more optimal

than insurance in the presence of large underwriting and adjustment costs (Section IV).

Justifying government intervention becomes substantially more difficult: Government

bureaucrats would have to be (i) armed with better information than the private sector or

(ii) more concerned about the well-being of the private sector than its own managers.



Presence of Landmark externalities




                                             51
        Certain landmarks such as the Sears Tower in Chicago and the Golden Gate

Bridge in San Francisco are more obvious targets for terrorists than other structures.

Landmarks, therefore, may create positive production externalities for other structures by

forming a “focal point buffer” of sorts. These externalities might not be compensated

with Coasian side payments due to large transaction costs when there are many property

owners. As a result, the production of new buildings could be distorted. For example, a

developer might decide to build the “second tallest” building in a particular area rather

than the tallest in order to avoid becoming the new terrorist focal point.

        In theory, the government could attempt to reproduce the efficient market solution

by subsidizing the production of landmarks with taxes on non-landmarks, thereby

mimicking the Coasian side payments that would exist if transaction costs were zero.

Unlike TRIA, however, it would not be optimal for the government to distort the prices

of terrorism insurance itself: the efficient prices would still reflect the underlying risks.

        But several problems arise even with a tax-and-transfer program. First, the

government’s information set would have to be extensive. The government would have

to determine the terrorist-related landmark qualities of each property; determine the

reservation prices of builders; properly distinguish between new and existing buildings;

and, much more. Of course, this process would also have to be unhindered by lobbying

efforts from the property owners and their legislative representatives. Failing to make

correct estimates could cause more economic damage than not estimating at all.

        Second, attempting to “fix” this non-market externality potentially contradicts the

“theory of second best,” which states that it is not always optimal to remove distortions in

specific sectors of the economy when the distortions cannot be removed in all sectors.




                                              52
Specifically, landmark properties are already better positioned to leverage their status in

order to earn economic rents. Since the government does not currently levy taxes on

“landmark status rents,” it is not necessarily efficient to further subsidize landmarks.



Incomplete trading markets

       Another potential argument for the government provision of catastrophic

coverage is that governments can more easily smooth large shocks inter-temporally

relative to the private sector. This argument for government intervention is really about

time diversification and not about the “size of shocks” considered earlier. As a practical

matter, however, government actions would still be presumably limited to larger shocks.

       Unfortunately, the underlying theoretical model that supports this argument has

not clearly specified in the previous literature. This omission is important. For example,

in the standard neoclassical (Ramsey) growth model, the representative household has an

infinite planning horizon and production is constant returns to scale. In this setting, the

government has no particular advantage over the private market at smoothing shocks over

time. Hence, we must look elsewhere to rationalize government involvement: There

must be a source of incomplete trading markets either between or within generations.

This section considers the potential for incomplete inter-generational markets since that

case seems more compelling than the case of incomplete intra-generational markets.

       Incomplete inter-generational markets can be motivated by abandoning the

standard neoclassical model in favor of the more realistic overlapping-generations (OLG)

model in which households live a finite length of time. But even here some care in

modeling is needed. For example, if household parents are purely altruistic toward their




                                             53
children and parents could, hypothetically speaking, legally pass negative transfers (inter-

vivos transfers or bequests) to their children during bad times then, by the process of

recursion, households again have infinite horizons, as in the standard neoclassical model.

Inter-generational trading markets are, therefore, effectively complete, and the

government once again has no particular advantage over the private market. Of course,

parents cannot pass negative bequests during bad times. But the inter-generational

linkage would still exist if children were also altruistic toward their parents and, hence,

were willing to make “gifts” (reverse transfers) to their parents during bad times.

       However, the evidence appears to show that households are not so altruistically

linked (Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff, 1997). It follows that incomplete trading markets

effectively exist between generations since people alive today cannot write legally

binding risk-sharing agreements with the unborn. The government, however, can

complete this missing market using its taxation authority (Smetters, 2003).

       Still, the exact nature of the terrorist loss is crucial in determining the

government’s optimal policy. In particular, if the terrorist loss is best viewed mostly as a

“depreciation shock” that lowers the return to existing capital owners but doesn’t depress

the wages of workers, then the efficient policy may involve the government subsidizing

the returns of capital owners with higher taxes on workers. One could view TRIA as an

imperfect attempt at doing this. The government’s optimal response depends, though, on

the various underlying parameter assumptions since the government’s policy induces

additional general-equilibrium effects on factor prices. For some parameter assumptions,

government risk sharing in the form provided by TRIA is not pareto improving.




                                              54
       The best available macro evidence, though, suggests that terrorist shocks depress

national output, presumably beyond just capital income returns (Blomberg et al, 2003;

Eckstein and Tsiddon, 2003). If the terrorist loss is best viewed as mostly a “total factor

productivity shock” that lowers capital returns and wages, then the efficient policy is

likely just opposite of the type of risk sharing provided by TRIA. In particular, the

optimal policy would additionally tax the already-lower returns of capital owners in order

to increase the after-tax wages on the next generation of workers by lowering their wage

taxes. In other words, capital owners get hit twice: First, by the initial terrorist shock and

then again by an additional tax. (Policy-induced general equilibrium effects reinforce

this optimal policy.) The intuition for this surprising result is that the shock to workers is

actually costlier than the shock to capital owners and so the optimal ex-ante policy helps

workers at the cost of capital owners.

       The analysis thus far, however, assumes that the government does not run

additional deficits after a shock. The possibility of debt policy could allow for some

inter-temporal sharing of losses with generations beyond the next generation. But deficit

financing of losses may not improve efficiency unless the pre-loss loss mitigation was

suboptimal and improved significantly after a loss. Once, again, though, the nature of the

shock is crucial in the analysis. A depreciation-like terrorist loss would, in partially

equilibrium, be optimally shared across many future generations. General-equilibrium

effects, however, complicate matters since deficit financing will also cause general-

equilibrium effects by increasing interest rates and lower wages. But sharing a

productivity-like terrorist losses over several generations would simply lead to a “deficit

gamble” since each loss has a permanent (i.e., “unit root”-like) impact on national output.




                                              55
       In general, most terrorist losses can be likely described as a combination of a

depreciation loss and a reduction in productivity. It follows that there might be some

scope for government intervention once general equilibrium effects are considered. The

exact combination of underlying model parameters, though, is critical in determining

whether there is a valid role for the government in sharing terrorist losses across

generations, and so some caution is required. Indeed, the theoretical results described

above suggest that government-subsidized insurance could actually do more harm than

good by effectively compensating the wrong generations. This research area deserves

more attention in the future using calibrated OLG models.



                                      VI. Conclusions

       Private commercial property and casualty insurance markets are likely able to

insurance against terrorism and even war losses if government tax, accounting, and

regulatory policies were changed in order to reduce the insurer costs of holding capital,

securitization of large risks and allow prices to freely adjust. To be sure, the

Administration and Congress created TRIA within a constrained environment where

these changes were not envisioned. But modifying these fiscal policies would likely be

much more efficient than the approach taken in TRIA, which has created several potential

problems: Crowding out the development of private insurance; excess demand for

subsidized insurance by diversified shareholders; ex-ante and ex-post moral hazard, and,

unfunded liabilities on future generations. Changing the tax, accounting, and regulatory

policies, however, will require considerable coordination between the federal government

and the states. The recent movement by the insurance industry toward federalization of




                                             56
insurance regulations39 would likely help speed things along but at a risk of more

lobbying by insurers at the federal level.

       The most common arguments in favor of direct government intervention into the

terrorism insurance market tend to focus on the difficulties that the private market faces

in providing terrorism insurance. These arguments, however, do not explain why the

private market solution is actually inefficient. Probably the most compelling “market

failure” can be traced to incomplete trading markets between generations. In theory, the

government can complete this missing market using its taxation authority. But

considerable care must be taken since the optimal policy might be exactly opposite that of

subsidized insurance, and so additional research is still required. Furthermore, although

this theoretical argument deals with time diversification and not the “size of losses,”

government intervention would, in practice, only be limited to very large losses –

probably well beyond the current TRIA $100 billion ceiling – due to the other

administrative inefficiencies that government intervention could produce.




                                             57
                                      References

Altonji, Joseph G; Hayashi, Fumio; Kotlikoff, Laurence J. “Parental Altruism and Inter
Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105, no. 6,
December 1997, pp. 1121-66.

American Academy of Actuaries (2002). “Terrorism Coverage in the Aftermath of
September 11.” Public Policy Monograph, May 2002.

BestWire Services. “A Year After Terror, Commercial Insurers Look Closer at
Concentrations of Risk.” September 12, 2002.

Blomberg, S. Brock, Gregory D. Hess, and Athanasios Orphanides. “The
Macroeconomic Consequences of Terrorism.” Presented at the Carnegie-Rochester
Conference, November, 2003.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “The April 2002 Senior Loan
Officer Opinion Survey on Banking Lending Practices.” April, 2002.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Monetary Policy Report to the
Congress.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, August, 2002.

Borch, Karl H. Economics of Insurance, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1990.

Bradford, David F. and Kyle D. Logue. “The Influence of Income Tax Rules on
Insurance Reserves.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The
University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 275 – 304.

Brice, William B. “British Government Reinsurance and Acts of Terrorism: The
Problems of Pool Re,” Comment. University of Pennsylvania Journal of International
Business Law, 1994, 15: 441.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Randall S. Kroszner and Brian H. Jenn. “Federal Terrorism Risk
Insurance.” National Tax Journal, vol. 55, no. 3, September 2002, pp. 647-57

Brown, Jeffrey R., J. David Cummins, Christopher Lewis, and Ran Wei. “An Empirical
Analysis of the Economic Impact of Federal Terrorism Reinsurance.” Presented at the
Carnegie-Rochester Conference, November, 2003.

Buchanan, James. “The Samaritan’s Dilemma.” In Edmund Phelps, Ed., Altruism,
Morality and Economic Theory, Russell Sage Foundation: New York, 1975.

Buffet, Warren. “To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway.” November 9, 2001.




                                          58
Congressional Budget Office. “Federal Reinsurance for Terrorism Risks.” A CBO
Paper, Congress of the United States, October, 2001.

Cummins, David J. “Risk Management and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of Risk
and Insurance, 1976, XLIII: 587 – 609.

Cummins, David J., Christopher Lewis, and Richard D. Phillips. “Pricing Excess-of-
Loss Reinsurance Contracts Against Catastrophic Loss.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The
Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 93 –
141.

Cummins, David J. “Protecting Policyholders from Terrorism: Private Sector Solutions.”
Testimony before Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government
Sponsored Enterprises, United States House of Representatives, October 24, 2001.

Cummins, David J. and Neil Doherty. “Federal Terrorism Reinsurance: An Analysis of
Issues and Program Design Alternatives.” Mimeo, The Wharton School, 2001.

Cummins, J David; Neil Doherty and Anita Lo. “Can Insurers Pay for the ‘Big One’?
Measuring the Capacity of the Insurance Market to Respond to Catastrophic Losses”
Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 26, no. 2-3, March 2002, pp. 557-83

Cummins, David J. “Convergence of Financial Services: Opportunities In the Wholesale
Market.” Presentation at the International Financial Risk Institute, April 11 – 12, 2002,
London.

Cummins, David J. and Christopher Lewis. “Catastrophic Events, Parameter Uncertainty
and the Breakdown of Implicit Long-Term Contracting: The Case of Terrorism
Insurance.” The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 26: 153 – 178.

Cummins, David Lalonde, and Richard Phillips. “The Basis Risk of Catastrophic-Loss
Index Securities.” Mimeo, The Wharton School, 2003. Forthcoming in the Journal of
Financial Economics.

Cutler, David M. and Richard Zeckhauser. “Reinsurance for Catastrophes and
Cataclysms.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The
University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 149 – 191.

Doherty, Neil and S. Tinic. “Reinsurance under Conditions of Capital Market
Equilibrium: A Note.” Journal of Finance, 1981, 36: 949-953.

Doherty, Neil A. and Lisa Posey. “Availability Crisis in Insurance Markets: Optimal
Contracts with Asymmetric Information and Capacity Constraints,” The Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 1995, 15: 55 – 80.




                                           59
Doherty, Neil and Kent Smetters. “Moral Hazard in Reinsurance Markets.” NBER WP #
9050, 2002. (Forthcoming in Journal of Risk and Insurance).

Doherty, Neil A., Joan Lamm-Tennant and Laura T. Starks. “Insuring September 11th:
Market Recovery and Transparency.” The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 26:
179 – 199.

Doherty, Neil and Sven Sinclair. “Risk Management, Transparency and Executive
Compensation.” Mimeo, The Wharton School, 2003.

Doherty, Neil A. Integrated Risk Management: Techniques and Strategies for Reducing
Risk, McGraw Hill (ISBN 0-07-135861-7), 2000.

Eckstein, Zvi and Daniel Tsiddon. “Macroeconomics of Terrorism: The Case of Israel.”
Presented at the Carnegie-Rochester Conference, November, 2003.

Federal Register. “Terrorism Risk Insurance Program; Disclosures and Mandatory
Availability Requirements.” 31 CFR Part 50, RIN 1505 – AA98. Vol 68, No. 201,
Friday, October 17, 2003.

Froot, Kenneth. “Introduction.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of Catastrophe
Risk, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 1 - 22.

Froot, Kenneth and Paul G. J. O’Connell. “The Pricing of U.S. Catastrophe Reinsuance.”
In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The University of Chicago
Press: Chicago, 1999: 195 – 227.

Froot, Kenneth A. “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Examination.” Journal
of Financial Economics, vol. 60, no. 2-3, May-June 2001, pp. 529-71

Froot, Kenneth A and Steven Posner. “The Pricing of Event Risks with Parameter
Uncertainty.” Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory, vol. 27, no. 2, December
2002, pp. 153-65

General Accounting Office. “Terrorism Insurance.” Testimony Before the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, House
of Representatives, February, 2002a.

General Accounting Office. “Catastrophe Insurance Risks: The Role of Risk-Linked
Securities and Factors Affecting Their Use.” Report GAO-02-941, September, 2002b.

Gron, Anne. “Insurer Demand for Catastrophe Reinsurance.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor,
The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 23
– 43.

Guy Carpenter. “The World Catastrophe Reinsurance Market: 2003” September 2003.



                                          60
Hofmann, Mark. “TRIA: Most Buyers Find Cover too Pricey, too Limited.” Business
Insurance, February 24, 2003.

Hoyt, Robert E and Ho Khang. “On the Demand for Corporate Property Insurance.”
Journal of Risk and Insurance, vol. 67, no. 1, March 2000, pp. 91-107.

Jaffee, Dwight M and Thomas Russell. “Catastrophe Insurance, Capital Markets, and
Uninsurable Risks” Journal of Risk and Insurance, vol. 64, no. 2, June 1997, pp. 205-30

James M. Buchanan, "The Samaritan's Dilemma," in Edmund Phelps, ed., Altruism,
Morality, and Economic Theory (New York: Russell Sage, 1975): 71-85.

Kading, Bradley L. “Regulatory Issues Regarding The Treatment of Risk Transfer
Securitizations.” Presentation before the International Association of Insurance
Regulators: Insurance Securitization Panel, October, 2000.

Kemsley, Deen and Doron Nissim. “Valuation of the Debt Tax Shield.” Journal of
Finance, vol. 57, no. 5, October 2002, pp. 2045-73

Klein, Robert; Martin Grace, and Richard Phillips. “Onshore Special Purpose
Reinsurance Vehicles: A Public Policy Evaluation.” Mimeo, Center for Risk
Management and Insurance Research, Georgia State University, 2000.

Kleindorfer, Paul R. and Howard C. Kunreuther. “Challenges Facing the Insurance
Industry in Managing Catastrophic Risks.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of
Catastrophe Risk, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 149 – 191.

Knowledge@Wharton. “To Pay or Not to Pay: Business Weighs the Cost of Terrorism
Coverage.” May 7, 2003.

Kunreuther, Howard, R Ginsberg, L Miller, P Sagi, P Slovic, B Borkin and N Katz.
Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons, New York, Wiley, 1978.

Kunreuther, Howard, Jacqueline Meszaros, Robin Hogarth, and Mark Spranca.
“Ambiguity and Underwriter Decision Processes.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization. 1995, 26: 337 – 352.

Kunreuther, Howard. “Mitigating Disaster Losses Through Insurance.” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 1996, 12: 171 – 87.

Kunreuther, Howard. “The Role of Insurance in Managing Extreme Events: Implications
for Terrorism Coverage.” Business Economics, April, 2002, 37 (2): 6 – 16.




                                           61
Kunreuther, Howard, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Beverly Porter and Gordon Woo. “Chapter
11 – Extending Catastrophe Modeling Technology to Terrorism and Other Extreme
Events.” Mimeo, The Wharton School, 2003.

Kunreuther, Howard, Erwann Michel-Kerjan, and Beverly Porter. “Assessing, Managing
and Financing Extreme Events: Dealing With Terrorism.” Mimeo, The Wharton School,
2003.

Lewis, Christopher M. and Kevin C. Murdock. “The Role of Government Contracts in
Discretionary Markets for Natural Disasters.” The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 1996,
63 (4): 567 – 597.

Lewis, Christopher M. and Kevin C. Murdock. “Alternative Means of Redistributing
Catastrophic Risk in a National Risk-Management System.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor,
The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 51
– 85.

Meulbroek, Lisa. “A Senior Manager’s Guide to Integrated Risk Management.” Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance, 14, 4 (Winter, 2002): 56 – 70.

Morgan Stanley. “An Update on WTC – Related Issues.” December 12, 2001.

Moss, David. “Courting Disaster? The Transformation of Federal Disaster Policy since
1803.” In Kenneth Froot, Editor, The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, The University of
Chicago Press: Chicago, 1999: 307 – 357.

Moss, David. “Testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation.” October 30, 2001.

Moss, David. When all Else Fails: Government as the Ultimate Risk Manager. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, 2002.

Muldavin, Scott. “Breaking the Transaction Gridlock.” Real Estate Finance, August,
2002: 23 – 29.

Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice
(I): Facts and Political Theories” NBER Working Paper 7118, 1999.

Nishiyama, Shinichi and Kent Smetters. “Consumption Taxes and Economic Efficiency
in a Stochastic OLG Economy” NBER WP #9492, February 2003.

Priest, George L. “The government, the market, and the problem of catastrophic loss.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1996, 12: 219 – 37.

Real Estate Roundtable, “Survey Confirms Economic Toll of Terrorism Insurance Gap
Over $10 Billion of Real Estate Projects Affected Across the U.S.” September 4, 2002.



                                          62
Real Estate Roundtable, “Terror Insurance Drag on Real Estate Still Climbing Over $15.5
Billion of Projects in 17 States Now Affected.” September 19, 2002.

Riddiough, Timothy and Risharng Chiang. “Commerical Mortgage-Backed Securities:
An Exploration into Agency, Innovation, Information, and Learning in Financial
Markets.” Mimeo, School of Business, University of Wisconsin, 2003.

Risk and Insurance Management Society, Inc. “Highlights from RIMS Survey on
Terrorism Insurance Availability.” September 9, 2002. (Available at www.RIMS.org)

Russell, Thomas. “The Costs and Benefits of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act: A First
Look.” Mimeo, Department of Economics, Santa Clara University, 2002.

Smetters, Kent. “Trading with the Unborn.” Mimeo, The Wharton School, 2003.

Smetters, Kent. “Is the Social Security Trust Fund Worth Anything?” Papers and
Proceedings of the American Economic Review, Forthcoming, May, 2004.

Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee, Statement No. 182, “A Proposed Federal
Backstop for Terrorism Insurance and Reinsurance.” September 23, 2002.

Stulz, Rene M. “What'
                    s Wrong with Capital Budgeting.” Mimeo, The Ohio State
University, 1999.

The Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers. “Many Commercial Interests are Not
Buying Terrorism Insurance, New CIAB Survey Shows.” News Release, March 24, 2003.

Tillinghast-Towers Perrin. U.S. Tort Costs: a 2002 Update – Trends and Findings on the
Costs of the U.S. Tort System, 2002.

Thornburgh, Dick. “No End in Sight as Punitive Damages Go Up, Up, Up” Wall Street
Journal, March 13, 2000, page A47.

United States Treasury. “Treasury Announces Decision on Group Life Coverage
Under Terrorism Risk Insurance Program.” August 15, 2003.

Viscusi, W. Kip, Richard J. Zeckhauser, Patricia Born, and Glenn Blackmon. “The
Effect of 1980s Tort Reform Legislation on General Liability and Medical Malpractice
Insurance.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1993, 6: 165 – 186.

Woo, Gordon. “Insuring Against Al-Qaeda.” Manuscript. NBER Meeting, 2003.
1
  Real Estate Roundtable (September 4, 2002).
2
  Warren Buffet (November 9, 2001)
3
  William J. Clinton, EXECUTIVE ORDER, “BLOCKING PROPERTY AND PROHIBITING
TRANSACTIONS WITH THE TALIBAN.” July 4, 1999.



                                          63
4
  See, for example, Newsweek, “Helping Hand: Where did the Taliban come from? How did they finance
the drive to impose an Islamic state?” October 13, 1997.
5
  William J. Clinton, EXECUTIVE ORDER, “BLOCKING PROPERTY AND PROHIBITING
TRANSACTIONS WITH THE TALIBAN.” July 4, 1999.
6
  See, for example, Elaine Sciolino, “After the Attacks: The Overview; Long Battle Seen.” The New York
Times, September 16, 2001: Section 1, Page 1, Column 6.
7
  See BestWire Services (September 12, 2002).
8
  See Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, August 2001, Table 1.
9
  See, for example, Houston Chronicle News Services, “Agreement close on aid to insurance industry.”
October 19, 2002: Section A; Pg. 24
10
   See, for example, American Academy of Actuaries (2002).
11
   Some exceptions include Senator Phil Graham of Texas.
12
   Real Estate Roundtable (September 4, 2002).
13
   See, for example, “Making the Case for a Federal Backstop for Terrorism Insurance,” Jointly produced
by The Financial Services Roundtable, the Real Estate Roundtable, the American Insurance Association,
and the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism, September 1, 2002. (Available at www.fsround.org.)
14
   Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee, Statement No. 182, “A Proposed Federal Backstop for
Terrorism Insurance and Reinsurance”, 9-23-02
15
   See PR Newswire 9/20/02, “Terrorism Insurance Survey Reveals Disturbing Trends.”
16
   Florida regulators capped terrorism charges for property insurance at 1% of the premium (see, for
example, http://www.radeylaw.com/articles.cfm?Articleid=71). Many other states de facto capped
terrorism rates at the amount filed by rating services. I am grateful to Debra Ballen for this information.
17
   Only violent acts in the interest of foreigners against the U.S. can be certified by the Treasury Secretary
in concurrence with the Secretary of State and the U.S. Attorney General.
18
   Cummins and Doherty (2001), though, consider a slight modification that they call “Excessive of
Relative Loss” contracts which payout relative to the insurance industry’s available surplus.
19
   See, for example, the interview of ISO spokesman, Dave Dasgupta, by Knowledge@Wharton, May 7,
2003.
20
   See Hofmann (2003).
21
   P. 17.
22
   Buffet, however, received a very good return on this particular investment: The premium was equal to
530% of the expected loss (Stulz, 1998).
23
   Note 24 to the Annual Statement that insurers submitted to state insurance regulators does not require
reporting information on payments prior to 1991.
24
   Referenced in “ISO REPORTS LATEST DATA ON INSURERS'ENVIRONMENTAL AND
ASBESTOS LIABILITIES.” Press Release, April 2, 1996. ISO estimates that about $40 billion was paid
between 1991 and 1995.
25
   ISO (1996).
26
   See, for example, American Academy of Actuaries (2002).
27
   See Jaffee and Russell (1997) for a complementary discussion.
28
   The NAIC adopted the Protected Cell Model Act in 1999 and a working group within the NAIC
proposed the Onshore Special Purpose Reinsurance Vehicle (SPRV) Model Act in 2001. Currently, the
SPRV entity is illegal in the United State, and faces considerable legal uncertainty (GAO, 2002b). One
advantage of the SPRV is that it can be used by non-insurers whereas protected cells are generally available
to insurers. Another advantage of the SPRV is that it legally is more effective at isolating the assets from
other potential claims during bankruptcy.
The advantage of the
29
   See, for example, the presentation by Bradley Kading (2000), Senior Vice President of Reinsurance
Association of America.
30
   The triplicate standard: (1) Does the instrument transfer or spread policyholder’s risk?; (2) Is the
instrument an integral part of the relationship between the policyholder and the insurer?; (3) Is the practice
limited to entities within the insurance industry.
31
   Josh Meyer, “Trading on the Future of Terror; A market system would help Pentagon predict turmoil. To
critics, it'
           s'gambling'on security.” Los Angeles Times, July 29, 2003, Main News; Part 1; Page 1.
32
   Bloomberg News, “Saddam Hussein Futures Offer Bets on His Removal.” February 10, 2003.


                                                     64
33
   James Bone and Alan Road, “Terror by degree.” The Times, October 18, 1997, Features Section.
34
   Steve Fainaru, “Clues Pointed to Changing Terrorist Tactics; Foiled Plots, FBI Data Showed Al Qaeda
Groups Might Use Airplanes as Missiles.” Washington Post, May 19, 2002.
35
   See “September 11 Fund Claims Top 98 Percent.” FoxNews.com, Friday, January 16, 2004.
36
   “Insurance Management Solutions Group 10th Annual Catastrophe Conference.” Remarks By Howard
Leikin, Deputy Administrator, Mitigation Division, November 29, 2001, St. Petersburg, Florida.
37
   Ibid.
38
   Ibid.
39
   See, for example, Joseph B. Treaster, “Insurers Want One Regulator Instead of 50.” The New York
Times, December 26, 2003.




                                                  65
