NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICS AND EFFICIENCY OF SEPARATING CAPITAL
AND ORDINARY GOVERNMENT BUDGETS
Marco Bassetto
Thomas J. Sargent
Working Paper 11030
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11030
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

We benefited from comments by Manuel Amador, V.V. Chari, Robert Lucas, Ellen McGrattan, Edward C.
Prescott, Robert Shimer, Nancy Stokey, Judy Temple, Francois Velde, and Ivan Werning. Florin Bidian and
Vadym Lepetyuk provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from NSF is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or NSF. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Marco Bassetto and Thomas J. Sargent. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Politics and Efficiency of Separating Capital and Ordinary Government Budgets
Marco Bassetto and Thomas J. Sargent
NBER Working Paper No. 11030
January 2005, Revised May 2006
JEL No. E6, H6, H7
ABSTRACT
We analyze the democratic politics of a rule that separates capital and ordinary account budgets and
allows the government to issue debt to finance capital items only. Many national governments
followed this rule in the 18th and 19th centuries and most U.S. states do today. This simple 1800s
financing rule sometimes provides excellent incentives for majorities to choose an efficient mix of
public goods in an economy with a growing population of overlapping generations of long-lived but
mortal agents. In a special limiting case with demographics that make Ricardian equivalence prevail,
the 1800s rule does nothing to promote efficiency. But when the demographics imply even a
moderate departure from Ricardian equivalence, imposing the rule substantially improves the
efficiency of democratically chosen allocations. We calibrate some examples to U.S. demographic
data. We speculate why in the twentieth century most national governments abandoned the 1800s
rule while U.S. state governments have retained it.
Marco Bassetto
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
271 19th Ave S.
Minneapolis, MN 55455
bassetto@econ.umn.edu
Thomas J. Sargent
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
ts43@nyu.edu

1

The 1800s rule and its purposes

The gold standard, which the 18th century bequeathed to the 19th, but which the 20th century
forgot, prescribed that national governments should promise to convert their debts into gold,
either on demand, for currency, or at a speciﬁed future date, for bonds. A government’s budget
constraint dictated that a ﬁscal rule accompany the gold standard, one that would force a national
government to balance its budget in the present value sense while abstaining from an inﬂation
tax.
The 19th century practice of keeping separate capital and ordinary government budgets was
one among many possible formulas that could achieve the present value budget balance needed
to support the gold standard. This particular formula forbad deﬁcits on the ordinary account
but allowed capital account deﬁcits that were balanced by prospective capital account surpluses
suﬃcient to service the newly issued debt. A common practice was to dedicate particular revenue
sources to service debt that had been issued to ﬁnance a particular capital project.1
We call this ‘the 1800s ﬁscal rule’ because that seems to have been its golden age. The 19th
century data for Britain and the U.S. states conform to this ﬁscal rule, provided that we allocate
war expenditures to the capital account. While most national governments have now abandoned
this practice, the rule survives in the constitutions of most U.S. states.2 This rule is one of the
main factors that forced U.S. states to retrench in the last few years, while its absence allowed
the federal government to expand its spending and cut its tax rates in the face of adverse shocks
to tax revenues like those aﬀecting the states.
Because of how the Maastricht treaty limits a country’s ability to run deﬁcits, recent discussions in the European Union have focused on good ways of restricting government indebtedness.
1

Another common rule in the 19th century imposed severe limits on the quantities of government debt that a

central bank could own. Many central banks operated under a rule that at the margin allowed them to conduct
open market operations in short term securities issued only by private citizens. While this restriction might be
undone by traders executing the sorts of strategies that underly the Modigliani-Miller theorem, it embraces the
spirit of the 1800s rule, which was to limit the national treasury’s access to easy sources of credit.
2
Evidence that these rules aﬀect government behavior is presented in Bohn and Inman [4], Poterba [20, 21, 22]
and Poterba and Rueben [23].

1

Proposals to distinguish between ordinary and capital-account expenses have been debated and
are serious options, should the Maastricht criteria be changed in the near future.3
While the 1800s rule rendered ﬁscal policy consistent with a national commitment to the gold
standard, many other rules would have too. Any ﬁscal rule that achieved present value budget
balance without seigniorage revenues could also have sustained the gold standard, including many
rules that would have tolerated temporary deﬁcits to pay for recurrent government expenses.
With its careful distinction between capital and ordinary deﬁcits, the 1800s rule served purposes
beyond its role in supplementing the gold standard.
This paper highlights one of those additional purposes of the 1800s rule in an economy with
successive generations of voters and a democratic government. We focus on how the rule shapes
the incentives that voters confront when they choose among alternative levels of nondurable and
durable public goods. A constitutional rule that prohibits government borrowing for ordinary
expenses aﬀects voters’ incentives to consume public goods.
The 1800s rule is simple. It requires information only about the output of the public sector
and its division between durable and nondurable public goods. It does not require detailed
knowledge about productivity shocks or households’ preferences for public goods.4
We study a budget rule as a “constitutional contract” constraining overlapping generations
of voting households who like private consumption and durable and nondurable public goods.
The contract sets rules for intergenerational transfers, the provision of public goods, and the
issuing of debt by a centralized institution called “government”. The contract is established
before the shocks impinging on the economy are realized and consists of two ﬁxed parameters,
an α that speciﬁes a debt redemption rate and an x that speciﬁes the fraction of investment
to be ﬁnanced by debt. Particular settings of these parameters separate ordinary and capital
government budgets. Within the institutional framework of the contract, a political-economic
3
4

See e.g. Buiter [6].
We study an environment in which it would be diﬃcult for diﬀerent generations to enforce constitutional

contracts based explicitly on the history of shocks. Therefore, we require budget rules to depend only on the
history of capital accumulation and the provision of public goods. See Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent [13] for an
analysis of how diﬃcult it is to verify present value budget balance from time series observations on government
expenditures and tax collections.

2

equilibrium is a competitive equilibrium in which durable and nondurable public goods are chosen
by democratic voting in each period. In making political choices, households take into account
how the current choice aﬀects the outcomes of future elections. We study how the (α, x) pair
inﬂuences the eﬃciency of outcomes in the political equilibrium. Outcomes depend on details of
the demographic structure in ways that we think may shed light on why the 20th century saw
the 1800s rule disappear among many national governments but not at the state level in the U.S.
Section 2 mentions evidence about the 1800s rule. Section 3 presents a benchmark economy
in which the 1800’s rule supports an eﬃcient allocation as a political-economic equilibrium. This
section shows how the 1800’s rule is attractive because it provides incentives for each generation
to supply the eﬃcient amount of public goods, independently of the history of shocks. Section 4
calibrates the benchmark economy to assess the optimal amount of debt ﬁnancing, as well as the
costs of deviating from it, and section 5 concludes. The robustness of the results to alternative
speciﬁcations of preferences is studied in appendix C.

2

The advocates and history of the 1800s rule

Although John Maynard Keynes disliked the gold standard, he advocated the 1800s ﬁscal rule
that seemed to have accompanied the gold standard and, at least the national level, to have
disappeared with it. Robert Skidelsky [31] discusses Keynes’s preference for separating ordinary
and capital budgets, for always balancing the ordinary budget, and for conﬁning countercyclical deﬁcits to the capital account. Keynes proposed timing capital account deﬁcits to ﬁght
unemployment.5
5

Keynes’ advocacy of a rule that separated capital and ordinary budgets may have reﬂected no more than

that he saw no good reason to abandon what he had observed was best practice among modern states in the
19th century. On other issues, Keynes’s policy advice sometimes amounted to recommending what he saw as
best late 19th century practice. For example, to reform the Indian currency Keynes [15] advocated that India
adopt the gold exchange standard into which Britain and other advanced countries had evolved. However, in a
personal communication to us (letter dated 2003-11-16), Lord Skidelsky suggests that it was only the substantial
expansion of public investment projects in 20th century Britain that started Keynes to think about the issue.
Skidelsky knows of no direct documents that would support our “best 19th century practice” conjecture about

3

Writing about the ‘dual monarchy’ of Austria and Hungary before World War I, Pasvolsky [17]
states that
Each had an ordinary and an extraordinary budget, the expenditures under the latter
being mainly for railroad construction and military needs.
Paul Studensky [32] and E. Cary Brown [5] painted a picture of the United States in which
for much of the 1800s, state governments explicitly adhered to the 1800s rule, while the federal
government adhered to it for military expenditures. Brown states:
Up to World War II, the expected and well accepted policy of the federal government
was to repay outstanding debt in a more or less systematic way, even when accomplished, as it often was, by substantial subsidies to creditors through price deﬂation.
(p. 229)
Until the time of the Great Depression of the 1930s, the major reason for borrowing by
the United States government was the preparation for or waging of war. Until then a
relatively narrow stance had been maintained with respect to the kinds of programs
considered appropriate to undertake. State governments, on the other hand, had
assumed a broader role in the 19th century in ﬁnancing transportation and other
developmental projects. Local governments grew explosively after the Civil War to
provide needed urban utilities and infrastructures. (p. 229)
Speaking of the prevailing theory about ﬁnancing state and local expenditures on “lasting
improvements” Paul Studensky wrote:
It was contended also that such expenditures [permanent improvements] would beneﬁt future generations as much as the present generation; that future generations
should consequently be made to contribute to their defrayment; and that this could
be accomplished only if the expenditures were ﬁnanced by means payable in the
future.6 (p. 15)
the source of Keynes’s preference for the 1800s rule.
6
Later in his book, Studensky criticized this rule and proposed improvements.

4

Consistent with this theory, a policy of borrowing was developed along the following
lines: borrowing was resorted to for all expenditures for permanent improvements;
each project was considered separately and a separate loan incurred for it; the bonds
were earmarked so that the proceeds could be used only for the project for which
they were authorized; . . . (p. 16).
Later, Studensky explained how the federal government mostly avoided borrowing to ﬁnance
its “lasting improvements”:
. . . how does it happen that the federal government has managed to ﬁnance its internal
improvements with little if any borrowing . . .? (p. 84) The explanation is found in
the peculiar nature of the national expenditure and revenue systems. Those for war
have been practically the only extraordinary expenditures. All other expenditures
have been considered ordinary. The government was expected to borrow in times
of war and to pay oﬀ its debt – certainly not to borrow in addition – in times of
peace. The revenues consisted exclusively, until recent times, of customs duties and a
few indirect taxes. The revenues from these sources during periods of prosperity not
only were ample for all purposes of government, and took care of all the necessary
permanent improvements without burdening the people, but were even yielding large
annual surpluses. There was no excuse for borrowing under these circumstances.
The federal government has very seldom ventured on any very large programs of
improvement, other than those connected with its military and naval establishment,
which could not be taken care of by its ordinary revenues. In the few instances in
which it has ventured on such programs, it had to resort to loans. It had to borrow
also in some cases to place its monetary system on a sound basis.” (p. 85)
Writing in 1930, Studensky foresaw irrepressible pressures to depart from the 1800s rule, and
Brown’s [5] account conﬁrms the breakdown.

5

3

The Benchmark Economy

In this section, we consider an environment in which a mechanism resembling the 1800s rule
implements a Pareto-optimal allocation. A key feature is the quasilinearity of household preferences, which, by implying risk neutrality, eliminates any loss from the lack of intergenerational
insurance.

3.1

Preferences and technology

We consider an economy populated by a continuum of households in overlapping generations.
Once born, each household faces a probability 1− θs of death in its s-th period of life, conditional
on having survived until then.7 Population grows at a constant rate n.
Households consume a private good in each period of their lives. They also enjoy the services
of two public goods. One is nondurable and another is durable and called public capital. Households supply labor services, at some utility cost. We interpret public capital in either of two
ways. First, it includes publicly-funded infrastructure (such as bridges, canals, railroads, sewers,
etc.); second, it can also include “national security,” a public good that is diﬃcult to measure,
but is revealed to be important by the resources countries devote to military purposes.
A household born in period t has preferences ordered by
s−t−1 
N +t


Et
β s−t
θj [cs−t,s + v(Gs , Γs ) − φ(ls−t,s )]
s=t

(1)

j=0

where N + 1 periods is the longest a household can live,8 cs−t,s and ls−t,s are consumption of the
private good and the labor supply in period s by a household of age s − t (born in period t),
Gs is the amount of nondurable public good per capita in period s, and Γs is the stock of the
durable public good per capita in period s. We assume that v is strictly concave, φ is strictly
7

We assume that a fraction 1 − θs of households of age s die every period. In this section, we also assume

that the age structure of the population at time 0 coincides with the demographic steady state associated with
the survival probabilities and population growth. We relax this assumption in the calibration.
8
We allow for the possibility that N = ∞. Here, and throughout the paper, we adopt the notational convention


−1
θ
j=0 j ≡ 1.

6

convex, and both v and φ are twice continuously diﬀerentiable and satisfy Inada conditions. We
also assume β(1 + n) < 1. The expected value is taken with respect to the uncertainty adapted
to the aggregate state; the presence of θj terms reﬂects idiosyncratic uncertainty over the life
span, which is assumed to be independent of aggregate shocks.
All goods are produced with one intermediate good. Each ﬁrm can turn K units of capital and
L units of labor into At F (K, L) units of the intermediate good. We assume F to be increasing,
concave, continuously diﬀerentiable, linearly homogeneous and to satisfy Inada conditions; At is
a stochastic process, whose domain is nonnegative, bounded, and bounded away from 0.
Firms can turn each unit of the intermediate good into one unit of the private consumption
good, 1/qtk units of private capital, 1/qtG units of the nondurable public good, and 1/qtΓ units
of public capital; qtk , qtG and qtΓ are stochastic processes that are nonnegative, bounded, and
bounded away from 0.
Private capital depreciates at a rate δ k , and public capital depreciates at a rate δtΓ , where the
latter is stochastic, with a domain in [0, 1).9 We deﬁne st ≡ (At , qtk , qtG , qtΓ , δtΓ ) to be the shock
that hits the economy at time t. All variables with a subscript t are assumed to be adapted to
st .
The economy-wide resource constraints are
Ct + qtk it + qtG Gt + qtΓ γt ≤ At F (

Kt−1
, Lt )
1+n

Kt−1
+ it
1+n
Γt−1
+ γt
Γt ≤ (1 − δtΓ )
1+n
Kt ≤ (1 − δ k )

(2)
(3)
(4)

where it is investment in private capital per capita, γt is investment in public capital per capita,
Kt is the capital stock per capita at the end of period t (to be used for production in period
9

Stochastic depreciation of public capital is introduced mainly to justify wars: we view them as being the

government response to a bad shock to the stock of “national security.”

7

t + 1), and Ct and Lt are consumption and the labor supply per capita:
Lt ≡
Ct ≡

N

s=0
N


λs ls,t
(5)
λs cs,t .

s=0

Also,

(1 + n)−s

λs ≡ N

t=0 (1

+

s−1

j=0 θj

n)−t t−1
j=0 θj

is the fraction of households of age s. The initial values of K−1 and Γ−1 are exogenously given.

3.2

Pareto-optimal allocations

Either we assume that private consumption can be negative or, more realistically, we will restrict
our analysis to a range of parameters and utility entitlements for the generations such that
private consumption is positive.
∞
We deﬁne a stochastic process {{cs,t , ls,t }N
s=0 , it , γt , Gt , Kt , Γt }t=0 to be a feasible (real) allo-

cation if it satisﬁes equations (2), (3), and (4) and is bounded.10 We deﬁne a feasible allocation
to be eﬃcient or ex ante Pareto optimal if there is no other feasible allocation that delivers a
weakly higher expected utility to each generation and a strictly higher utility to at least one
generation. We thus measure from the perspective of households that know to which generation
they belong but not the realizations of shocks.11
The quasilinearity of utility in consumption makes characterizing eﬃcient allocations particularly simple. In each period t, taking 1 unit of consumption per capita from each surviving
household born in period t − j allows a planner to award a consumption increase of λj /λs to each
10

The term “real” is introduced to distinguish this allocation from the asset allocation, which we will introduce

later. Wherever not speciﬁed, by allocation we mean real allocation. The assumption of boundedness could
be relaxed, but bounded sequences are a particularly simple commodity space to work with. Notice that all
inﬁnite sums that we introduce will be well deﬁned in this commodity space. Technological growth could be
accommodated by suitably rescaling variables and introducing a shifter in preferences to ensure stationarity.
11
In this setup with quasilinear utility, the diﬀerence between ex ante and ex post Pareto optimality is not too
important.

8

surviving household born in period t − s. The expected utility cost for the former generation is
j−1
β s j−1
m=0 θm 12
θm , and the expected utility gain for the latter is (1+n)
The slope of the Pareto
β j m=0
j−s .
frontier is uniquely pinned down as the ratio, i.e., [β(1+n)]j−s . Movements along the frontier are
achieved simply by redistributing consumption, without aﬀecting other variables. The diﬀerence
between this situation and a standard Pareto problem, with strictly concave utility, is illustrated
in ﬁgure 1; in the standard problem, the slope of the utility depends on the allocation, and the
frontier is recovered by varying the Pareto weights assigned to each group in the Pareto problem;
with quasilinear preferences, a ﬁxed Pareto weight corresponds to all utility pairs, so that the
frontier is not to be traced out by varying the Pareto weight.
Pareto frontier with quasilinear utility

Utility of another person

Utility of another person

Pareto frontier with strictly concave utility

Slope = Pareto weight→

← Pareto weight is unique

Utility of one person

Utility of one person

Figure 1: Pareto problem and the shape of the frontier
We consider only those allocations in which all households belonging to the same cohort are
treated symmetrically. Among these, an eﬃcient allocation solves the following
Pareto problem:
max

∞
{Ct ,Gt ,Γt ,it ,γt ,{ls,t }N
s=0 ,kt }t=0

12

E

∞


t

[β(1 + n)]

Ct + v(Gt , Γt ) −

t=0

the expected utility gain is

j−1
β
m=0 θm
(1+n)j−s s−t−1
m=0

θm

λs φ(ls,t )

(6)

s=0

If t−j < 0, we measure utility from time 0, so the expected utility cost is β t
t

N


.

9

j−1

m=j−t θm .

Likewise, if t−s < 0,

subject to (2), (3) and (4).
The ﬁrst-order conditions for this problem yield
vG (Gt , Γt ) = qtG ,

t = 0, . . .

Γ
Γ
)qt+1
,
vΓ (Gt , Γt ) = qtΓ − βEt (1 − δt+1

(7)
t = 0, . . .

Kt−1
t = 0, . . . , s = 0, . . . , N
, Lt
1+n

Kt
qk
k
= t − (1 − δ k )Et qt+1
t = 0, . . .
, Lt+1
1+n
β

φ (ls,t ) = At Fl
Et At+1 Fk

(8)
(9)
(10)

Equation (9) implies that all households supply the same amount of labor: ls,t = Lt , s = 0, . . . , N.
Equation (9) evaluated at time t + 1 can then be uniquely solved for Lt+1 and substituted into
(10). The assumptions about F and φ guarantee that the left-hand side is a well-deﬁned, strictly
decreasing function of Kt , and that a (unique) solution exists. From that equation, we thus obtain
that all Pareto optima must share the same level of private capital and hence the same labor
supply. Equations (7) and (8) imply that Gt and Γt are uniquely determined as well. All of
these variables are independent of the initial level of public capital, Γ−1 . Investment can then
be deduced from (3) and (4), and consumption per capita (but not its allocation across diﬀerent
cohorts) from (2).

3.3

Implementing Pareto Optima

We will show that any Pareto-optimal allocation can be attained through the following institutional framework. In the beginning, households establish “government”, an institution empowered to levy taxes, purchase public goods, and provide transfers. The constitution speciﬁes that
public goods are chosen each period by majority vote. The constitution names two parameters
(α, x) that restrict debt repayment and government borrowing; a fraction α of government issued
consols is to be redeemed each period and a fraction x of public investment is paid for with debt.
The economy unfolds as follows:
(i) In period t, the government purchases Gt and γt from competitive ﬁrms. The amount is
chosen by majority voting, subject to ﬁnancing restrictions to be described below.
10

(ii) Taxes are lump sum and levied equally on each household alive.
(iii) Each unit of nondurable spending Gt must be ﬁnanced from taxes levied in period t.
(iv) For each unit of public investment γt , a fraction x is paid for by issuing new consols.13
(v) In each period, the government raises enough taxes to pay interest on outstanding consols
and to repurchase a fraction α > 0 of them.
(vi) To achieve the appropriate distribution of welfare, the government is committed ex ante to
an appropriate bounded sequence of unconditional transfers {Tt }∞
t=−N to the cohort born
in period t. The transfer is paid out in each period that a household is alive and is ﬁnanced
by current taxes. Diﬀerent assumptions about the schedule for debt repayment imply that
diﬀerent sequences of transfers are needed to achieve a given utility assignment.
(vii) Households and ﬁrms trade goods and factors of production in competitive markets.
Features (i), (iii), and (iv) capture the 1800’s rule. The “constitution” does not specify the
level of provision of the public goods but restricts how to pay for them. The ﬁnancing restrictions
provide incentives for voters to choose eﬃcient amounts of public goods.
An attractive feature of this institutional setup is its simplicity. Future generations require
very little information about past behavior, making it easier to enforce such a rule (e.g., by
threatening to repudiate government debt); by contrast, more complicated mechanisms would
require future generations to acquire more information about their predecessors’ decisions to
establish whether they had conformed to the rule. Therefore, it could take longer for a more
complicated rule to become understood and consented to.14 A benchmark assumption about the
13

Diﬀerent debt maturities and repayment schedules could be considered, provided the amounts of bonds and

lump-sum transfers are adjusted appropriately. In what follows, we will assume that the government issues exactly
x. When median(θs ) < 1 + n, as we will generally assume, the conditions that ensure that it is desirable to set
x to a positive number also ensure that all the people alive will beneﬁt from issuing debt, so that issuing the full
amount x would be chosen even if the constitution prescribed a limit on debt issuance only, rather than a level.
14
We don’t model a process through which a government rule of conduct is established, but that could be a
fascinating exercise. For sure, for U.S. state governments, the 1800s rule did not emerge in a vacuum. Wallis [34]

11

transfers in part (vi) is that none takes place; this amounts to choosing a speciﬁc point on the
Pareto frontier.

3.4

Analysis

We ﬁrst describe the households’ optimization problem, and then deﬁne an equilibrium. We
assume that households can trade one-period debt, in addition to physical capital and government
consols.15
A tax-debt policy is a bounded sequence {τt , Bt }∞
t=0 , where τt are lump-sum taxes per capita in
period t and Bt is the amount of government-issued consols per capita at the end of period t.
We set the coupon payment on each consol to 1. A price system is a sequence {wt , rt , pt , πt }∞
t=0 ,
where wt is the wage rate in period t, rt is the rental rate of capital, pt is the price of a consol,
exclusive of the time-t coupon payment, and πt is the price of a 1-period pure discount bond. An
N −1 ∞
}t=0 consisting of the capital, the government
asset allocation is a sequence {{ks,t , bs,t , as,t }s=0

consols, and one-period bonds held by a household of the cohort born in t − s at the end of
period t.
A household born in period s ≥ 0 solves the following problem, taking as given the price
describes how twelve U.S. states adopted new state constitutions during the 1840s, most formalizing a version of
the 1800s rule. Wallis describes those constitutional reforms as responses to problems that befell earlier attempts
by the state governments to ﬁnance internal improvements, some with “taxless ﬁnance”, others with “beneﬁt
taxation”. See Wallis and Weingast [35] for a convincing account of the consequences for the political processes
for choosing public investments (‘internal improvements’), whether by the federal government or by the states, of
the clause in the U.S. constitution that forbad the federal government to impose direct taxes, except in proportion
to states’ populations. Wallis and Weingast describe how that clause made it virtually impossible to form winning
coalitions in the U.S. congress for large local public works. They go on to describe how, by eﬀectively turning
public works over to the state legislatures, that clause worked to create a viable federalism that kept states in
the union.
15
One-period debt is considered mainly to rule out bubbles in the price of consols. When N = ∞, its presence
is suﬃcient to rule out bubbles, as long as short-selling constraints limit households to portfolio positions that
are essentially bounded from below. When N is ﬁnite, it is necessary to assume that households can set up an
inﬁnitely-lived intermediary that is subject to similar short-selling constraints. Huang and Werner [14] provide a
complete treatment of this issue.

12

system and the tax policy:
max Es

s+N


t−s−1 

β t−s
θj [ct−s,t − φ(lt−s,t )]

t=s

(11)

j=0

subject to the ﬂow budget constraint
ct−s,t + qtk kt−s,t + pt bt−s,t + πt at−s,t ≤ wt lt−s,t − τt + Ts +
(pt + 1)
at−s−1,t−1
[rt + (1 − δ k )qtk ]
kt−s−1,t−1 +
bt−s−1,t−1 +
θt−s−1
θt−s−1
θt−s−1

t = s, . . . , s + N

(12)

This budget constraint assumes that households participate in a collective insurance agreement,
whereby the assets of people who die are redistributed to the survivors in proportion to their
holdings. The existence of this insurance agreement is necessary for the competitive equilibrium
to be Pareto-optimal, and it is optimal for households to participate. We assume that households
start with no wealth, so k−1,s−1 = b−1,s−1 = a−1,s−1 = 0.16
To prevent Ponzi schemes, it is necessary to impose a borrowing limit on households. If N
is ﬁnite, we require aN,s+N = kN,s+N = bN,s+N = 0. If N is inﬁnite, we require a household’s
asset allocation to be essentially bounded from below.17 We also require households to choose
bounded real allocations.
Households that were born before period 0 solve a similar problem from period 0 onwards,
except for their initial condition: a household born in period j < 0 starts from an (exogenous)
initial condition (k−j−1,−1 , b−j−1,−1 , a−j−1,−1 ) that is not necessarily 0.18

3.5

Competitive equilibrium

∞
A competitive equilibrium is a real allocation {{ĉs,t , ˆls,t }N
s=0 , ît , γ̂t , Ĝt , K̂t , Γ̂t }t=0 , an asset allocaN −1 ∞
∞
tion {{k̂s,t , b̂s,t , âs,t }s=0
}t=0 , a tax-debt policy {τ̂t , B̂t }∞
t=0 , a price system {ŵt , r̂t , p̂t , π̂t }t=0 , initial
16

This implies that the corresponding terms in (12) can be neglected, and the undeﬁned term θ−1 does thus

not appear.
17
The household’s asset allocation is bounded from below if {kt−s,t , bt−s,t , at−s,t }∞
t=s form a stochastic process
that is bounded from below; it is essentially bounded from below if there exists an alternative asset allocation
∞
{k̃t−s,t , b̃t−s,t , ãt−s,t }∞
t=s that is bounded below, satisﬁes (12) for a suitable bounded choice of {ct−s,t , lt−s,t }t=s ,

and is such that [rt +(1−δ k )qtk ]k̃t−s,t +(pt +1)b̃t−s,t + ãt−s,t ≤ [rt +(1−δ k )qtk ]kt−s,t +(pt +1)bt−s,t +at−s,t , t ≥ s.
N −1
N −1
N −1
18
We also require s=0 λs ks,−1 = K−1 , s=0 λs bs,−1 = B−1 and s=0 λs as,−1 = 0.

13

+∞
conditions {{k−s−1,−1 , b−s−1,−1 , a−s−1,−1 }−1
s=−N , K−1 , Γ−1 , B−1 }, and a transfer sequence {Tt }t=−N

such that:
s+N
s+N −1
(i) ({ĉt−s,t , ˆlt−s,t }t=max(0,s)
, {k̂t−s,t , b̂t−s,t , ât−s,t }t=max(0,s)
) solves the maximization problem of

the representative household born in period s, given the price system, the tax policy,
the initial conditions, and the transfers;
(ii) at any time t, factor prices equal marginal products:
K̂t−1
, L̂t )
1+n
K̂t−1
, L̂t )
r̂t = At Fk (
1+n

ŵt = At Fl (

(13)

(iii) at any time t, the allocation satisﬁes the feasibility conditions (2), (3) and (4);
(iv) at any time t, the asset markets clear:
K̂t =
B̂t =
0=

N

s=0
N

s=0
N


λs k̂s,t
λs b̂s,t

(14)

λs âs,t

s=0

(v) the government budget constraint holds

B̂t−1
λs Tt−s
(1 + p̂t ) + qtG Ĝt + qtΓ γ̂t − τ̂t +
1+n
s=0
N

p̂t B̂t =

(15)

The necessary conditions of the household maximization problem imply that, in a competitive
equilibrium,19
p̂t =
1/β =
19

β
,
1−β

t≥0

k
Et (r̂t+1 + (1 − δ k )qt+1
)
,
k
qt

(16)
t≥0

These conditions include the absence of pricing bubbles; see footnote 15.

14

(17)

β = πt ,
φ (ls,t ) = ŵt ,

t≥0

(18)

s = 0, . . . , N , t ≥ 0

(19)

and, if N = ∞,
t



lim β Ej [r̂t + (1 − δ

t→∞

k

)qtk ]k̂t−s,t−1



+ (p̂t + 1)b̂t−s,t−1 + ât−s,t = 0,

s ≥ 0,

j ≥ max{0, s}
(20)

Because utility is linear in consumption, in any competitive equilibrium, as in any Paretooptimal allocation, individual consumption absorbs the impact of all shocks at time t, making
history irrelevant. Furthermore, substituting (13) into (17) and (19), we obtain that the labor
supply and capital coincide with their values in any Pareto-optimal allocation, and are thus
uniquely pinned down and independent of the government spending processes. Working backwards through (13), we obtain that the equilibrium factor prices are also uniquely pinned down;
like the labor supply and capital, they are independent of {Gt , Γt }∞
t=0 .

3.6

Political-economic equilibrium

Next we deﬁne a political-economic equilibrium in which households collectively choose public
spending and investment in each period within our institutional framework. To evaluate those
choices, households must form expectations about the evolution of the economy. Deﬁne a history
of the economy to be a sequence ht ≡ {sj , Gj , Γj }tj=0 , for any t ≥ 0.20
We deﬁne a political-economic equilibrium in terms of a (measurable) mapping Ψ that recursively generates a history of the economy. The mapping Ψ associates to each history ht a time-t alt
location (other than public spending and capital, already included in ht ) ({cs (ht ), ls (ht )}N
s=0 , i(h ),

γ(ht ), K(ht )), a time-t tax-debt policy (B(ht ), τ (ht )), a time-t price vector (w(ht ), r(ht ), p(ht ), π(ht )),
N −1
), and a time-t+1 choice of government spenda time-t asset allocation ({ks (ht ), bs (ht ), as (ht )}s=0

ing and capital, contingent on the future shock, (G(ht , st+1 ), Γ(ht , st+1 )). To obtain the time-0
values of government spending and capital, we also associate two values G(∅) and Γ(∅) to the
20

Although other variables could be introduced as part of the history, it is easy to show that their presence

would be redundant for the deﬁnition of an equilibrium below. See e.g. Chari and Kehoe [7].

15

null history. Given any history hj , each mapping Ψ recursively generates a history from hj :
ht = (ht−1 , st , G(ht−1 , st ), Γ(ht−1 , st )). Each mapping Ψ and its associated history induce an
allocation, a price system, and a tax/debt policy from initial conditions Γj−1 , which is part of
N −1
, and sj .21
hj , {ks (hj−1 ), bs (hj−1 ), as (hj−1 )}s=0
N −1
A mapping Ψ̃ ≡ ({c̃s , ˜ls }N
s=0 , {k̃s , b̃s , ãs }s=0 , ĩ, γ̃, K̃, B̃, τ̃ , w̃, r̃, p̃) is a political-economic equi-

librium if it has the following properties.
(i) (Competitive equilibrium) Given any history hj , including the null history, the real and asset
allocations, the price system and tax/debt policy induced by Ψ̃ form a competitive equiN −1
,
librium from the initial conditions Γj−1 , K̃(hj−1 ), B̃(hj−1 ), {k̃s (hj−1 ), b̃s (hj−1 ), ã(hj−1 )}s=0

and sj .
(ii) (Self-interested voting) Given any history hj−1 , including the null, and any shock sj ,
(G̃(hj−1 , sj ), Γ̃(hj−1 , sj )) is a Condorcet winner over any alternative proposal (G, Γ), assuming that in the future the economy will follow the path implied by Ψ̃, i.e., given any
alternative (G, Γ), the following relation holds for more than 50% of the people alive at
time j:
c̃s (h̃jG,Γ ) + v(G, Γ)+
s+t−1 
N
−s






j+t−1
j+t−1
βt
θm Ej c̃s+t (h̃j+t
)
+
v
G̃(
h̃
,
s
)
,
Γ̃(
h̃
,
s
)
≤
t+j
t+j
G,Γ
G,Γ
G,Γ
t=1
N
−s


m=s

βt

s+t−1


t=0


θm

(21)




Ej c̃s+t (h̃j+t ) + v G̃(h̃j+t−1 , st+j ), Γ̃(h̃j+t−1 , st+j )

m=s

j+t−1
where h̃G,Γ
and h̃j+t−1 are deﬁned recursively as follows:

h̃jG,Γ = (hj−1 , sj , G, Γ)
j+t
h̃G,Γ
j+t

h̃
21 j−1

h

=
=

j+t−1
h̃G,Γ
, sj+t , G̃
j+t−1

h̃





h̃j+t−1
G,Γ , sj+t
j+t−1

, sj+t , G̃ h̃






, Γ̃



j+t−1
h̃G,Γ
, sj+t
j+t−1

, sj+t , Γ̃ h̃

, sj+t




,

t≥1

,

t≥0

is the predecessor of the history hj . When we consider an initial history h0 , k̃s (h−1 ) is ks,−1 , the initial

level which is exogenously given; the same applies to other variables.

16

In words, h̃j+t is the history induced by Ψ̃ from hj−1 ; h̃j+t
G,Γ is the history induced by choosing
(G, Γ) in period j and following Ψ̃ afterwards.
(iii) (Budget balance) Given any non-null history,

(1 + αp̃(ht ))B̃(ht−1 )
τ̃ (h ) =
λs Tt−s
+ qtG Gt + (1 − x)qtΓ γ̃(ht ) +
1+n
s=0
N

t

(22)

where Gt is the appropriate element of the history ht .
Requirement (i) states that, no matter what happened in the past, Ψ̃ prescribes a path that
is a competitive equilibrium for the households. Requirement (ii) states that at each time t the
majority prefers not to deviate from an equilibrium G̃, Γ̃, taking into account that a deviation
has an immediate utility impact and also aﬀects the future by changing the path of histories
that will unfold. Requirement (iii) embodies the budget rule restrictions (iii), (iv) (v) and (vi)
imposed by the constitution.
We focus our attention on a speciﬁc class of political-economic equilibria that we will call
Markov equilibria, in which the current choices of G and Γ are inﬂuenced by the minimum
possible number of state variables. In our environment with quasilinear preferences, a minimum
state description is attained when the choices depend only on the current realization of the shock
st .
It is convenient to use
Γ
Γ
Assumption 1 Et (1 − δt+1
)qt+1
depends only on st .

Assumption 1 is clearly satisﬁed if st is a ﬁrst-order Markov process, but it is a much weaker
requirement.
The next proposition shows that, when future choices of G and Γ are not conditional on past
variables, the same turns out to be optimal for the current choice.22
22

Markov equilibria do not allow the government to exploit “trigger-strategy” equilibria, in which failure to

deliver a certain amount of public goods in the current period leads households to unfavorable expectations in
the future even though the “fundamentals” of the economy are unaﬀected.

17

Proposition 1 If assumption 1 holds, there exist Markov equilibria in which G and Γ are functions of st alone. Following any history, all variables are the same in all equilibria, except for the
distribution of consumption. Though individual consumption may vary across diﬀerent equilibria,
all generations achieve the same welfare ex ante in all Markov equilibria.
Proof. Our proof works by construction. We proved earlier that all competitive equilibria
share the same values of pt , Kt , wt , rt and ls,t , for any s, t ≥ 0, and that these are independent of
t
t
t
t
{Gt , Γt }∞
t=0 . This implies that, for any history h , there is a unique way to set p(h ), K(h ), w(h ),

r(ht ) and ls (ht ), s ≥ 0, and that all these variables are functions of the history of exogenous
shocks only. We set investment to the only values that are consistent with (3) and (4): i(ht ) =
K(ht ) − (1 − δ k )K(ht−1 ) and γ(ht ) = Γt − (1 − δtΓ )Γt−1 .
To get the values of G(ht−1 , st ) and Γ(ht−1 , st ), we proceed as follows. In the candidate
equilibrium we are constructing, future levels of public spending and capital are unaﬀected by
the current ones. Within the equilibrium, an increase in the time-t provision of either public
good beneﬁts only the households that are alive in period t. On the cost side, equations (15)
and (22) imply that an additional unit of Gt increases time-t taxes by qtG units, with no eﬀect
on subsequent taxes. An additional unit of γt increases time-t taxes by qtΓ (1 − x). Within the
Γ
)/(1 + n) units,
candidate equilibrium, the additional unit leads to a reduction in γt+1 of (1 − δt+1

and no further eﬀect on public investment. This implies that time-t + 1 taxes change by
xqtΓ
1+n

Γ
Γ
(1 − x)(1 − δt+1
)
qt+1
1−β
+α −
β
1+n

and taxes in period t + j, j > 1 by

x
1−β
Γ
Γ
+ α [qtΓ (1 − α) − qt+1
(1 − δt+1
)](1 − α)j−2 .
(1 + n)j
β
To a person of age s, the expected present value of taxes per unit of public capital is therefore

1−β
βθs
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
Qs ≡qt (1 − x) +
xqt
+ α − (1 − x)Et [qt+1 (1 − δt+1 )] +
1+n
β
s+j−1 

(23)
N
−s



x
1−β
j
Γ
Γ
Γ
j−2
+ α qt (1 − α) − Et [qt+1 (1 − δt+1 )] (1 − α) .
β
θm
j
(1
+
n)
β
m=s
j=2

18

The preferences over policy for this person are given by
v(G, Γ) − qtG G − Qs Γ.
If we order households by Qs , the preferences above satisfy the order restriction of Rothstein [27,
28], which implies that a Condorcet winner exists, and that it corresponds to the policy preferred
by the person with median Qs .23 We thus set G(ht−1 , st ) and Γ(ht−1 , st ) to
arg max v(G, Γ) − qtG G − median(Qs )Γ
G,Γ

(24)

Given our assumptions, a unique solution to this problem exists, and it depends only on st . For
any non-null history, we set B recursively:
B(ht ) =

(1 − α)B(ht−1 ) xqtΓ γ(ht )
+
.
1+n
p(ht )

(25)

We set τ (ht ) according to (22), and aggregate consumption such that
∞


λs cs (ht ) = At F

s=0

K(ht−1 )
, l(ht ) − qtk i(ht ) − qtG Gt − qtΓ γ(ht ).
1+n

(26)

Subject to (26), individual consumption is not uniquely pinned down.
To construct individual consumption, we partition the set of histories into stochastic sequences {hv }∞
v=t , t ≥ −1, with the property that, within elements of the same partition,
hv = (hv−1 , sv , G(hv−1 , sv ), Γ(hv−1 , sv )) for an arbitrary value of the shock sv , while for each
initial element of a sequence either t = −1 or ht = (ht−1 , st , G(ht−1 , st ), Γ(ht−1 , st )). Within each
partition, a history represents a path that is induced by the functions G(.) and Γ(.) from the
history ht . Along each of these paths, we set the functions cs (.), ks (.), bs (.) and as (.) arbitrarily,
subject to the following restrictions:
(i) Given the taxes and prices speciﬁed above, the resulting sequences must satisfy the household budget constraints (12) for an economy that starts in period t with initial conditions
N −1
;
speciﬁed by (ks (ht−1 ), bs (ht−1 ), as (ht−1 ))s=0
23

In computing the median, it is of course necessary to take into account the distribution of the population by

age. The same qualiﬁcation pertains to all other references to the median in the paper.

19

(ii) if N = ∞, the implied asset allocation must be essentially bounded from below;
(iii) the implied real allocation must be bounded;
(iv) individual consumption schedules are such that (26) holds in the aggregate.
Examples of functions that satisfy these requirements are the following:24 ks (hv ) = K(hv )/(1 −
λN ), bs (hv ) = B(hv )/(1 − λN ), as (hv ) = 0 and
qvk K(hv ) + p(hv )B(hv )
+ w(hv )ls (hv ) − τ (hv ) + Tv−s
1 − λN
v
k k
[r(h ) + (1 − δ )qv ]K(hv−1 ) (p(hv ) + 1)B(hv−1 )
+
+
, v > 0, s = 1, . . . , N − 1
θs−1 (1 − λN )
θs−1 (1 − λN )

(27)

q0k K(h0 ) + p(h0 )B(h0 )
+ w(h0 )ls (h0 ) − τ (h0 ) + T−s
1 − λN
[r(h0 ) + (1 − δ k )q0k ]ks−1,−1 (p(h0 ) + 1)bs−1,−1 as−1,0
+
+
+
, s = 1, . . . , N − 1
θs−1
θs−1
θs−1

(28)

cs (hv ) = −

cs (h0 ) = −

c0 (hv ) = −

qtk K(hv ) + p(hv )B(hv )
+ w(hv )l0 (hv ) − τ (hv ) + Tv ,
1 − λN

v≥0

(29)

cN (hv ) = w(hv )lN (hv ) − τ (hv ) + Tv−N
[r(hv ) + (1 − δ k )qvk ]K(hv−1 ) (p(hv ) + 1)B(hv−1 )
+
+
,
θN −1 (1 − λN )
θN −1 (1 − λN )

v > 0,

(30)

cN (h0 ) = w(h0 )lN (h0 ) − τ (h0 ) + T−N
+

[r(h0 ) + (1 − δ k )q0k ]kN −1,−1 (p(hv ) + 1)bN −1,−1 aN −1,0
+
+
.
θN −1
θN −1
θN −1

(31)

By iterating equation (25) forward and using the facts that p(hv ) is constant over time and
that Γ(hv ) is bounded, we can show that B(hv ) is bounded, which implies that the consumption
plans of the households are bounded.25
It is now straightforward to see that the mapping that we have just constructed generates
a competitive equilibrium starting from any history hj , given the levels of public spending and
capital implied by (24). Starting from any initial capital level, we previously showed that the
24
25

If N = ∞, λN should be set to 0, and (30) and (31) do not apply.
If N = +∞, the proposed asset allocation also satisﬁes the no-Ponzi games restriction and the transversality

condition (20).

20

values assigned to p(ht ), π(ht ), K(ht ), ls (ht ), w(ht ) and r(ht ), t ≥ j, are the unique choices that
ensure that the household problem has a (bounded) solution, that factor prices equal marginal
products, that the labor supply is optimally chosen, and that (16) and (18) hold. With these
choices, households are indiﬀerent among all possible consumption proﬁles. Given the previously
determined variables and (22), equation (25) describes the unique sequence of government debt
that satisﬁes the government budget constraint and (20), and (26) describes the unique sequence
of aggregate consumption that is consistent with the resource constraint (2). The conditions on
the consumption of individual households ensure that the individual budget constraints are met.
Whenever the future levels of G and Γ depend only on the future shocks and not on any history,
the mapping constructed above implies that the current choices of G and Γ do not aﬀect the
labor supply, private capital, or factor prices in any period, nor do they aﬀect subsequent values
of public spending and capital. These are precisely the conditions under which households will
vote for G and Γ according to (24), which implies that the mapping satisﬁes condition (ii) of
a political-economic equilibrium. Finally, condition (iii) is met because it was imposed in the
construction of the mapping.
To check that all Markov equilibria lead to the same ex ante welfare for all generations, notice
that prices, taxes, and the provision of the public goods are the same in all Markov equilibria and
in all histories. As a consequence, the individual household’s optimization problem is identical
in all of the equilibria, and the multiplicity of the Markov equilibria comes only from the fact
that households are indiﬀerent among many equivalent optimal consumption plans. QED.
From now on, we will refer to “the” Markov equilibrium, ignoring the multiplicity that is
irrelevant for the aggregate allocation and for welfare. We are interested in comparing the
equilibrium outcome with Pareto-optimal allocations.
Proposition 2 The Markov equilibrium outcome satisﬁes conditions (7), (9) and (10) of Pareto
eﬃciency.
Proof. We already observed that any competitive equilibrium satisﬁes (9) and (10). (7) is
the ﬁrst-order (necessary and suﬃcient) condition for maximizing (24) with respect to G. QED.

21

With quasilinear preferences, the level of public consumption G will be eﬃcient if households
are forced to pay for it through contemporaneous taxes. This result carries a nice intuition: a
balanced-budget restriction over (nondurable) public consumption converts the choice of its level
into a static decision. All households alive agree on the beneﬁts, and they also equally share the
costs, leading to an eﬃcient decision.26
The next proposition shows that a pure balanced-budget rule leads to underprovision of public
capital for the most relevant range of parameter values.
Proposition 3 Assume that median(θs ) < 1 + n. Then, if x = 0, the marginal value of public
capital in the Markov equilibrium outcome is higher than the eﬃcient level implied by (8).
Proof. When x = 0, Qs = qtΓ −

Γ )q Γ ]
θs βEt [(1−δt+1
t+1
.
1+n

Under the assumption that median(θs ) <

1 + n, the proposition follows immediately. QED.
Since θs ≤ 1, the hypothesis of proposition 3 is valid whenever there is any population
growth. The hypothesis of the proposition fails only if population shrinks faster than the median
probability of survival.
Assumption 2 Qs is strictly decreasing in x for all ages s.
Lemma 1 A suﬃcient condition for assumption 2 is that θs < 1+n for all ages s and qtΓ (1−α) >
Γ
Γ
(1 − δt+1
)].27
Et [qt+1

Proving the lemma is a matter of simple but tedious algebra. The condition in the lemma relates
Γ
Γ
the repayment rate of debt (α) to the depreciation of public capital (δt+1
). When Et [qt+1
(1 −
Γ
Γ
Γ
)] = qtΓ (1 − Et δt+1
), this condition reduces to α ≤ Et δt+1
, and is satisﬁed if debt is repaid
δt+1

more slowly than the rate at which capital depreciates. In the more-general case, the condition
requires the expected value of undepreciated capital 1 period after the investment to be less
than the amount of debt contracted at time t and left to be paid oﬀ after period t + 1. Once
again, the condition is thus satisﬁed when debt is repaid suﬃciently slowly. If the issued debt
26

See Wallis [34] and Wallis and Weingast [35] for descriptions of explicit discussions of ‘beneﬁt taxation’ in

the U.S. during the 1800s.
27
If θs < 1 ∀s, then the suﬃcient condition holds even if the inequality is weak, rather than strict.

22

becomes due too fast, it is possible for the debt actually to increase the amount of taxes per
unit of current investment that some households pay, taking into account the future equilibrium
Γ
response of investment. Whether this perverse case arises depends not only on α and δt+1
, but

also on the details of the stochastic death process. For some stochastic processes, such as the
constant probability of death considered later, allowing debt always reduces the perceived cost.
Proposition 4 Let median(θs ) < 1 + n and assumption 2 hold. Then there exists a level x̄ > 0
such that the marginal value of public capital in the equilibrium outcome when x = x̄ is almost
surely closer to the eﬃcient level than if x ≤ 0.
Proof. Proposition 3 established that vΓ (Gt , Γt ) is higher than the eﬃcient level when x ≤ 0.
Assumption 2 implies that median(Qs ) is strictly decreasing in x, and hence the same is true of
the equilibrium value of vΓ (Gt , Γt ). QED.
Proposition 4 provides a suﬃcient condition for the desirability of setting x > 0 in the
constitution.28 Intuitively, the ability partly to ﬁnance public investment through debt is useful
if it reduces the cost perceived by the voters alive at the moment in which the decision is taken.
In the next proposition, we tailor x exactly to match the solution that comes from maximizing
(24) subject to the eﬃciency condition (8). In general, the best x will depend on t and st , so
it is impossible to reach eﬃciency if the constitution speciﬁes a ﬁxed x. However, a ﬁxed x will
work under the following:
Γ
Γ
Assumption 3 Et (1 − δt+1
)qt+1
= (1 − δ̄ Γ )qtΓ almost surely.

A simple example in which assumption 3 holds is when qtΓ is nonstochastic and constant over
time and δtΓ is i.i.d. We will later consider the quantitative costs of deviating from the optimal
28

We reason here in terms of pure eﬃciency, but diﬀerent choices of x also have distributional implications.

Suppose for instance that the economy is initially in an equilibrium with x = 0, and that an unexpected reform
sets it to a positive value that leads to a more-eﬃcient provision of public capital. While everybody potentially
beneﬁts from this increased eﬃciency, the reform will generate an increase in public debt that can hurt generations
born far in the future. Therefore, this reform is not necessarily a Pareto improvement unless transfers are adjusted
to compensate future generations.

23

x; those computations will indirectly inform us about the magnitude of the eﬃciency losses of
adopting a ﬁxed value for x in the constitution when assumption 3 fails.
Proposition 5 Let assumption 3 hold. Then, generically in the death process, there exists a
value x∗ such that, if x = x∗ , the allocation induced by any Markov equilibrium is Pareto optimal.
A suﬃcient condition for x∗ to be unique is that assumption 2 holds.
Proof. See appendix.
Little can be said in general about how x∗ varies with the parameters of the model. It follows
immediately from theorem 4 that x∗ > 0 when the assumptions of the theorem hold; otherwise,
even its sign cannot be established a priori. We now consider two special cases in which strong
implications can be derived.
Assumption 4 Let N = ∞ and θs = θ̄, s = 0, . . ..
Assumption 4 corresponds to the overlapping generation model of Blanchard [3], in which
all households face a constant probability of death, independent of age. This case is interesting
not only as a benchmark, but also because it informs us of properties that will be shared by the
quantitative calibrations of the next subsection. This happens because the probability of dying
in the next year is small for most people, and very slowly increasing with age; only in very old
age does the probability increase substantially, but those elderly people turn out to be far from
the median voter, and thus have no direct inﬂuence over the outcome.
Proposition 6 Let assumptions 3 and 4 hold. Then households’ preferences over (G, Γ) are
independent of age, and
x∗ =

β(1 − δ̄ Γ ) (1 − βθ(1 − α)/(1 + n))
> 0.
1 − βθ(1 − δ̄ Γ )/(1 + n)

(32)

Proof. It follows from simple algebra. First, substitute assumptions 2 and 4 in the deﬁnition
of Qs . The resulting value is independent of s. We then solve (24), and match its ﬁrst-order
conditions to (8). QED.
With quasilinear preferences, the only disagreement among households comes from the different probabilities of surviving into future periods. In the Blanchard model, these probabilities
24

are the same, and the policy vote becomes unanimous once again. Furthermore, under the
Blanchard assumption, issuing debt necessarily lowers the perceived cost of public capital for all
people alive; it follows that the optimal level of debt ﬁnancing is positive.
From (32), a higher depreciation of public capital implies that the eﬃcient debt ﬁnancing
is smaller, as one would expect. The eﬀect of increasing the probability of survival θ and/or
decreasing population growth n is ambiguous. Both opposing eﬀects become less prominent when
θ/(1 + n) approaches 1.29 The optimal level of x does not converge to 0 as θ/(1 + n) converges
to 1; however, the ineﬃciency caused by a given x vanishes in the limit as θ/(1 + n) → 1,
because then Ricardian equivalence holds, and it implies that any debt structure would deliver
a Pareto-optimal outcome.
Assumption 5 α = δ̄ Γ .
Proposition 7 Let assumptions 3 and 5 hold. Then the value of x∗ of proposition 5 is equal to
β(1 − δ̄ Γ ). Furthermore, when x is set at this value, the household preferences over (G, Γ) are
independent of age.
Proof. It follows immediately from substituting the relevant values into (24). In particular,
with these substitutions Qs is independent of the age s. QED.
Several authors have stressed the importance of matching the maturity of debt to be issued
to the durability of the public investment undertaken, under the principle of “making people
pay for what they enjoy.”30 When α = δ̄ Γ , the 1800s rule does not conform so precisely to the
principle of making people pay for what they enjoy, yet it can still attain an eﬃcient outcome.
For eﬃciency considerations, it is not important to match (marginal) costs and beneﬁts of current
investment for each individual cohort, whether born or unborn; it is necessary only to match
marginal expected costs and expected beneﬁts for the median voter among the cohorts that take
part in the investment decision, i.e., only those alive at the time the investment is undertaken.
While our main analysis shows that matching debt maturity to project durability is not necessary to achieve eﬃciency, proposition 7 oﬀers a justiﬁcation for aiming for a match. Choosing
29

The optimal amount of debt is decreasing in θ/(1 + n) if and only if δ̄ Γ > α.
30
See e.g. Secrist [30].

25

to repay debt at the same rate at which capital depreciates avoids conﬂicts among diﬀerent
generations simultaneously alive; furthermore, it makes it easier to determine the appropriate
level of debt to be issued as simply equalling the expected present value of future undepreciated
capital. In the absence of uncertainty, this policy is equivalent to requiring generations alive in
any period to pay only for the “rental price” of public capital.31 More generally, we have the
following:
Proposition 8 Suppose that public capital can be owned by private ﬁrms and rented to the
government at competitive rates. Then an eﬃcient allocation could be achieved by imposing a
pure balanced budget requirement on the government, which would rent the services of capital.
We relegate to the appendix the full details of the proof, but the intuition is very straightforward. With a rental market and a pure balanced budget, households alive will agree that it is
preferable for the government to rent, rather than own, its public capital. Purchasing the capital
would simply be a gift to future generations. Since all generations alive agree on the value of
services of public capital within each period, if the rental market is competitive, they will equalize the marginal utility of the services from public capital to the rental price. Anticipating this,
ﬁrms will have an incentive to buy and rent to the government exactly the eﬃcient amount of
capital.
In practice, most components of public capital would not support a competitive rental market because they would generate a severe holdup problem.32 The 1800s rule provides a good
alternative to the missing rental market.
31

With uncertainty, this is only true in expected value; later generations may be called to pay more or less,

depending on the realization of the shocks.
32
The following examples illustrate the problem. Any major infrastructure project, such as a canal, would
necessarily not face competition from a perfect substitute, generating monopoly power on the supply side. On
the demand side, no private ﬁrm would be allowed to bid against the government for renting nuclear missiles,
generating monopsony.

26

4

Calibrated Examples

The previous theoretical results suggest that ﬁnancing some, but not necessarily 100%, of public
investment with debt is desirable. If we interpret the 1800s rule as prescribing that 100% of the
cost of public investment be ﬁnanced by debt issue, it is interesting to inquiry of our model: how
close is the eﬃcient debt allowance x∗ to 100%? And what is the eﬃciency loss from not setting
x exactly to x∗ ?
To answer these questions, we now consider three calibrated examples. Throughout the three
examples, we assume:
• A constant, certain value for qtΓ (the magnitude is irrelevant);
• Decisions are taken every year, so 1 year is the appropriate period length;
• β = 0.96;
• α = 0.04522, corresponding to a half-life of debt of 15 years;
• For depreciation, we consider a low value of δ̄ Γ = 0.03 and a high value of δ̄ Γ = 0.06. The
former is meant to capture depreciation for major infrastructure projects, the latter is a
number commonly used for private capital.
The three examples diﬀer in their demographic structures:33
1. For “U.S. now,” we calibrate the survival process and the age distribution to that faced by
the U.S. population in 2000.
2. For “U.S. 1880”, we calibrate the survival process and the age distribution to that faced by
the U.S. population in 1880. We will use this example to see to what extent demographic
changes over the last two centuries aﬀect the relevance of the “1800s rule.”
3. To consider how federal and state governments are aﬀected diﬀerently by the budget rule,
we calibrate the age structure to that of Illinois in 2000.34 We will label this experiment as
33
34

The details of the demographic structure are contained in appendix B.
The results presented here diﬀer slightly from the earlier version of this working paper. This discrepancy is

due to correcting a mistake in computing the mobility by age.

27

“Illinois now.” The crucial diﬀerence between “U.S. now” and “Illinois now” is the degree
of mobility. The model probability of “death” is calibrated by summing the probability of
dying and that of moving out of the state.35 We assume that migration decisions are exogenous. Modelling mobility as endogenous would strengthen our results: without borrowing,
current generations would have even less of an incentive to invest in public capital, since
additional investment would trigger more immigration, congesting any future beneﬁts that
the current generations might enjoy.36 However, this eﬀect is likely to be swamped by the
migration ﬂows that occur for reasons that are independent of taxes and beneﬁts.37
U.S. Now

U.S. 1880s

Illinois Now

δ̄ Γ = 0.03

114%

108%

108%

δ̄ Γ = 0.06

77%

80%

80%

Table 1: Optimal Amount of Debt Financing
Table 1 reports the optimal fraction of public investment that should be ﬁnanced by debt.38
The main conclusion that we draw from this table is that this fraction is not very sensitive to
the demographic structure and evolution of the population: it is about the same in a calibration
with low population growth and low mortality rate (U.S. now), high population growth and
high mortality rate (U.S. in 1880) and low population growth with high mobility rate (Illinois
now). By contrast, the table shows that the debt is sensitive to the depreciation rate. The
results support the case for distinguishing between very long-term investments, such as major
infrastructures, and investment in equipment, for which a lower degree of debt ﬁnancing or a
shorter maturity of debt is warranted.
35

It is straightforward to adjust the model to account for migration. Immigration requires assuming that some

households are born at ages greater than 0; out-migration requires adjusting the annuitization so that households
lose their private assets if they die, but not if they move out of state. Both adjustments do not aﬀect the
computations developed above to establish eﬃciency of the provision of public goods.
36
See e.g. Schultz and Sjöström [29].
37
As an example, even for the very targeted AFDC transfer programs, Meyer [16] and Gelbach [10] ﬁnd that
endogenous mobility, while present, has a quantitatively small impact on the programs.
38
Even when α < δ̄ Γ , in all of the calibrated examples assumption 2 holds, which implies that x∗ is unique.

28

Tables 2 and 3 measure the eﬃciency wedge in the provision of public capital for a given level
of debt ﬁnancing. This is deﬁned as
Wedge =

Meq − Mopt
Mopt

where Meq = marginal value of public capital in the political-economic equilibrium outcome and
Mopt = marginal value of public capital in an eﬃcient allocation. As an example, a reading of
50% means that only those public infrastructures would be ﬁnanced that generate a present value
of beneﬁts of more than $1.50 per $1 invested.39
In table 2, we consider the consequences of adopting a balanced budget provision that forbids
the government ever to borrow. Given the absence of wealth eﬀects, this table also shows the
consequences of adopting any rule in which the deﬁcit limit is independent of current spending; a
prominent example of this rule is the European stability pact, which caps deﬁcits at 3% of GDP
independently of public spending. The table shows that the eﬃciency losses from this type of
policy can be substantial. It is smallest for current U.S. demographics, which are much closer to
Ricardian equivalence,40 and larger for 1880s demographics or the case of Illinois. These results
provide a rationale for adopting the 1800s rule in the 18th and 19th century rather than now,
and for adopting the rule at the state and local level rather than at the national level.
Table 3 looks at the consequences of allowing public investment to be 100% debt ﬁnanced.
The main conclusion to be drawn from this table is that the eﬃciency losses from not tailoring
debt ﬁnancing exactly are quite small; the worst loss comes from the 1880s calibration with
δ = 0.06, where projects are undertaken if they generate a present value of beneﬁts of $0.92 per
$1 invested.
39

An alternative measure of the costs and beneﬁts of switching policy is cast in (private) consumption equiv-

alents. Using the calibration presented in appendix B.2, the cost estimates turn out to be quite small. As an
example, for δ = 0.06, the welfare gain, aggregated across generations, from moving from a balanced budget to
the eﬃcient policy is a permanent increase of about 0.01% of consumption for the U.S. government, and of about
0.09% of consumption for Illinois. These small magnitudes are not surprising, since public investment is a small
fraction of GDP; even if all of public investment were pure waste, the consumption cost would simply be its share
in GDP, about 1% for the federal government and 2% for Illinois.
40
A calibration to European data, with even lower population growth, would lead to even lower eﬃciency losses.

29

U.S. Now

U.S. 1880s

Illinois Now

δ̄ Γ = 0.03

20%

46%

43%

δ̄ Γ = 0.06

14%

32%

30%

Table 2: Eﬃciency Wedge =

Meq−Mopt
Mopt

under Balanced-Budget

U.S. Now

U.S. 1880s

Illinois Now

δ̄ Γ = 0.03

3%

3%

3%

δ̄ Γ = 0.06

-4%

-8%

-7%

Table 3: Eﬃciency Wedge under 100% Debt Financing for Capital Improvements

5

Conclusions

Our main lesson is that the 1800s rule does remarkably well, given its simplicity. The rule makes
only a blunt distinction between recurring expenses and capital improvements, and permits no
debt to pay for the former and 100% debt to pay for the latter. By contrast, the distortions
from not distinguishing between the two types of spending can be substantial. This happens
even though the only source of “shortsightedness” in the political system comes from population
growth and mobility/mortality, which generate only small deviations from Ricardian equivalence.
Bigger departures from Ricardian equivalence are generated by political-economy models with
politicians who act as if they are more short-sighted than voters.41 Some of these models may be
easily extended to strengthen the case for adopting a rule,42 while others do not clearly generate a
distinction between government spending in durable and nondurable goods.43 A more systematic
41

Chari and Miller [8] rely on these models in their informal discussion to advocate the adoption at the federal

level of the rule considered here.
42
We view extensions of Rogoﬀ and Sibert [26] and Rogoﬀ [25] as particularly good candidates because they
imply a tendency to choose projects with immediate beneﬁts over projects with delayed beneﬁts.
43
Among these, the most natural extension of models of partisan politics such as Alesina and Tabellini [1],
Persson and Svensson [19], or Tabellini and Alesina [33] would generate overspending in both types of goods,
unless government capital is perceived as a less partisan good than nondurable consumption, as assumed by
Peletier, Dur and Swank [18] and by Azzimonti-Renzo [2].

30

analysis of the performance of the 1800s rule in such environments is a worthwhile extension of
the research we pursued here.
Throughout this paper, we have taken for granted that it is easy to distinguish between
durable and nondurable public goods. However, the 1800s rule seems to generate an obvious incentive to label any government expense as a “capital improvement.” An alternative institutional
setup that is immune to this is explored by Rangel [24], who advocates requiring the government
to rely on land taxes alone.44 When the value of government capital is factored into the price
of land, this approach allows current landowners to reap the beneﬁts of public investments that
will accrue to future generations. Local jurisdictions in the U.S. rely heavily on property taxes
(if not land taxes),45 suggesting that this is may be a viable alternative at least in the case of
local public goods.

Appendix
A

Proofs

A.1

Proof of proposition 5

We already observed that in a competitive equilibrium the labor supply as well as private capital
and investment are equal to their (unique) value implied by any Pareto-optimal allocation. We
also proved that the balanced-budget restriction on Gt ensures that (7) is satisﬁed. We need
only to prove that there exists a value x∗ such that the solution to (24) satisﬁes (8). First, note
that Qs is linear in x. Matching the ﬁrst-order condition of (24) with respect to Γ to (8) requires
median(Q0s + Q1s x) = qtΓ [1 − β(1 − δ̄ Γ )]
where
Q0s
44
45

≡

qtΓ

βθs (1 − δ̄ Γ )
1−
1+n

(33)



A similar argument appears also in Glaeser [11].
In terms of eﬃciency, property taxes and land taxes have very diﬀerent implications, as the former includes

a distortionary tax on capital.

31

and
Q1s



βθs 1
Γ
−1 +
≡
+ α − δ̄ +
1+n β
s+j−1 


N
−s


1−β
1
j
Γ
j−2
β
θm
+ α (δ̄ − α)(1 − α)
(1 + n)j
β
m=s
j=2
qtΓ

For a generic death process, we have median(Q1s ) = 0. In this case, the left-hand side of equation
(33) is a continuous function of x, and it diverges to inﬁnity as x diverges, but with opposite signs
as x → −∞ or x → +∞. This implies that a solution to equation (33) exists. If assumption 2
holds, then Q1s < 0 for all ages, hence the median cost strictly decreases with x and the solution
is unique. QED.

A.2

Proof of proposition 8

Assume the government is constrained by a pure balanced budget. First, we guess and verify that
there is a Markov equilibrium in which the government chooses not to own any public capital,
the total amount of public capital (rented + owned, in case a deviation occurs and some of it
is purchased) is independent of the past (it only depends on the current shocks), and likewise
public consumption is independent of the past. The proof repeats the steps of proposition 1 with
the following added considerations.
1. The competitive rental price of capital that allows ﬁrms to break even equals
Γ
Γ
qtΓ − βEt [(1 − δt+1
)qt+1
]

(34)

This will be the rental rate in any period and after any history.
2. Within a period, the generations alive have to decide how to split the services of public
capital that they decide to consume between the rental market and the market where the
government purchases the capital. Within the candidate equilibrium, a purchase of public
capital by the government will be undone in the next period, when the undepreciated
portion will be resold to private ﬁrms (and rented back from them). Given the balanced
budget requirement, purchasing one unit of capital, rather than renting it, implies an
32

Γ
Γ
increase in taxes of βEt [(1 − δt+1
)qt+1
] in period t, and a decrease of

Γ
1−δt+1
Γ
qt+1
1+n

next period,

with no further consequences. All generations alive will thus prefer that the government
rent public capital, as long as either n > 0 or the probability of survival from period t to
t + 1 is not 1.
3. Having established that public capital will only be rented, we now look for the amount that
households will decide to rent. Since we assumed that the rental market is competitive,
households will take as given the price (34). With this arrangement, there is now no
diﬀerence between G and the services from Γ: both are nondurable and purchased period
by period, both are valued equally by all generations alive, and all generations share equally
the costs for both. The eﬃciency result that we established for public consumption thus
trivially extends to public capital: households will rent services from public capital up to
the point at which
Γ
Γ
)qt+1
]
vΓ (Gt , Γt ) = qtΓ − βEt [(1 − δt+1

QED.

B

Details of Calibration

B.1

Demographic Structure

1. U.S. now.
We use the death rate by age in 2000, from the National Center for Health statistics. For
the age structure we use data from the 2000 U.S. Census. We abstract from out-migration
from the U.S., which is small.46 However, the age structure reﬂects the eﬀects of nontrivial
immigration. It is very straightforward to adapt the model for the possibility of people
being “born” at an age s > 0. We truncate the distribution at age 90, assuming that a
90-year old person dies for sure; we also do not consider people below 18 years of age, so a
46

We tried including it, with little change.

33

person is “born” when (s)he reaches age 18 or (s)he immigrates. Finally, population growth
is taken from the 10-year growth from the 1990 to the 2000 Census, at an annualized rate.
2. U.S. 1880s.
Mortality data come from Haines [12]. The data are aggregated in 5-year intervals of age,
so we used piecewise linear interpolation. For deaths and the age structure (relevant for
voters), we only consider males between 21 and 80. We use data from the West Model. For
the population growth (which we assume to be relevant for taxpayers), we use the growth
of the total U.S. population from 1880 to 1890, annualized. Results change very little if
diﬀerent choices are made regarding the inclusion/exclusion of one sex from the calibration.
3. Illinois now.
For the probability of death, we use the same as the U.S. 2000 example. The probability of
death is swamped by the eﬀect of out-migration, so any diﬀerence between Illinois and the
rest of the U.S. would be quantitatively insigniﬁcant for the results. For out-migration, the
U.S. Census reports the number of people that left Illinois between 1995 and 2000, by age.
We use this to construct an annual probability of out-migration by dividing the number of
migrants by 5. We are implicitly assuming that out-migration is permanent, i.e., a person
that leaves Illinois will never return to be an Illinois resident. This is clearly an unrealistic
assumption, but we expect the bias introduced by it to be quantitatively small.

B.2

Parameter Choices for Welfare Computations
1−σ

1−σ

We assume that v(G, Γ) = ξ G1−σ + η Γ1−σ .
To pin down σ, we need a measure of the price elasticity of the demand for public goods.
DelRossi and Inman [9] survey related studies, quoting estimates between 0.17 and 5. We choose
a unit elasticity and set σ = 1 (log preferences).
To calibrate ξ and η for the federal government, we match the fraction of government consumption expenditures to GDP and government gross investment to GDP from NIPA data,
which are approximately 6% and 1% respectively. For Illinois, we match the ratio of the operat34

ing budget appropriations to GDP and of capital budget appropriations to GDP (source: BEA
for GDP, State of Illinois for spending); these numbers are approximately 7% and 2%. We do
not consider the U.S. in 1880, as the scope of the federal government was extremely limited back
then.47
We assume that the economy is in steady state, and normalize GDP to 1.48 To infer the
stock of public capital from the ﬂow of gross investment, we take the depreciation rate to be
6% (our higher choice, which does not correspond to infrastructure only). We assume that
Illinois is following the 1800s rule, and ﬁx ξ and η to match the appropriate ratios under this
assumption. Since the federal government is not mandated to follow any constitutional rule in
linking taxes and spending, it is less obvious what to assume. Fortunately, the results for the
federal government are less sensitive to the speciﬁc value chosen: as the wedges in table 2 imply,
even drastic changes in the degree of debt ﬁnancing have only a moderate impact on government
spending. We thus assume that the federal government follows a practice that requires, at the
margin, an extra dollar in current revenues for each extra dollar in spending of either type; this
rule is equivalent to a balanced budget, or to the 3% deﬁcit/GDP limit of the European stability
pact, or to any deﬁcit ceiling which is not conditional on spending.
The implied values for ξ are approximately .078 for the federal government and .093 for
Illinois; the implied values for η are approximately .02 at the federal level and .036 for Illinois.

C

Robustness Checks

The results obtained above rely on the strong assumption of quasilinear preferences. In this
section, we study whether they are likely to be robust to alternative speciﬁcations of preferences.
Unfortunately, when preferences are not quasilinear, a Markov equilibrium will typically depend
on the entire distribution of wealth across the living cohorts; computing equilibria with both
47

For the 19th century, we chose to analyze the United States because very good mortality data by age were

readily available to us. However, that experiment is mainly designed to inform us about the likely gains for other
countries in which national governments played a more prominent role.
48
Note that, in a growing economy, ξ and η should grow at the GDP rate to have balanced growth.

35

endogenous policy and long-lived overlapping generations is thus infeasible. We will instead study
economies in which overlapping generations live for (at most) two periods. We will compare the
results for quasilinear preferences and for a more-standard log choice, and will argue that they
are quite similar. This makes us optimistic that the results would also be similar in the case of
long-lived overlapping generations.
The choice of overlapping generations of two period lived people is useful computationally,
but it is also interesting because it stacks the odds against us. To see this, consider the ﬁrst-order
condition that determines public investment in the quasilinear case:
vΓ (G, Γ) = median(Qs ),

(35)

where Qs in (23) is computed assuming that any additional investment undertaken today is reversed in the subsequent period. If the current median voter stayed in power for the subsequent
period as well, the same ﬁrst-order condition would hold, even without quasilinearity: the envelope condition would imply that, at the margin, the household would be indiﬀerent whether
the current additional investment is fully undone next period, or whether some of it is passed
on. The presence of conﬂict generates two departures from this ﬁrst-order condition: ﬁrst, the
envelope condition no longer holds, since the identity of the median voter changes from one
period to the next; second, the median has to be taken over the Qs computed according to the
equilibrium process for taxes, so the identity of the median voter might change depending on
the speed with which any additional investment is reversed in the subsequent periods. However,
both of these factors play a limited role in the quantitative results of the previous section. Most
people currently alive (up to age 55 or so) face a fairly ﬂat probability of death for a long time; as
a consequence, the choice of next period’s median voter is very close to the optimal choice of the
current median voter, and even a change in the identity of the median voter is unlikely to cause
drastic changes in policy. By contrast, with overlapping generations living for two periods, the
conﬂict between the current median voter (which we will take to be the young, assuming population growth) and the future median voter is extreme, since their survival proﬁles are radically
diﬀerent.
In the computations below, we compare the outcomes of quasilinear preferences with the
36

political outcome when households have preferences given by
log c0,s + log(1 − l0,s ) + ξ log(Gs ) + η log(Γs )+

βθ0 log c1,s+1 + log(1 − l1,s+1 ) + ξ log(Gs+1 ) + η log(Γs+1 )


To simplify the analysis, we assume no uncertainty. We take factor prices as given. We will
mainly comment results at the steady state, but similar numbers occur along transition paths.
We construct a sequence of numerical examples. Even though we occasionally chose some parameter values to match data, these are meant purely to illustrate the extent to which quasilinear
preferences and log preferences yield similar results.
In example 1, we set one period to be 30 years; this gives households a reasonable life span,
but it implies an unreasonably long lag between one policy session and the next. We thus choose
the following parameter values:
• θ0 = 1: the young survive for sure 1 more period, leading to maximal conﬂict between the
two generations alive;
• n = 1: population doubles from one period to the next;
• r = 5 and δ k = .84: this corresponds to a yearly depreciation of about 6% and a net rate
of return of capital of 5.62% per year;
• β=

1
:
1+r−δ k

this implies that the individual consumption proﬁle is ﬂat;

• α = 0.2: this implies a half-life of debt of about 3 periods (93 years);
• δ Γ = 0.6, about 1.7% per year;
• w = 10;
• η = 0.02, ξ = 0.133; this implies that, in the steady state of the golden rule, public
investment/GDP is 2% and public consumption/GDP is 7%.
• Throughout the example, the government is not allowed to issue debt to pay for public
consumption; in steady state, this turns out to be eﬃcient, since both generations alive
have the same private consumption level and hence the same valuation of the public good.
37

Optimal debt

Steady-state wedge

if starting at golden rule under balanced budget

Steady-state wedge
under Golden Rule

Log

6%

3.8%

-54%

Linear

7%

4.2%

-54.2%

Table 4: Public investment and eﬃciency in example 1
Table 4 illustrates the results for this case. The ﬁrst column illustrates the following experiment. We assume that the economy starts from the steady state implied by the political-economic
equilibrium that prevails under the golden rule. At time 0, the fraction x of investment ﬁnanced
through bonds is unexpectedly changed once and for all. We compute the compensating variation that makes each generation indiﬀerent between the original value of x and the new one.
Typically, early generations will be hurt by a sudden reduction in x, since they will be able to
pass on less debt to future generations, while later generations beneﬁt from the lower steady-state
level of debt. We aggregate welfare using the interest rate as the discount factor, which would
be appropriate if the government could use generation-speciﬁc lump-sum transfers for compensation. The optimal amount of debt ﬁnancing turns out to be quite low in this case: this is not
surprising, since most public capital depreciates from one period to the next. More interestingly,
log and linear preferences yield almost identical answers.
In the second column, we look at the wedge in the marginal utility of public capital between
the eﬃcient provision level and the one prevailing in steady state when the government is not
allowed to issue any debt (x = 0). In the third, we study the same wedge, but in the steady state
when the government follows the golden rule (x = 1). Even for these measures of distortion,
linear and log preferences yield essentially identical results.
The results of example 1 are driven to a signiﬁcant extent by the high discount factor and the
low durability of public capital. In example 2, we choose numbers closer to a yearly calibration;
this implies of course that people in this artiﬁcial economy would live only for 2 years.
Parameter values are now: θ0 = 1, n = 0.02, β = 0.96, δ k = δ Γ = 0.06, r = .102 (such that
β=

1
),
1+r−δ k

α = 0.045, and η, ξ, and w at the same values of the ﬁrst example.
38

Optimal debt

Steady-state wedge

if starting at golden rule under balanced budget

Steady-state wedge
under Golden Rule

Log

66%

59%

-16%

Linear

53%

18%

-16%

Table 5: Public investment and eﬃciency in example 2
For this example, the diﬀerence between log and linear preferences is more signiﬁcant. However, this diﬀerence almost vanishes if we reduce the probability of survival from young to old
age to θ0 = 0.4, as shown in table 6. Since θ0 = 0.4 still implies a high degree of conﬂict across
generations, we view this result as very encouraging for the accuracy of the predictions contained
in section 4.
Optimal debt

Steady-state wedge

if starting at golden rule under balanced budget

Steady-state wedge
under Golden Rule

Log

89%

564%

-66%

Linear

89%

562%

-66%

Table 6: Public investment and eﬃciency in example 2, with θ0 = 0.4
Finally, to assess the impact of wealth eﬀects, we change the interest rate r to 22.7% for the
log economy only, so that, in the steady state, consumption of the old is 12% higher than that
of the young.49 The approximation remains acceptable, except for distortion levels that are very
far from anything that we considered in section (4).
The presence of a wealth eﬀect implies that a balanced-budget restriction will no longer lead
to eﬃciency in public consumption; since the young are relatively poorer, they will choose a
lower level of G than optimality would dictate. Table 8 explores a potential role for letting the
government issue debt as a way of restoring eﬃciency. While allowing a tiny fraction of debt
ﬁnancing improves welfare, the results suggest again that the diﬀerence between linear and log
49

For the linear economy, the consumption proﬁle is indeterminate, and an increase in r with no change in β

would lead to unbounded solutions.

39

Optimal debt

Steady-state wedge

if starting at golden rule under balanced budget

Steady-state wedge
under Golden Rule

Log

81%

263%

-62%

Linear

89%

562%

-66%

Table 7: Public investment and eﬃciency in example 2, with θ0 = 0.4 and an increasing consumption proﬁle
Optimal debt

Steady-state wedge

if starting at golden rule

under Golden Rule

Log

6%

3%

Linear

0%

0%

Table 8: Public consumption and eﬃciency in example 2, with θ0 = 0.4 and an increasing
consumption proﬁle
preferences is small; the main implication that spending in nondurable public goods should not
be ﬁnanced through debt is upheld.

References
[1] Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini. A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deﬁcits and Government
Debt. Review of Economic Studies, 57(3):403–414, 1990.
[2] Marina Azzimonti Renzo. On the Dynamic Ineﬃciency of Governments. Mimeo, University
of Rochester, 2004.
[3] Olivier J. Blanchard. Debt, Deﬁcits and Finite Horizons. Journal of Political Economy,
93(2):223–247, 1985.

40

[4] Henning Bohn and Robert P. Inman. Balanced-Budget Rules and Public Deﬁcits: Evidence
from the U.S. States. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 45:13–76,
1996.
[5] E. Cary Brown. Episodes in the Public Debt History of the United States. In Rudiger
Dornbusch and Mario Draghi, editors, Public Debt Management: Theory and History, pages
229–254. Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[6] Willem H. Buiter. Ten Commandments for a Fiscal Rule in the E(M)U. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 19(1):84–99, 2003.
[7] V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. Sustainable Plans. Journal of Political Economy,
98(4):783–801, 1990.
[8] V. V. Chari and Preston J. Miller. Playing by the Rules: A Proposal for Federal Budget
Reform. In Preston J. Miller, editor, The Rational Expectations Revolution: Readings from
the Front Line, pages 169–191. MIT Press, 1994.
[9] Alison F. DelRossi and Robert P. Inman. Changing the Price of Pork: the Impact of Local
Cost Sharing on Legislators’ Demands for Distributive Public Goods. Journal of Public
Economics, 71(2):247–273, 1999.
[10] Jonah B. Gelbach. Migration, the Life Cycle, and State Beneﬁts: How Low Is the Bottom?
Journal of Political Economy, 112(5):1091–1130, 2004.
[11] Edward L. Glaeser. The Incentive Eﬀects of Property Taxes on Local Governments. Public
Choice, 89(1-2):93–111, 1996.
[12] Michael R. Haines. Estimated Life Tables for the United States, 1850-1900. NBER Historical
Paper, 59, 1994.
[13] Lars Peter Hansen, William T. Roberds, and Thomas J. Sargent. Time Series Implications
of Present Value Budget Balance and of Martingale Models of Consumption and Taxes. In
Rational Expectations Econometrics, pages 121–161. Westview Press, 1991.
41

[14] Kevin X.D. Huang and Jan Werner. Implementing Arrow-Debreu Equilibria by Trading
Inﬁnitely-Lived Securities. Economic Theory, 24(3):603–622, 2004.
[15] John Maynard Keynes. Indian Currency and Finance. Macmillan and Co, Ltd, 1913.
[16] Bruce D. Meyer. Do the Poor Move to Receive Higher Welfare Beneﬁts? Joint Center for
Poverty Research Working Paper, 58, 2000. Northwestern University/ University of Chicago.
[17] Leo Pasvolsky. Economic Nationalism of the Danubian States. The Macmillan Company,
1928.
[18] Ben D. Peletier, Robert A.J. Dur, and Otto H. Swank. Voting on the Budget Deﬁcit:
Comment. American Economic Review, 89(5):1377–1381, 1999.
[19] Torsten Persson and Lars E. O. Svensson. Why a Stubborn Conservative would Run
a Deﬁcit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
104(2):325–345, 1989.
[20] James M. Poterba. State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Eﬀects of Budgetary Institutions
and Politics. Journal of Political Economy, 102(4):799–821, 1994.
[21] James M. Poterba. Capital Budgets, Borrowing Rules, and State Capital Spending. Journal
of Public Economics, 56(2):165–187, 1995.
[22] James M. Poterba. Do Budget Rules Work? In Alan J. Auerbach, editor, Fiscal policy:
Lessons from economic research., pages 53–86. MIT Press, 1997.
[23] James M. Poterba and Kim S. Rueben. Fiscal News, State Budget Rules, and Tax-Exempt
Bond Yields. Journal of Urban Economics, 50(3):537–562, 2001.
[24] Antonio Rangel. How to Protect Future Generations Using Tax Base Restrictions. American
Economic Review, 95(1):314–346, 2005.
[25] Kenneth Rogoﬀ.

Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles.

80(1):21–36, 1990.
42

American Economic Review,

[26] Kenneth Rogoﬀ and Anne Sibert. Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles. Review of
Economic Studies, 55(1):1–16, 1988.
[27] Paul Rothstein. Order Restricted Preferences and Majority Rule. Social Choice and Welfare,
7(4):331–342, 1990.
[28] Paul Rothstein. Representative Voter Theorems. Public Choice, 72(2-3):193–212, 1991.
[29] Christian Schultz and Tomas Sjöström. Local Public Goods, Debt and Migration. Journal
of Public Economics, 80(2):313–337, 2001.
[30] Horace Secrist. An economic analysis of the constitutional restrictions upon public indebtedness in the United States. Bulletin of the University of Wisconsin. Economics and political
science series, 8(1), 1914.
[31] Robert Skidelsky. John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain, 1937-1946. MacMillan Pub.
Ltd., 2001.
[32] Paul Studensky. Public Borrowing. National Municipal League, 1930.
[33] Guido Tabellini and Alberto Alesina. Voting on the Budget Deﬁcit. American Economic
Review, 80(1):37–49, 1990.
[34] John Joseph Wallis. Constitutions, Corporations, and Corruption: American States and
Constitutional Change, 1842 to 1852. Journal of Economic History, 65(1):211–256, 2005.
[35] John Joseph Wallis and Barry Weingast. Equilibrium Impotence: Why the States and Not
the American National Government Financed Infrastructure Investment in the AnteBellum
Era. NBER Working Paper, 11397, 2005.

43

