NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS CRISES AND DEVALUATION

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 1103

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1103
April 1983

Balance—of—Payments Crises and Devaluation

Abs t r act

The collapse of a fixed exchange rate is typically

marked by a sudden balance—of—payments crisis in which
"speculators" fleeing from the domestic currency acquire a
large portion of the central bank's foreign exchange holdings.
Faced with such an attack, the central bank often withdraws
temporarily from the foreign exchange market, allowing the
exchange rate to float freely before devaluing and returning

to a fixed-rate regime. This paper links the timing of the
initial speculative attack to the magnitude of the expected
devaluation and to the length of the transitional period of

floating. An implication of the analysis is that there exist
devaluations so sharp and transition periods so short that a
crisis must occur the moment the market first learns that the

current exchange parity will eventually be altered. For sufficiently long transition periods, the floating exchange rate
"overshoots" its new peg before appreciating back toward it;
for shorter periods, the rate depreciates monotonically to its

new fixed level. Accordingly, the central bank's return to
the foreign exchange market can occasion a capital outflow or
a capital inflow.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, New York 10021
(212) 280—5189

Introduction

A central bank that tolerates a persistent balance-ofpayments deficit will ultimately find itself unable to peg
the exchange rate between domestic and foreign currency.
If capital is internationally mobile, the collapse of the
fixed exchange rate is typically sparked by a sudden balance-

of—payments crisis in which "speculators" fleeing from the
domestic currency acquire a large portion of the central

bankts foreign reserve stock. Faced with this reserve
hemorrhage, the bank must withdraw from the foreign exchange

market and allow the exchange rate to float, at least
temporarily.

Can economic theory throw any light on the timing

of such speculative attacks? In a perceptive analysis,

Krugman [] demonstrates that when agents have perfect
foresight, asset markets can be continuously in equilibrium
only if the attack occurs on a unique, well—defined

date.

A balance—of—payments crisis will generally take place
only after the date upon which it first becomes apparent
that the fixed exchange rate cannot be defended indefinitely.
Roughly speaking, the time of the attack is determined by the

requirement that no discrete jump in the equilibrium exchange
rate occur at the moment the transition from a fixed to a
floating—rate regime is made.

The timing of a crisis thus depends on the policies

—2—

agents expect the central bank to pursue during and after a run

on its reserve stock. Krugman 13] analyzes the case }n which
the bank commits its entire reserve stock to the defense of the
currency, and, after losing that stock, never again intervenes
to influence the exchange rate.V More frequently, however,

a central bank abandons the current exchange rate before the
speculators have acquired all its reserves, and then, after a
transitional period of floating, re—pegs the rate at a higher

level. In other words, the balance—of-payments crisis leads
to a devaluation rather than to a permanent abandonment of

the fixed exchange rate regime.
This paper studies how the expectation of subsequent
devaluation affects the timing of balance—of—payments crises.

Section I describes a simple open—economy model, and Section
II uses it to link the date of a crisis to the magnitude of
the expected devaluation and the duration of the transitional

float. While crises occur earlier the greater the anticipated
devaluation, their timing is related to the length of the

floating—rate interval in a more complicated way. That relation
is explored in Section III, which analyzes the exchange rate's

behavior during the interlude of floating. An implication of
the analysis is that there exist transition periods so short
and devaluations so large that a crisis must occur the moment
agents discover that the exchange parity will eventually be

altered. If a crisis is inevitable and agents learn that the
central bank will respond with an immediate devaluation, then
the crisis must take place immediately.

—3—

I.

The Model

The simple linear example used here is taken directly

from Flood and Garber [2]. We consider a small open economy
whose residents consume a single consumption good supplied by

both foreign and domestic producers. Two assets are available,
domestic money (which foreigners do not hold) and an internationally tradable bond whose face value in terms of foreign

currency is fixed. The domestic money price of the consumption
good is denoted by P, while the foreign—currency price of con-

sumption is P. The two prices are linked by

the

arbitrage

relation

P

EP*,

(i)

where E, the exchange rate, is the price of foreign money in

terms of home money. P is exogenous and constant; for convenience, the normalization *

= 1 is adopted. An additional

assumption of convenience is that the interest rate on foreign—
currency bonds is constant and equal to zero.

The demand for domestic real money balances is a decreasing
function of the rate of exchange depreciation:

= a —

8(E/E).

(2)

According to (1) and (2), a higher home inflation rate leads

—4—

asset holders to devote a greater share of their portfolios
to foreign—currency assets. The supply of domestic money is
given by

M

where

S

-

+

D

is the domestic credit component of the monetary

Dt

base and Rt is the stock of foreign reserves of the central
bank, valued in home currency at the exchange rate prevail—
ing on the purchase date.

In equilibrium,

=

= Dt

+

R.

The central bank causes domestic credit to evolve over time
according to the rule
=

Rule

> 0.

(1)

is always followed, under all exchange—rate regimes.

Under a fixed exchange rate and with perfect capital
mobility, the foreign reserve stock Rt is an endogenous variable

that can jump discontinuously as private residents re—balance
their portfolios in response to current or anticipated shocks.
Accordingly, at times t when the reserve stock undergoes a
discrete change, the analysis below will distinguish between the
left—hand and right-hand limits of the reserve path, denoted by

t

=

urn

s-'t

s<t

RS ,

Rt

=

lim
s+t
s>t

R .
S

(5)

—5—

A notational convention similar to (5) will be applied below to

other non-predetermined variables. The domestic credit stock is not
among these, however: provided the central bank adheres rigidly
to rule (Ii), making no discrete changes in its domestic assets,

Dt is a predetermined variable and must change continuously.
If the exchange rate is initially fixed at level E, so
that E/E =

0, the equilibrium level of nominal balances must,

by (2), be constant at level

M =

c.

(6)

By (3) and ()), therefore, official international reserves
must decline at rate p as long as the exchange rate remains pegged:

=

-.

(1)

The reserve loss has as its counterpart a continuing private-

sector capital outflow; and the fixed exchange rate must be
abandoned once the stock of reserves earmarked for defense of

the exchange rate E has been exhausted. As Krugman [3] observes,
the collapse of the exchange rate will involve a balance-of-

payments crisis in which domestic residents suddenly acquire the
non—earmarked portion of the central bank's foreign reserve stock.

The precise timing of the crisis depends on the pelicies
agents expect the central bank to adopt in response to a

—6—

run on its reserves. Krugman [3] focuses on the case in which
the central bank withdraws permanently from the foreign exchange

market after the run; but there are other possibilities. The
next section studies how anticipated post—attack policies affect the timing of the speculative attack.

II. Crises and Devaluation
Central banks rarely commit all their reserves to

defending an indefensible exchange rate. Typically, the
central bank will simply withdraw from the foreign exchange

market once a balance—of—payments crisis has driven foreign

reserves to a level it deems dangerously low. After a
transitional period of floating, the exchange rate is formally

devalued and pegged at its new, higher level. The establishment
of a "realistic" exchange rate may evoke an initial capital inflow; but unless the devaluation is accompanied by appropriately
restrictive macroeconomic measures, further crises will inevitably
occur.—
To study how this scenario influences the timing of the
initial attack, some assumptions about agentst information are

required. It is assumed that the length of the transitional
period of floating, denoted by T, is known with certainty.
Further, agents are assumed to know the level E'> E to which
the exchange rate will be devalued at the end of the transition.

A final piece of information that must be available is the

—7—

res'erve level

0 at which the monetary authority abandons

>

the current fixed exchange rate. The case emphasized in [3]
is the case t =

in which, following a crisis, the exchange

rate is allowed to float freely forever.

Time begins at t = 0.

The time T at which the attack

on the exchange rate occurs is calculated, as ususal, by a

process of backward induction. The key to the solution is the
observation that along a perfect—foresight path, agents can

never expect a discrete jump in the level of the exchange
rate: a jump, if anticipated, would provide agents with a
profitable arbitrage opportunity inconsistent with the hypo-

thesized equilibrium (see [3]). This principle delivers two
restrictions on the economy's path. At time T, when the central
bank allows the exchange rate to float, the initial fixed exchange rate E must coincide with the exchange rate ET equili-

brating the asset markets. Further, as t approaches T+T (the
moment at which the central bank re—enters the

foreign exchange

marketl

the eouilibrjum floating exchange rate Et must converge to
the new par value, E'.
Only the depreciation rate E/E can jump.
Consider first the behavior of the exchange rate during

the transitional period of floating. That behavior is governed

by equation (2). A general solution to the non—autonomous
differential equation defined by (2) is
T+t
E

t

=

keat+J(DS +)e_5_t)ds (T
t
B

<

t

<

T+T),

(8)

—8—

where k is an arbitrary constant. Note that B =
—

R,

while reserves

are lost in the attack. The particular sQiution of (2)

associated with asset—market equilibrium can be determined by

invoking the necessary terminal condition ET+= Et; and the
unique value of k consistent with this terminal condition is,

te_

by (8), k =

T+T)/8

The path of the exchange rate during

the transition period is therefore described by
T+T
E

t

tet_T_T)u1'8 + I
8

f( +)e5_tds.
S

(9)

t

By equating the original fixed exchange rate

to the

value for E given by (9), the time T at which the balance-ofpayments crisis occurs can be calculated. A convenient expres-

sion for E is obtained by setting t = T in (9), integrating by
parts, and applying (14):

E =

E;eT/8

+ -(a -

eT/8)

+ 1(DT + )(i - e_aT/'8)

e_an/'8.

—

(io)

To find T, equate the right—hand side of (10) to E and substitute
D0 + ijT

for

T =

DT. The date of the speculative attack is given by

)]et'
(i eT)
-

—

+

-

D0

-

B

-

.a (11)

—9—

Expression (ii) shows how the anticipated official
response to a balance-of—payments crisis influences the date

of its occurrence. The equilibrium value of T is clearly a
declining function of E' ,

the

anticipated post—devaluation

exchange rate; thus, the greater the expected devaluation,

the sooner the speculative attack occurs. Indeed, there
exist devaluations sufficiently drastic that T < 0. In these
cases, the currency is attacked the moment the market learns

that the fixed exchange rate cannot be maintained forever.
The relation between T and T is more complex, and is
graphed in Figure 1; for future reference,

=

u(l

dT

-

eT)

-

aT/s (1
pe

(a/){pT—

—aT/s 2
e

(E'

-

(12)

An intuitive explanation of Figure 1 is most easily given
after the next section's discussion of exchange rate behavior

during the floating—rate interlude. Note, however, that
as t

-+

0, T -

—, so

that a run must occur at time 0 if the

transitional period T is sufficiently short.../ In particular,

if it is known that the monetary authority will devalue the
instant the attack takes place CT

0), the run must occur as

soon as the inevitability of a crisis is perceived. When the
exchange rate is to be sharply devalued with no transitional

T

T2
T*

T1

T
T

1

FIGURE 1

—10—

float, domestic money holders can avoid an anticipated discrete capital loss only if they stage an immediate attack.

III. Exchange Rate Dynamics during the Transition Period
A useful benchmark for the purposes of this section is
the case T =

studied in [2] and in [3]. When the central

bank leaves the foreign exchange market forever after the
speculative attack, the date of the attack, denoted T*, is
given by

— D0

T* =

[let T -

in

—

(13)

—

equation (11)]. How does the exchange rate be-

have after floating in this limiting case? By (9), the exchange rate Et is equal to (Dt + )/a +

for t > T*. It

follows that the exchange rate's time derivative

is constant

at p/a during the (infinite) period of floating following the
attack.

Return now to the assumption t < .

then,

by (ii) and (13), T =

If

PT/a = E' —

T*: the crisis occurs on the same

date as it would if the exchange rate were never re—pegged.
The reason for this is that the exchange rate can move from E
to E' over the transitional period if it rises at the constant
rate p/a characterizing the case T =

. Because

the demand

for money the instant after the attack is then the same as in

—11—

the case t

= , the

attack must occur at time T*. The exis-

tence of a finite t such that the attack occurs at T* is
reflected in Figure 1.

The foregoing transition time is a borderline case.
It is now clear that if pt/ct <

E'

—

, the

exchange rate must

at all moments depreciate more quickly, and at an increasing
to E' in time t;

rate, to travel from

thus,

T <

T*,

so that

real balances are lover than in the borderline case the instant

after the attack. Similarly, T > T* when sit/a

> ' — . In

the latter situation, Et rises at a declining rate during the

float; but the exchange rate iay "overshoot" ' and subsequently

if real balances become sufficiently high. Figure 2
displays two possible exchange rate paths corresponding to the
transition times
When pt/ct

in Figure 1.

and

> E'

E, the exchange rate may be depreciating

—

(at a falling rate), appreciating (at a rising rate), or stationary at the moment the central bank re—enters the foreign exchange

market. In order that the exchange rate be stationary at that

moment (i.e., ÷ =
DT+T

+

= cz'.

0),

it must be true [by (2)J that

=

Through use of () and (11), this condition

can be written as

-

Let

e'B)

-

(ct/8)[pt

-

denote the unique value of i

a(' - )] = 0.
satisfying

(lu)

(114). As (12) shows,

I.')

Lxi

Q
tti

I—I

I'.)

.4

+

I\)

'-3

r')

'-3

I-i

.4

I—,

c-F

'-3

'-3

Lxii

I

Lxii

—12—

r is also the transito interval such that dT/dt = 0.
It is thus the dividing point between cases in which a reduction
ifl T hastens the speculative attack and cases in which a reduc-

tion In T postpones the attack (see Figure i).

The foregoing coincidence yields some intuition regarding the sign of the derivative dT/dT. When -r < -r, the exchange

rate depreciates from E to '

during the floating period without

ever rising above E'. Since a reduction in -r shortens the
time available for this transition, the exchange rate must be
depreciating more quickly at the outset; and this can be the
case only if the run occurs earlier, so that Initial nominal
balances

are lower.

When T > -r, however, the exchange rate rises above E'

during the floating—rate interlude before appreciating toward

'

at

an increasing rate (see Figure 2). A fall in -r again

decreases the time available for the transition from E to E';

but in the present case, a rise in T makes the transition

possible by raising M and thus shortening the initial period
(and reducing the extent) of exchange rate depreciation before
the rapid appreciation to E'.

The central bank's re—entry into the foreign exchange

market occasions an equilibrating capital movement. If r <
implying that

> 0, the pegging of the exchange rate

must raise money demand, and cause an instantaneous capital
inflow (a transfer of foreign assets from the public to the

central bank). When T > T, however,

< 0, money demand is

—13—

reduced,

and the bank suffers a reserve 1oss.' The behavior

of the capital account after devaluation is often lin1ed to
the monetary authority's success in choosing a "realistic"
exchange rate and adopting appropriately restrictive macro-

economic policies. The present analysis appears to support
that view because the longer is the transition period, the higher
is the money supply and the less "realistic" is a given exchange

rate at the time of re—pegging. Note, however, that a capital
inflow may accompany re—pegging even if the market knows that the
new fixed exchange rate must eventually be abandoned.

Conclusion

When a fixed exchange rate is untenable, the central

bank may devalue rather than exhaust its foreign reserves ir.

a futile attempt to defend that rate. This

raper

has studied

how the prospect of devaluation affects the timing of the
balance—of—payments crisis that forces the mcnetarv authority's

hand.

the crisis is
of the expected

In the model employed above, the date of

a well—defined function of both

the

magnitude

devaluation and the length of the transitional period of

floating

preceding the establishment of a new exchange parity.

The latter relationship, while understandable, is complex. One

simple and important implication is this: if the transitional
float is sufficiently brief, a speculative attack on the currency will occur as soon as the market realizes that the current
exchange rate cannot be enforced indefinitely.

_14_

The behavior of the exchange rate during the
transitional float elucidates the relationship between
the length of the floating—rate interlude and the date of the
speculative attack; but that behavior is of independent

interest as well. For sufficiently long transition periods)
the floating exchaiige rate will "overshoot" its new peg

before appreciating back toward it. For shorter transition
periods, the rate will depreciate monotonically toward its

new fixed level. Depending on which of these cases obtains,
the central bank's return to the foreign exchange market may

occasion a capital outflow or a capital inflow. The stage is
then set for the next balance—of—payments crisis.

—15—

Footnotes

1. Salant and Henderson [5] contains an early discussion of
speculative attacks under rational expectations, while Salant {]

analyzes the phenomenon in more general, possibly stochastic
models of official price fixing. Flood and Garber [2] develop
the computable linear example employed in this paper, and apply
it in a stochastic environment.

2.

Krugman also studies a model in which the market is uncertain

about the portion of its reserves that the central bank is wil-

ling to commit. This paper abstracts from such uncertainty.

3.

Instances abound. For example, several OECD countries

allowed their exchange rates to float temporarily after the
speculative crises that led to the Smithsonian currency re-

alignment of December 1911. Blanco and Garber El] study a stochastic model of exchange—rate crises in which the size of any devaluation is determined by an endogenous central—bank rule.
In contrast to this paper, they assume that devaluation occurs
as soon as reserves reach their lower limit: there is no

tempo-

rary period of floating. The particular form of the rule used
to choose the post—crisis fixed exchange rate makes it possible
for the pre-crisis rate to be viable in some periods even though
agents expect devaluation to occur at the same moment as the
speculative attack.

-i6-

)4•

The discussion ignores the (realistic) possibility that

the central bank responds to the crisis by imposing capital
controls.

5. The exchange rate may, of course, jump upward
as a result of an attack that occurs at time 0.

6. Underlying the analysis is the assumption that B is large
enough to allow the central bank to re—peg the exchange rate
for some non—zero time interval.

—17—

REFERENCES

[1] BLANCO, HERMINIO and PETER M. GARBER: "Recurrent: Devaluation and the Timing of Speculative Attacks." Mirneo,
University of Rochester, 1982.

[2] FLOOD, ROBERT P. and PETER M. GARBER: "Collapsing

Exchange-Rate Regixes: Some Linear Examples." Journal
of International Economics, forthcoming.

[3] KRUGMAN, PAUL: "A Model of Balance—of—Payments Crises."
Journal of Mony, Credit ad_Banking 11, (August 1979),
311—325.

[J

SALANT, STEPHEN W.: "The Vulnerability of Price Stabiliza-

tion Schemes to Speculative Attack." Journal of Political
Economy 91, (February 1983), 1—38.

[5] SALANT, STEPHEN W. and DALE W. HENDERSON: "Market Anticipations of Government Policies and the Price of Gold."

Journal of Political Econom 86, (August 1978), 627—68.

