                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                MEESE-ROGOFF REDUX:
                       MICRO-BASED EXCHANGE RATE FORECASTING

                                            Martin D.D. Evans
                                            Richard K. Lyons

                                          Working Paper 11042
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11042


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Meese-Rogoff Redux: Micro-Based Exchange Rate Forecasting
Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 11042
January 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper compares the true, ex-ante forecasting performance of a micro-based model against both

a standard macro model and a random walk. In contrast to existing literature, which is focused on

longer horizon forecasting, we examine forecasting over horizons from one day to one month (the

one-month horizon being where micro and macro analysis begin to overlap). Over our 3-year

forecasting sample, we find that the micro-based model consistently out-performs both the random

walk and the macro model. Micro-based forecasts account for almost 16 per cent of the sample

variance in monthly spot rate changes. These results provide a level of empirical validation as yet

unattained by other models. Our result that the micro-based model out-performs the macro model

does not imply that macro fundamentals will never explain exchange rates. Quite the contrary, our

findings are in fact consistent with the view that the principal driver of exchange rates is standard

macro fundamentals. In Evans and Lyons (2004b)we report firm evidence that the non-public

information that we exploit here for forecasting exchange rates is also useful for forecasting macro

fundamentals themselves.

Martin D. D. Evans
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
Washington DC 20057
and NBER
evansm1@georgetown.edu

Richard K. Lyons
U.C. Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu
Introduction
   This paper compares the true, ex-ante forecasting performance of a micro-based model

against both a standard macro model and a random walk. In contrast to existing literature,

which is focused on longer horizon forecasting, we examine forecasting over horizons from

one day to one month (the one-month horizon being where micro and macro analysis begin to

overlap). Over our 3-year forecasting sample, we find that the micro-based model consistently

out-performs both the random walk and the macro model. Micro-based forecasts account

for almost 16 per cent of the sample variance in monthly spot rate changes. These results

provide a level of empirical validation as yet unattained by other models.

   The forecasting experiment proposed by Richard Meese and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1983) re-

mains a benchmark against which exchange rate models are judged. Their result that struc-

tural macro models cannot out-perform a naive random-walk has proven robust over the

decades. Yet, the Meese-Rogoﬀ paper was never about forecasting in the true sense, i.e.,

using time-t information to forecast exchange rates at t + 1. By using concurrent, realized

values of the forcing variables, their regressions were more about concurrent explanation

than about ex-ante forecasting. Their only “forecasting” element is in their reliance on

ex-ante data to estimate equation parameters, which appropriately penalized models whose

estimated parameters were unstable.

   Charles Engel and Kenneth West (2004a,b) provide a valuable perspective on the fore-

castability of exchange rates. One explanation for the random walk nature of exchange rates

is that there exists some unobserved fundamental that itself follows a random walk (unob-

served being important because fundamentals proposed in most macro models do not follow

random walks). They oﬀer a diﬀerent explanation, one rooted in the asset approach to ex-

change rates and the present value relation that follows from it. Specifically, they show that


                                              1
if fundamentals are I(1), but not necessarily random walks, then as the discount factor in

the present value relation approaches one, the exchange rate will follow a process arbitrarily

close to a random walk. Intuitively, given that an I(1) process can be split into random-walk

and stationary components, a discount factor near one means that most all of the weight

is placed on fundamentals far into the future, expectations of which are dominated by the

random-walk component.

       This paper takes the analysis of Engel and West as an important reorientation of thinking

and brings it to the natural next step. Specifically, if there is little room for forecasting based

on stationary components of fundamentals, then one needs to focus on where all the action is,

namely, exchange rate dynamics that come from expectational surprises. Though the surprise

part is, by definition, orthogonal to public information, our micro-based model shows that

there should exist types of “non-public” information that are useful for forecasting this part,

and where to look for these types of information.1 We then locate data on these types

of non-public information and test whether they have true, ex-ante forecasting power. We

should emphasize that our tests are qualitatively stronger than those of Meese and Rogoﬀ:

the hurdle for finding that a model outperforms a random walk is even higher.

       Importantly, our result that the micro-based model out-performs the macro model does

not imply that macro fundamentals will never explain exchange rates. Quite the contrary,

our findings are in fact consistent with the view that the principal driver of exchange rates is

standard macro fundamentals. As a conceptual matter, we show this by providing a struc-

tural interpretation–using a fundamentals-based model–that our findings are consistent

with fundamentals being the driver. As an empirical matter, there is firm evidence that

   1
    We refrain from using the word “news” because it has too strong an association with macro information
that is public, which, even in the most careful of event studies, explains less that 5 percent of exchange rate
variation in total (see Andersen et al. 2003).



                                                      2
the non-public information that we exploit here for forecasting exchange rates is also useful

for forecasting macro fundamentals themselves, so this information is not orthogonal to the

evolving real economy (see Martin Evans and Richard Lyons 2004b).

    The remainder of the paper has four sections. Section I provides perspective on why

forecasting exchange rates is so diﬃcult. Section II presents two forecasting models from

the macro tradition and one forecasting model from the more recent, micro-based tradition.

Section III describes our data, reviews some estimation issues, and presents our empirical

results. Section IV presents concluding remarks.



I    Forecasting Exchange Rates

Why are future changes in exchange rates so hard to forecast? To address this question, we

start with the present value expression for the spot rate:


                                                P∞
                                 st = (1 − b)        i=0   bi Et ft+i ,                   (1)


where st is the log nominal exchange rate ($/other), and ft is current macro fundamentals.

This equation nests a large class of macro exchange rate models: The precise definition

of fundamentals and the specific form of the parameter b depend on the macro model in

question. To study the forecasting implications of (1), we iterate forward to get,


                                                  b
                                  st = Et ft +      E ∆st+1 ,
                                                 1−b t




                                                 3
and then rearrange to give:


                                           1−b
                               ∆st+1 =      b
                                                 (st − Et ft ) + εt+1 ,                     (2)


where:                                     X∞
                          εt+1 ≡ (1 − b)               bi (Et+1 − Et ) ft+i+1 .             (3)
                                                 i=0


   Equations (2) and (3) allow us to analyze how the behavior of fundamentals aﬀects

the forecastability of exchange rates. To this end, let us start with the simple case of

fundamentals ft following a random walk. Equation (1) implies that st = Et ft in this

case, so according to (2) the spot rate must also follow a random walk. The point here is

that unforcastability in spot rates does not in itself imply that spot rates are disconnected

from fundamentals. Put diﬀerently, forecasting success is not necessary for validating macro

models.

   Many macro models identify elements of ft as I(1), but not random walks. In this

case there should be some forecastability. However, Engel and West (2004a) point out that

forecasting will still be hard because the value of b implied by macro models is close to unity.

We can illustrate their point with a simple example. Suppose that changes in fundamentals

follow the auto-regressive process


                                     ∆ft = φ∆ft−1 + ut ,                                    (4)


with 1 > φ > 0, and also that Et ft = ft (i.e. there is complete information about the current

state of fundamentals). Then (1) implies that st − ft follows an AR(1) process


                                                                   bφ
                              st − ft = φ(st−1 − ft−1 ) +             u,
                                                                  1−βφ t




                                                   4
               1
and εt+1 =       u .
             1−bφ t+1
                        These results imply a theoretical R2 from equation (2) of


                                           (1 − b)2 φ2
                                                             .
                                     (1 − b)2 φ2 + (1 − φ2 )


Simple calculations show that the implied values for R2 are below 0.01 when b is greater

than 0.95 and φ is less than 0.8. There is very little forecastability in ∆st+1 when b is close

to unity unless the changes in fundamentals are very strongly autocorrelated.

   In reality, forecasting exchange rates will be even harder than this example implies be-

cause we do not have data on the real-time estimates of fundamentals, Et ft . Even when we

have the “correct” definition of fundamentals and so can construct a value for ft , this ex-post

value may diﬀer significantly from the real time estimate (see, for example, Evans 2004). Un-
                                                 1−b
der these circumstances, estimating ∆st+1 =       b
                                                       (st − ft ) + ε̂t+1 will produce poorer results

than our example suggests because bias from measurement error pushes the coeﬃcient on

st − ft towards zero.

   Engel and West’s analysis and our simple example suggest that forecasting future spot

rate changes with the fundamentals found in macro models is indeed a challenge. This does

not mean that forecasting spot rates is all but impossible. On the contrary, it suggests that

we reorientate our thinking towards a new class of models. Specifically, if there is little room

for forecasting based on st − ft , because b is close to unity and changes in fundamentals are

not very predictable, then we need to focus on where all the action is, namely, exchange rate

dynamics that come from expectational surprises (i.e., εt+1 in equation 3). This is precisely

the focus of more recent micro-based models. Macro models are agnostic about the process

by which information is incorporated into new forecasts (since all relevant information is

assumed public, and the mapping to price is direct and immediate). Micro-based models

focus, by contrast, on the process through which dispersed information becomes known to the

                                                5
agents who set prices–the marketmakers–and is thereby incorporated in their expectations.

Only after being incorporated in marketmaker expectations does it aﬀect the prices that

marketmakers set.



II     Forecasting Models

In this section we present the two models we shall use in our forecast comparisons. The first

is representative of a wide class of macro-economic models. The second is a micro-based

model–a stylized version of the model described in Evans and Lyons (2004a). Both models

produce a present value representation for the log spot rate similar to equation (1).


II.I   Macro Models

The macro model we examine has two central features: (i) the discount factor b is very

close to unity and (ii) information about future fundamentals arrives simultaneously to all

agents, who in turn revise their forecasts for fundamentals in unison. Engel and West (2004b)

note that feature (i) is a property of two of the most important models used in macro: the

money-income model and Taylor-rule model. In the former, fundamentals are given by


                     ft = mt − m∗t − γ(yt − yt∗ ) + qt − (vt − vt∗ + αρt ) ,


where mt is the log nominal money supply, yt is log nominal output, qt is the real exchange

rate, and ρt is the FX risk premium (a “∗ ” denotes a foreign variable). This specification

produces a discount factor b that equals α/(1 + α), where α is the interest semi-elasticity of

money demand in both countries. Engel and West note that estimates of α in the literature

of between 20 and 60 imply that b is very close to unity. When interest rates are set according


                                               6
to a Taylor-rule, fundamentals are


                 ft ≡ (pt − p∗t ) −   1
                                      ϕ0
                                           [ρt + ϕ1 (ytg − yt∗g ) + ϕ2 (π t − π∗t ) + ut − u∗t ] ,


where pt is the log nominal price level, ytg is the “output gap”, and π t is inflation. In this

case the discount factor b equals (1 + ϕ0 )−1 , where ϕ0 is the coeﬃcient on the spot rate in

the Taylor interest-rate rule. Engel and West point out that the values for ϕ0 implied by

actual monetary policy rules are small so that the discount factor b must again be close to

one.

      Given the arguments above, there is little point in trying to forecast ∆st+1 using st − ft .

Instead we make use of another feature of both the money-income and Taylor-rule models,

the UIP equation: Et ∆st+1 = it − i∗t + ρt . Notice that if either model is correct, it − i∗t + ρt =
1−b
 b
      (st − Et ft ) . Combining this expression with equation (2) gives us the ex-post version of

the UIP equation:

                                       ∆st+1 = it − i∗t + ρt + εt+1 .                                (5)


It is important to stress that this equation is just as good a specification as (2) from a

forecasting point of view. From a practical standpoint, both equations require an assumption

about the risk premium. We consider macro forecasts based on two assumptions: (A) ρt = ρ

and (B) ρt = ϕ0 − ϕ(it − i∗t ). Both specifications are encompassed by the regression:


                                      ∆st+1 = a0 + a(it − i∗t ) + εt+1 .                             (6)


Under (A), we have UIP with a constant risk premium: a0 = ρ and a = 1, and under (B)

deviations in UIP are perfectly correlated with the interest diﬀerential a0 = ϕ0 , and a =



                                                         7
1 − ϕ. We shall refer to (6) as the UIP model when assumption (A) holds, and as the Fama

model when assumption (B) holds.


II.II       A Micro-Based Model

Exchange rate dynamics in the micro-based model also focus on the present value relation.

However, in this context there is a rather subtle but significant diﬀerence: the relevant

expectation is that of the marketmaker. Specifically,

                                                       X∞
                                        st = (1 − b)               bi Etm ft+i .                             (7)
                                                             i=0



Here the present value relation characterizes the form of the price-setting rule for market-

makers; Etm denotes expectations conditioned on marketmakers’ information at the start of

period t. This is a crucial diﬀerence because micro-based models focus on the process by

which marketmakers obtain information (micro-level learning, in contrast to the symmetric-

information learning in traditional macro models). In particular, rewriting (7) we have:




                                          ¡ 1−b ¢
                            ∆st+1 =          b
                                              (st − Etm ft ) + εm
                                                                t+1 ,                                       (8a)
                                                X∞ ¡                  ¢
                               εm
                                t+1   ≡ (1 − b)       bi Et+1m
                                                                 − Etm ft+i+1 .                            (8b)
                                                       i=0



Thus, innovations in spot rates, εm
                                  t+1 , come from the present value of revisions in marketmaker

forecasts of future fundamentals.

      Micro-based models tell us that marketmakers obtain information about fundamentals

from the flow of transactions, specifically order flow.2 The idea is simple: If the trades of

  2
      Order flow is signed transaction flow. Trades are signed from the direction of the initiating counterparty.

                                                        8
private agents convey information about future fundamentals that is not currently known

to marketmakers, then marketmakers will learn from those trades. Note that for the trades

of private agents to convey information, it is not necessary that private agents perceive

themselves to have superior information: they could instead be trading for purely allocational

motives (e.g., clearing export transactions or repatriating earnings from abroad), with the

sum of these trades conveying information about the macro-economy that is not otherwise

available at the time. When a large number of agents are trading for correlated reasons,

the resulting transaction flow during period t (after st is set) will convey information to

marketmakers that causes them to revise their fundamentals forecasts.

   Let us now consider the implications of the micro model for forecasting. First, note that

any variable correlated with the arrival of information to marketmakers will be correlated

with the exchange rate innovation εm
                                   t+1 . Thus, transaction flows during period t seem an

obvious candidate. There is strong empirical support for this idea in the data (Evans and

Lyons 2002a,b). But from a forecasting point of view, this does not get us far. Rather, we

need to understand whether transactions flows generated before period t could be correlated

with the arrival of information between the start of periods t and t + 1. If every marketmaker

observed all transactions flows contemporaneously, the exchange rate innovation εm
                                                                                 t+1 should

only be correlated with the unanticipated portion of transactions flows during period t. As a

result, εm
         t+1 should not be correlated with transaction flows during periods t − 1 and earlier.

   In sum, the forecasting power of micro-based models rest to two critical features. First,

transactions flows must contain information relevant for fundamentals. This feature arises in

an environment where either (1) agents initiating trades in the FX market have information

they believe they can take advantage of; or (2) agents are trading for allocative reasons and

the aggregate of those trades correlates with the current state of the macroeconomy. The


                                              9
second feature concerns the delay between the time information first generates transaction

flows and the time this fact is widely recognized by marketmakers. If there is no delay

because marketmakers can observe aggregate order flow contemporaneously, then spot rates

will be correlated contemporaneously with order flow (as in Evans and Lyons 2002a). The

forecasting power of order flow arises precisely because it takes time for the implications of

aggregate order flow to be recognized across all marketmakers and hence reflected in spot

prices.

   We can illustrate how information in order flow may be delayed with a simple example.

Suppose marketmakers observe only part of the aggregate order flow in real time, and learn

fully about aggregate order flow with a lag. In particular, let us assume that aggregate

order flow during period t, xt+1 , follows an AR(1) process: xt+1 = λxt + vt+1 where vt+1

is a i.i.d. mean zero shock with variance σ 2v . Further, assume that each marketmaker

(indexed by i) observes a sample of aggregate order flow xit+1 during period t trading where

xit+1 = xt+1 +ξ it+1 and ξ it+1 is a i.i.d. mean zero idiosyncratic shock with variance σ 2ξ . We also

assume that marketmakers learn the true aggregate order flow with a one-period delay. Thus,

at the start of period t, marketmaker i’s information Ωit comprises the history of aggregate
                                                        ©                         ª
order flow {xt−1 , xt−2 , ...} and individual order flow xit , xit−1 , xit−2 , ... . In this environment,

the unexpected order flow observed by marketmaker i during period t trading can be shown

to be:


                             xit+1 − Eti xit+1 = xt+1 − Eti xt+1 + ξ it+1 ,

                                               = vt+1 + λψvt + ξ it+1 ,                              (9)




                                                   10
where ψ ≡ σ 2ξ /(σ 2v + σ 2ξ ) and Eti denotes expectations conditioned on Ωit . Thus, the order

flow information received by marketmaker i has an aggregate component vt+1 that follows

an MA(1) and an idiosyncratic component ξ it+1 . This means that the information received

by individual marketmakers during period t trading will be correlated with past innovations

in aggregate order flow vt .

   Does this mean that the forecast revisions εm
                                               t+1 can be correlated with vt ? Not necessarily.

It depends on whether marketmakers would find it optimal to change their own price quotes

in the face of idiosyncratic information. This is not the case in models of marketmaker

behavior (Lyons 1997 and Evans and Lyons 2002a). In the Bayes-Nash equilibrium of these

models, each marketmaker chooses to trade on idiosyncratic information (at the prices quoted

by other marketmakers) rather than simply announcing it to others in the form of a price

quote. Moreover, if diﬀerences between the quotes set by marketmakers in a given period

make them vulnerable to being arbitraged, marketmakers have a further reason not to change

their quotes in response to idiosyncratic information. In the context of our example, this

Bayes-Nash logic means that marketmakers would not change their quote between t and

t + 1 based on xit+1 − Eti xit+1 because it contains idiosyncratic information ξ it+1 . Rather, they

would wait until they have a more precise signal, one that is purged of ξ it+1 . This is achieved

at the start of period t + 1 when they learn xt . When all marketmakers learn xt , the value

of vt becomes common knowledge.

   We can put these ideas together in a stylized model of fundamentals and order flow:


                                   ∆ft = φ∆ft + ut + δvt ,                                    (10a)

                                     xt = λxt−1 + vt .                                        (10b)




                                                11
Equation (10a) extends our specification of the fundamentals process in equation (4). Inno-

vations in fundamentals growth include a common-knowledge component ut , and a com-

ponent correlated with the innovation in aggregate order flow, vt . We assume that ut

is observed contemporaneously (i.e. at the start of period t), and that vt only becomes

known to all marketmarkers with a one period delay. Under these assumptions, marketmak-

ers do not know the concurrent state of the macroeconomy. Rather Etm ft−1 = ft−1 , and

Etm ft = (φ + 1)ft−1 − φft−2 + ut , so ft − Etm ft = δvt . With these results we can rewrite

equation (7) as


                                         bφ                               bφ
                       st = Etm ft +        E m ∆ft
                                        1−bφ t
                                                        =     1
                                                                f
                                                            1−bφ t
                                                                     −       f
                                                                         1−bφ t−1
                                                                                    −     δ
                                                                                            v,
                                                                                        1−bφ t




so the innovation in spot rates εm             m
                                 t+1 ≡ st+1 − Et st+1 is:



                                            bφ                                                       [1+φ(1−b)]δ
    εm
     t+1 =
               1
             1−bφ
                    (ft+1 − Etm ft+1 ) −   1−bφ
                                                  (ft − Etm ft ) −      δ
                                                                          v
                                                                      1−bφ t+1
                                                                                 =     1
                                                                                         u
                                                                                     1−bφ t+1
                                                                                                 +      1−bφ
                                                                                                                 vt .


Finally, substituting for vt and combining the result with (8a) gives the following forecasting

equation:
                                                                      [1+φ(1−b)]δ
                    ∆st+1 =   1−b
                               b
                                    (st − Etm ft ) +     1
                                                           u
                                                       1−bφ t+1
                                                                  +      1−bφ
                                                                                    (xt − λxt−1 ) .                 (11)


This equation shows that lagged order flows can have forecasting power for spot rates even

when the discount factor is very close to unity: the coeﬃcient on the last term has a limiting

value of δ/(1 − φ) as b → 1.

   In the empirical analysis below we consider two forecasting equations based on (11). The

first specification is given by


                                         ∆st+1 = a0 + axagg
                                                        t   + et+1 ,                                                (12)


                                                         12
where xagg
       t   denotes aggregate order flow from six end-user segments. The second specification

considers the forecasting power of disaggregated order flow:

                                                  X6
                                 ∆st+1 = a0 +               aj xdis
                                                                j,t + et+1 ,                          (13)
                                                      j=1



where xdis
       j,t denotes the order flow from segment j. Notice that the transaction flows in both

specifications are derived from trading that took place before the start of period t.3 Below

we refer to the specificaions in (12) and (13) as the Micro I and Micro II models.

       One further point deserves emphasis: the fact that aggregate order flow has forecasting

power for spot rates is not a violation of market eﬃciency (at least not in the weak or

semi-strong senses of eﬃciency). As researchers, we have access to aggregate order flow data

that was not part of the information set available to all marketmakers at the time they were

setting spot rates. Ex post, forecastability looks like a missed opportunity for profit (though

not necessarily on a risk-adjusted basis). Ex ante, however, it is important to recognize that

this order flow information is not available to everyone.



III        Empirical Analysis

III.I       Data

Our empirical analysis utilizes a new data set that comprises end-user transaction flows,

spot rates and euro deposit rates over six and half years. The transaction flow data is of

a fundamentally diﬀerent type and it covers a much longer time period than the data used

   3
    Equations (12) and (13) do not include the interest diﬀerential to control for the first term on the
right hand side of (11). Adding the interest diﬀerential has no eﬀect on the forecasting performance of the
micro-based models because, as we shall see, the diﬀerential has no forecasting power whatsoever.



                                                    13
in earlier work (e.g., Evans and Lyons 2002a,b). The diﬀerence in type is our shift from

inter-marketmaker order flow to end-user order flow. By end users we are referring to three

main segments: non-financial corporations, investors (such as mutual funds and pension

funds), and leveraged traders (such as hedge funds and proprietary traders). The data set

also contains information on trading location. From this we construct order flows for six

end-user segments: trades executed in the US and non-US markets for non-financial firms,

investors, and leveraged traders. Though inter-marketmaker transactions account for about

two-thirds of total volume in major currency markets, they are largely derivative of the

underlying shifts in end-user demands. Our data on the end-user segments include all of

Citibank’s end-user trades in the largest spot market, the USD/EUR market, from January

1993 to June 1999.4 The data also include all of Citibank’s end-user trades in the USD/EUR

forward market over the same period. Citibank’s end-user market share in these currencies

is in the 10-15 percent range; no other bank has a larger market share in these currencies.


III.II      Forecast Comparisons

We test for forecastability in two ways. First, we report mean-squared error (MSE) ratios

to be comparable with earlier studies, notably Nelson Mark (1995) and Jon Faust et al.

(2003). We also construct a new test statistic for comparing the forecasting performance of

models relative to the random walk (RW).5 This statistic, the "projection" statistic, is both

easy to compute and has a straightforward asymptotic distribution under the null that the

exchange rate follows a random walk. It also provides an economically meaningful measure

   4
     Before January 1999, data for the euro are synthesized from data in the underlying markets against the
dollar, using weights of the underlying currencies in the euro.
   5
     We construct this test because conventional statistics based on MSE’s as computed by Christiano (1989),
Mark (1995) and others have a complicated (non-normal) asymptotic distribution when the models are
nested, as they are here (Clark and McCraken 2001).


                                                    14
of forecasting performance. All of our results are based on recursive estimates of the non-RW

model using a growing number of observations.

       We compute the projection statistic as follows: Let ∆h st+h|t denote the forecast of

∆h st+h ≡ st+h − st computed from a model estimated with data available on day t. First we

construct the recursive h-period out-of-sample forecasts for the non-RW model over the fore-
                                                                  \
casting period starting on day S and ending on day T − h : (i.e., ∆st+h|t for S < t ≤ T − h).

Next we regress the forecasts on the realized values for ∆st+h :


                                   \
                                   ∆st+h|t = β 0 + β∆st+h + wt+h .




Under the null hypothesis that st follows a random walk, there is no forecast change in

the spot rate so ∆st+h|t = 0. Under these circumstances, the out-of-sample forecasts based
                                    \
on the alternative model estimates, ∆st+h|t , only diﬀer from zero due to the presence of

sampling error. Furthermore, since these forecasts are calculated using data up to day t,

the error cannot be correlated with ∆st+h under the null. These observations imply that

we can compare forecasting performance of a model against the random walk benchmark,

simply by testing for the significance of the β coeﬃcient. If the alternate model does no

better than the RW, we should find estimates of β insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. If the

alternate model does have forecasting power, then the estimates of β should be positive and

significant. The only factor complicating inference concerns the possible presence of serial

correlation in wt+h . We compute an estimate of the variance of β using the Newey-West

(1987) estimator.6

   6
    Consistency of the standard error on β requires that the truncation lag used in the covariance estimator
increases with the sample size. In practice we set the truncation lag to h − 1.




                                                    15
III.III      Results

Our results are reported in Table 1. The table presents the forecasting power of four diﬀerent

models: the UIP and Fama models based on equation (6), the Micro I model specified in

(12), and the Micro II model specified in (13). These models are compared across 5 diﬀerent

forecasting horizons h: 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 trading days, using 6/3/1996 as the start of the

forecasting period.7 Note that 20 trading days is 4 trading weeks, i.e., roughly one calendar

month. In the UIP and Fama models we use euro deposit rates with maturities that match

the forecast horizon. In the micro-based models order flows are derived from transactions

over the h trading days starting on day t − h.

    Table 1 shows that the forecasting performance of the macro models is uniformly poor,

in keeping with results from Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983) and the voluminous literature that

followed their work (for a recent update, see Yin-Wong Cheung et al. forthcoming). In

contrast, the forecasting performance of the micro models is significantly better, particularly

as the forecasting horizon is extended. According to the projection statistic, the forecasting

ability of the Micro I model is significantly better than the RW model at the one percent level

at horizons of 10 days or longer. The results from the Micro II model are if anything even

stronger. The projection statistics indicate that disaggregated order flow has statistically

significant forecasting power for spot rate changes at all horizons. This finding is robust to

our forecasting method. We find similar results when forecasts are based on rolling estimates

of the Micro II model using a fixed number of observations.

    The estimates of β also provides us with a more economically meaningful measure of the

   7
     The number of out-of-sample forecasts used to compute the MSE and projection statistics for h =
{1, 5, 10, 15, 20} are 797, 793, 788, 783, and 778, respectively. Since there are at least 38 non-overlapping
observations (778/20 > 38) in the forecasting period, our results should be largely immune to the well-known
small-sample problems that plague inference in long-horizon forecast comparisons conducted over standard
data spans.


                                                     16
                         Table 1: Forecast Comparisons
                                    Horizon h (trading days)
                  1             5            10           15                 20
  UIP
  MSE           1.001         1.006        1.012         1.016             1.021
 p-value       (1.000)       (1.000)      (1.000)       (1.000)           (1.000)
    β           0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000             0.000
 p-value       (0.058)       (0.597)      (0.542)       (0.488)           (0.414)
  Fama
MSE Ratio       1.005         1.011        1.022         1.035             1.054
 p-value       (1.000)       (1.000)      (1.000)       (1.000)           (1.000)
    β           0.000         0.003        0.002         0.003             0.010
 p-value       (0.533)       (0.332)      (0.457)       (0.452)           (0.359)
 Micro I
MSE Ratio       1.026         1.015        1.001         0.946             0.896
 p-value       (1.000)       (1.000)      (1.000)       (0.357)           (0.106)
    β           0.002         0.024        0.092         0.133             0.129
 p-value       (0.398)       (0.118)      (0.000)       (0.000)           (0.000)
 Micro II
MSE Ratio       0.961         0.876        0.848         0.810             0.806
 p-value       (0.124)       (0.024)      (0.091)       (0.045)           (0.055)
    β           0.027         0.057        0.102         0.122             0.157
 p-value       (0.005)       (0.018)      (0.005)       (0.007)           (0.002)
Notes: MSE ratio is the ratio of mean squared forecast errors for the non-RW model to the
RW model. The p-value from a one-sided test for the RW null is reported in parenthesis
under the MSE ratios. These p-values are computed as in Mark (1995) with the Andrews
AR(1) rule for the truncation lag The p-values below the estimates of β are for the null
β = 0 and are computed from the asymptotic distribution of the OLS estimates using
Newey-West estimator with h − 1 lags.




                                           17
forecasting performance. By definition, the h- period change in the spot rate comprises a
                                                   \
forecastable and unforecastable component: ∆st+h ≡ ∆s         t+h|h . Multiplying both sides
                                                     t+h|t + ε[

of this identity by ∆st+h , and taking expectations gives us a variance decomposition for spot

rate changes:

                                    ³               ´     ¡              ¢
                                             \
                 V ar (∆st+h ) = Cov ∆st+h , ∆s             t+h|h , ∆st+h .
                                               t+h|t + Cov ε[




Since the projection coeﬃcient β is simply the ratio of the covariance between ∆st+h and
\
∆st+h|t to the variance of ∆st+h , the values for β reported in Table 1 estimate the contribution

of the model forecasts to the variance of spot rate changes over the forecasting period. As

the table shows, forecast based on either micro-based model account for a greater fraction

of the variance in spot rates as the forecasting horizon rises. Forecasts from the Micro II

model account for almost 16 per cent of the sample variance in monthly spot rate changes.

By this metric, the forecasting power of disaggregated order flows is truly significant from

an economic perspective.



IV      Conclusions

Within the public information paradigm, which is standard in exchange rate economics,

the scope for successful exchange rate forecasting is narrow indeed: forecasts based on ex-

ante expected changes perform poorly (Meese and Rogoﬀ 1983, Engel and West 2004b) and

forecasting surprises is, by definition, impossible from pubic information. Relaxing complete

information oﬀers, at least at the conceptual level, a way to proceed. We provide a model

showing why there may exist types of non-public information that should be useful for

forecasting exchange rate surprises (i.e., price changes that cannot be explained based on


                                               18
measures of public information). Because our model provides a structural interpretation

that is fundamentals based, this shows that surprises being forecastable is consistent with

the bedrock idea that exchange rates are driven by macro fundamentals.

   The proof is, of course, in the empirical pudding. When we compare the true, ex-ante

forecasting performance of a micro-based model against both a standard macro model and

a random walk, we find that the micro-based model consistently out-performs both: micro-

based forecasts account for roughly 16 percent of the variance in monthly spot rate changes.

Because our analysis is not based on concurrent, realized values of the forcing variables–as

was that of Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983)–the results provide a level of empirical validation as

yet unattained by other models. Put diﬀerently, our tests are qualitatively stronger than

those of Meese and Rogoﬀ in the sense that the hurdle for finding that our micro-based

model outperforms a random walk is even higher here. Moreover, as Evans and Lyons

(2004b) shows, there is firm evidence that the non-public information that we exploit here

for forecasting exchange rates is also useful for forecasting macro fundamentals themselves.

   Future work along micro-based modeling lines might consider the following related issues.

First, is the forecasting power here coming from the real economy (i.e., the non-financial

firms)? If so, this would provide a still closer link to the relevance of supply-side factors in

exchange rate determination (in the spirit of new open economy modeling). Second, if the

dispersed information framework is the right one, what are the implications for deep issues

such as market incompleteness, risk sharing, and goods-market pricing? Third, to what

degree is the information being revealed in order flow actually macroeconomic information?

Might it instead be due, at least in part, to variations in equilibrium expected returns? And

if the latter, what are the links to existing models of risk-premium determination?




                                              19
References
Andersen, Torben; Bollerslev, Tim; Diebold, Francis and Vega, Clara. “Micro Eﬀects of

    Macro Aannouncements: Real-time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange.” American

    Economic Review, 2003, 93, pp. 38-62.

Cheung, Yin-Wong; Chinn Menzie and Pascual, Antonio. “Empirical Exchange Rate Mod-

    els of the Nineties: Are any Fit to Survive?” Journal of International Money and

    Finance, forthcoming.

Clark, Todd and McCraken, Michael. “Evaluating long-horizon forecasts.” Federal Reserve

    Bank of Kansas City working paper No. 01-14, 2001.

Christiano, Lawrence. “P*: Not the Inflation Forecaster’s Holy Grail,” Federal Reserve

    Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1989, 13 pp. 3-18.

Engel, Charles and West, Kenneth. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals.” National Bureau

    of Economic Research (Cambridge MA) Working Paper 10723, August 2004a, and

    Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

–––––.“Accounting for Exchange Rate Variability in Present Value Models when the

    Discount Factor is Near One.” American Economic Review, May 2004b (Papers and

    Proceedings) 94, pp. 118-125.

Evans, Martin. “Where Are We Now? Real-Time Estimates of the Macro Economy.”

    Mimeo, Georgetown University, 2004.

Evans, Martin and Lyons, Richard. “Order flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal

    of Political Economy, 2002a, 110, pp. 170-180.

–––––.“Informational Integration and FX Trading.” Journal of International Money

    and Finance, 2002b, 21, pp. 807-831.

                                           20
–––––. “A New Micro Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics.” National Bureau of Eco-

    nomic Research (Cambridge MA) Working Paper 10379, March 2004a.

–––––.“Exchange Rate Fundamentals and Order Flow.” Mimeo, Georgetown Univer-

    sity, 2004b.

Faust, Jon; Rogers, John and. Wright, Johnathan. “Exchange Rate Forecasting: The

    Eerrors we’ve Really Made.” Journal of International Economics, 2003, 60, pp. 35-59.

Lyons, Richard. “A Simultaneous Trade Model of the Foreign Exchange Hot Potato.”

    Journal of International Economics, 1997, 42 pp. 275-298.

Mark, Nelson. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-horizon Predictabil-

    ity.” American Economic Review, 1997, 85 pp. 201-218.

Meese, Richard, and Rogoﬀ Kenneth. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies.”

    Journal of International Economics, 1983, 14 pp. 3-24.

Newey, Whitney. and West, Kenneth. “A Simple, Positive Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity

    and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 1987, 55 pp. 703-

    708.




                                          21
