NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE OPTIMAL PROGRESSIVITY OF THE INCOME TAX CODE
Juan Carlos Conesa
Dirk Krueger
Working Paper 11044
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11044
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

This work has benefitted from useful comments by Marco Bassetto, Martin Floden, Jonathan Heathcote, Tim
Kehoe, Victor Rios-Rull and Tom Sargent, as well as seminar participants at CEMFI, CERGE-EI,
Complutense, EUI, IDEI, UPF, UPN, UPO, UPV, the Hoover Institution and the 2001 SED Meetings in
Stockholm. Conesa acknowledges financial support from Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (SEC200306080), Generalitat de Catalunya, and Fundación Ramón Areces, and Krueger acknowledges financial
support under NSF grant SES-0004376. All remaining errors are our own. The authors can be reached at
juancarlos.conesa@upf.edu and dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Juan Carlos Conesa and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income Tax Code
Juan Carlos Conesa and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 11044
January 2005
JEL No. E62, H21, H24
ABSTRACT
This paper computes the optimal progressivity of the income tax code in a dynamic general
equilibrium model with household heterogeneity in which uninsurable labor productivity risk gives
rise to a nontrivial income and wealth distribution. A progressive tax system serves as a partial
substitute for missing insurance markets and enhances an equal distribution of economic welfare.
These beneficial effects of a progressive tax system have to be traded off against the efficiency loss
arising from distorting endogenous labor supply and capital accumulation decisions.
Using a utilitarian steady state social welfare criterion we find that the optimal US income tax is well
approximated by a flat tax rate of 17.2% and a fixed deduction of about $9,400. The steady state
welfare gains from a fundamental tax reform towards this tax system are equivalent to 1.7% higher
consumption in each state of the world. An explicit computation of the transition path induced by
a reform of the current towards the optimal tax system indicates that a majority of the population
currently alive (roughly 62%) would experience welfare gains, suggesting that such fundamental
income tax reform is not only desirable, but may also be politically feasible.
Juan Carlos Conesa
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
juancarlos.conesa@upf.edu
Dirk Krueger
Professor for Macroeconomics
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt am Mai
Mertonstr. 17, PF 81
60054 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
and NBER
dirk.krueger@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de

1. Introduction
Progressive income taxes play two potentially beneficial roles in aﬀecting consumption, saving
and labor supply allocations across households and over time. First, they help to enhance a
more equal distribution of income, and therefore, possibly, wealth, consumption and welfare.
Second, in the absence of formal or informal private insurance markets against idiosyncratic
uncertainty progressive taxes provide a partial substitute for these missing markets and therefore may lead to less volatile household consumption over time.
However, progressive taxation has the undesirable eﬀect that it distorts incentives for
labor supply and saving (capital accumulation) decisions of private households and firms.
The policy maker thus faces nontrivial trade-oﬀs when designing the income tax code.
On the theoretical side, several papers characterize the optimal tax system when two of
these eﬀects are present. The seminal paper by Mirrlees (1971) focuses on the traditional
tension between equity and labor supply eﬃciency, whereas Mirrlees (1974) and Varian (1980)
investigate the trade-oﬀs between labor supply eﬃciency and social insurance stemming from
progressive taxation. Aiyagari (1995) shows that, in the presence of uninsurable idiosyncratic
uncertainty the zero capital tax result by Judd (1985) and Chamley (1986), derived from the
desired eﬃciency of capital accumulation, is overturned in favor of positive capital taxation.
Aiyagari’s result is due to the fact that positive capital taxes cure overaccumulation of capital in the light of uninsurable idiosyncratic income shocks, rather than influence the risk
allocation directly. Golosov et. al. (2001) present a model with idiosyncratic income shocks
and private information where positive capital taxes, despite distorting the capital accumulation decision, are optimal because they improve the allocation of income risk by alleviating
the eﬀects that the informational frictions have on consumption allocations. Albanesi and
Sleet (2003) take a similar approach as Golosov et al. (2003) in characterizing (analytically
and computationally) eﬃcient allocations in a private information economy and show how to
decentralize these allocations with income- and wealth-specific taxes.
Common to these papers is that, in order to insure analytical tractability, they focus
on a particular trade-oﬀ and derive the qualitative implications for the optimal tax code.
In contrast, in this paper we quantitatively characterize the optimal progressivity of the
income tax code in an economic environment where all three eﬀects of progressive taxes (the
insurance, equity and eﬃciency eﬀects) are present simultaneously.
In our overlapping generations economy agents are born with diﬀerent innate earnings
ability and face idiosyncratic, serially correlated income shocks as in Huggett (1993) and
Aiyagari (1994). These income shocks are uninsurable by assumption; the only asset that
is being traded for self-insurance purposes is a one-period risk-free bond which cannot be
shortened. In each period of their finite lives agents make a labor-leisure and a consumptionsaving decision, which is aﬀected by the tax code. The government has to finance a fixed
exogenous amount of government spending via proportional consumption taxes, taken as
given in the analysis, and income taxes, which are the subject of our study. We restrict
the income tax code to lie in a particular class of functional forms. This functional form,
which has its theoretical foundation in the equal sacrifice approach (see Berliant and Gouveia
(1993)), has two appealing features. First, it provides a close approximation to the actual
US income tax code, as demonstrated by Gouveia and Strauss (1994). Second, it provides
a flexible functional form, nesting a proportional tax code, a wide variety of progressive tax
2

codes and a variety of regressive tax codes such as a poll tax, with few parameters, which
makes numerical optimization over the income tax code feasible.
The social welfare criterion we use in order to evaluate diﬀerent income tax codes is steady
state ex-ante expected utility of a newborn agent, before it is known with which ability level
(and thus earnings potential) that agent will be born (i.e. looking upon her future life behind
the Rawlsian veil of ignorance). Thus, progressive taxes play a positive role in achieving a
more equal distribution of income and welfare (or in other words, they provide insurance
against being born as a low-ability type). They also provide a partial substitute for missing
insurance markets against idiosyncratic income shocks during a person’s life. On the other
hand, labor-leisure and consumption-saving decisions are distorted by the potential presence
of tax progressivity.
Our first main quantitative result is that the optimal income tax code is well approximated by a proportional income tax with a constant marginal tax rate of 17.2% and a
fixed deduction of roughly $9, 400. Under such a tax code aggregate labor supply is 0.54%
higher and aggregate output is 0.64% higher than in the benchmark tax system, calibrated
to roughly match the US system. This is true even though average hours worked decline
by about 1%, reflecting a shift of labor supply from low-productivity to high-productivity
individuals. Households with annual income below around $18, 200 and above $65, 000 would
pay lower total income taxes as compared to the benchmark, whereas the middle class, the
households with incomes between $18, 200 and $65, 000 face a substantially higher income
tax bill. The implied steady state welfare gains from such a tax reform are sizeable, in the
order of magnitude equivalent to a uniform 1.7% increase in consumption across all agents
and all states of the world.
The intuition for this result, which supports voices arguing for flat tax reform such as Hall
and Rabushka (1995), is that lower marginal tax rates for high-income people increase labor
supply and savings incentives, whereas the desired amount of redistribution and insurance
is accomplished by the fixed deduction. That the desire for redistribution and insurance,
nevertheless, is quantitatively important is reflected in our finding that a pure flat tax, without
deduction, leads to a reduction in welfare by close to 1%, compared to the US. benchmark,
even though aggregate output increases by 9.0% compared to the benchmark.
These results suggest that sizeable welfare benefits are forgone by passing on a fundamental tax reform. Our second main quantitative result, based on an explicit computation of the
transition path induced by such a reform, indicates that such a reform is not only desirable,
in a steady state welfare criterion sense, but may also be politically feasible. In particular,
we find that a majority of 62% of all agents currently alive would obtain welfare gains from
such a reform. As our steady state findings suggest, households located around the median of
the labor earnings and wealth distribution tend to suﬀer most from the reform; our analysis
thus suggests that the middle class may be the biggest opponent to the proposed tax reform.
Several other studies attempt to quantify the trade-oﬀs involved with reforming the (income) tax code in models with consumer heterogeneity. Castañeda et al. (1999) and Ventura
(1999) use a model similar to ours in order to compare in detail the steady state macroeconomic and distributional implications of the current progressive tax system with those
of a proportional (flat) tax system. We add to this literature the normative dimension of
discussing optimal income taxation (with the implied cost of having to take a stand on a par-

3

ticular social welfare functional), as well as an explicit consideration of transitional dynamics
induced by a potential tax reform. Domeij and Heathcote (2004) investigate the allocational
and welfare eﬀects of abolishing capital and income taxes, taking full account of the transition,
but also do not optimize over the possible set of policies. Saez (2001) investigates the optimal
progressivity of capital income taxes; in particular he focuses on the tax treatment of the top
tail of the wealth distribution. In order to derive analytical results labor income is exogenous,
deterministic and not taxed in his model, so that the labor supply and insurance aspects of
progressive taxation are absent by construction. Finally, Caucutt et al. (2003) and Benabou
(2002) study the eﬀects of the progressivity of the tax code on human capital accumulation
and economic growth. Their analyses devote more detail to endogenizing economic growth
than our study, but allows only limited cross-sectional heterogeneity and intertemporal trade;
by stressing distributional and risk allocation aspects we view our analysis as complementary
to theirs.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we describe the economic environment and
define equilibrium. Section 3 contains a discussion of the functional forms and the parameterization employed in the quantitative analysis. In Section 4 we describe our computational
experiments and in Section 5 we summarize our results concerning the optimal tax system
and steady state welfare consequences of a tax reform. Section 6 is devoted to a discussion
of the allocative and welfare consequences of a transition from the actual tax system to the
optimal system derived in Section 5. Conclusions can be found in Section 7.

2. The Economic Environment
2.1. Demographics
Time is discrete and the economy is populated by J overlapping generations. In each period
a continuum of new agents is born, whose mass grows at a constant rate n. Each agent
faces a positive probability of death in every period. Let ψ j = prob(alive at j + 1|alive at j)
denote the conditional survival probability from age j to age j + 1. At age J agents die with
probability one, i.e. ψ J = 0. Therefore, even in the absence of altruistic bequest motives, in
our economy a fraction of the population leaves accidental bequests. These are denoted by
T rt and confiscated by the government as general revenue. At a certain age jr agents retire
and receive social security payments SSt at an exogenously specified replacement rate bt of
current average wages. Social security payments are financed by proportional labor income
taxes τ ss,t .
2.2. Endowments and Preferences
Individuals are endowed with one unit of productive time in each period of their life and
enter the economy with no assets. They spend their time supplying labor to a competitive
labor market or consuming leisure. Individuals are heterogeneous along three dimensions
that aﬀect their labor productivity and hence their wage.
First, agents of diﬀerent ages diﬀer in their average, age-specific labor productivity εj . For
agents older than jr (retired agents) we assume εj = 0. Furthermore, individuals are born
with diﬀerent abilities αi which, in addition to age, determine their average deterministic
4

labor productivity. We assume that agents are born as one of M possible ability types
i ∈ I, and that this ability does not change over an agents’ lifetime,1 so that agents, after
the realization of their ability, diﬀer in their current and future earnings potential. The
probability of being born with ability αi is denoted by pi > 0. This feature of the model,
together with a social welfare function that values equity, gives a welfare-enhancing role to
redistributive fiscal policies.
Finally, workers of same age and ability face idiosyncratic uncertainty with respect to their
individual labor productivity. Let by η t ∈ E denote a generic realization of this idiosyncratic
labor productivity uncertainty at period t. The stochastic process for labor productivity
status is identical and independent across agents and follows a finite-state Markov process
with stationary transitions over time, i.e.
Qt (η, E) = P rob(η t+1 ∈ E|η t = η) = Q(η, E).

(1)

We assume that there is a unique invariant measure associated with Q, which P
we denote
by Π. All individuals start their life with average stochastic productivity η̄ =
η ηΠ(η),
where η̄ ∈ E. Diﬀerent realizations of the stochastic process then give rise to cross-sectional
productivity, income and wealth distributions that become more dispersed as a cohort ages.
In the absence of explicit insurance markets for labor productivity risk a progressive tax
system may be an eﬀective, publicly administered tool to share this idiosyncratic risk across
agents.
At any given time individuals are characterized by (at , η t , i, j), where at are asset holdings
(of one period, risk-free bonds), η t is stochastic labor productivity status at date t, i is ability
type and j is age. An agent of type (at , η t , i, j) deciding to work `j hours commands pre-tax
labor income εj αi η t `j wt , where wt is the wage per eﬃciency unit of labor. Let by Φt (at , η t , i, j)
denote the measure of agents of type (at , η t , i, j) at date t.
Preferences over consumption and leisure {cj , (1 −`j )}Jj=1 are assumed to be representable
by a standard time-separable utility function of the form

E

( J
X
j=1

β

j−1 (cj

γ

1−σ

(1 − `j )1−γ )
1−σ

)

,

(2)

where β is the time discount factor, γ is a share parameter measuring the importance of
consumption relative to leisure, and σ controls the degree of risk aversion.2 Expectations are
taken with respect to the stochastic processes governing idiosyncratic labor productivity and
the time of death.
1

Ability in our model stands in for innate ability as well as for education and other characteristics of an
individual that are developed before entry in the labor market, aﬀect a persons’ wage and do not change over
a persons’ life cycle.
2
The coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion with our utility specification is given by
−cucc
= σγ + 1 − γ.
uc

5

2.3. Technology
We assume that the aggregate technology can be represented by a standard Cobb-Douglas
production function. The aggregate resource constraint is given by
Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt + Gt ≤ Ktα (At Nt )1−α

(3)

where Kt , Ct and Nt represent the aggregate capital stock, aggregate consumption and aggregate labor input (measured in eﬃciency units) in period t, and α denotes the capital share.
The term At = (1 + g)t−1 A1 captures labor augmenting technological progress. The depreciation rate for physical capital is denoted by δ. As standard with a constant returns to scale
technology and perfect competition without loss of generality we assume the existence of a
representative firm operating this technology.
2.4. Government Policy
The government engages in three activities in our economy: it spends money, it levies taxes
and it runs a balanced budget social security system. The social security system is defined by
benefits SSt for each retired household, independent of that household’s earnings history. The
social security tax rate τ ss,t is set to assure period-by-period budget balance of the system.3
We take the social security system as exogenously given and not as subject of optimization
of the policy maker.
Furthermore the government faces a sequence of exogenously given government consumption {Gt }∞
t=1 and has three fiscal instruments to finance this expenditure. First it levies a
proportional tax τ c,t on consumption expenditures, which we take as exogenously given in
our analysis. Second, accidental bequests T rt accrue to the government (which one may
interpret as estate taxes that do not distort bequest behavior, since our life cycle structure
does not model it explicitly). Finally, the government can tax each individual’s income,
yt = (1 − τ ss,t )wt αi εj η`t + rt at , where wt and rt denote the wage per eﬃciency unit of labor
and the risk free interest rate, respectively.4 We impose the following restrictions on income
taxes. First, tax rates cannot be personalized as we are assuming anonymity of the tax code.
Second, the government cannot condition tax rates on the source of income, i.e. cannot tax
labor and capital income at diﬀerent rates.5 Apart from these restrictions, however, income
taxes to be paid can be made an arbitrary function of individual income in a given period.
We denote the tax code by T (·), where T (y) is the total income tax liability if pre-tax income
equals y.
When studying the optimal progressivity of the income tax code, the problem of the
government then consists of choosing the optimal tax function T (·), subject to the constraint
3

The current US system ties benefits to past contributions, albeit in a very progressive form. To the
extent that our social security system is too progressive, compared to the data, this would bias our tax
results towards less progressivity of the system in the model. Note however, that in the actual system payroll
taxes are capped at some income level, whereas in our model all labor income is subject to the payroll tax,
counteracting the potential bias just described. We made this simplifying assumption so that average indexed
monthly earnings do not become an additional continuous state variable.
4
After retirement, taxable income equals yt = SSt + rt at .
5
For a study that discusses the eﬀects of changing the mix of capital and labor income taxes, see Domeij
and Heathcote (2001).

6

that this function can only depend on individual income and balances the budget, keeping
fixed the stream of government expenditures and the consumption tax rate.
2.5. Market Structure
We assume that workers cannot insure against idiosyncratic labor income uncertainty by
trading explicit insurance contracts. Also annuity markets insuring idiosyncratic mortality
risk are assumed to be missing. However, agents trade one-period risk free bonds to self-insure
against the risk of low labor productivity in the future. The possibility of self-insurance is
limited, however, by the assumed inability of agents to sell the bond short; that is, we impose
a stringent borrowing constraint upon all agents. In the presence of survival uncertainty, this
feature of the model prevents agents from dying in debt with positive probability.6
2.6. Definition of Competitive Equilibrium
In this section we will define a competitive equilibrium and a balanced growth path. Individual state variables are individual asset holdings a, individual labor productivity status η,
individual ability type i and age j. The aggregate state of the economy at time t is completely
described by the joint measure Φt over asset positions, labor productivity status, ability and
age.
Therefore let a ∈ R+ , η ∈ E = {η 1 , η 2 , ..., η n }, i ∈ I = {1, . . . , M}, j ∈ J = {1, 2, ...J},
and let S = R+ × E × J. Let B(R+ ) be the Borel σ -algebra of R+ and P(E), P(I), P(J)
the power sets of E, I and J, respectively. Let M be the set of all finite measures over the
measurable space (S, B(R+ ) × P(E) × P(I) × P(J)).
Definition 1. Given a sequence of social security replacement rates {bt }∞
t=1 , consumption tax
∞
∞
rates {τ c,t }t=1 and government expenditures {Gt }t=1 and initial conditions K1 and Φ1 , a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of functions for the household, {vt , ct , a0t , `t : S → R+ }∞
t=1 , of
production plans for the firm, {Nt , Kt }∞
,
government
income
tax
functions
{T
:
R
→
R+ }∞
t
+
t=1
t=1 ,
∞
∞
∞
∞
social security taxes {τ ss,t }t=1 and benefits {SSt }t=1 , prices {wt , rt }t=1 , transfers {T rt }t=1 ,
and measures {Φt }∞
t=1 , with Φt ∈ M such that:
1. given prices, policies, transfers and initial conditions, for each t, vt solves the functional
equation (with ct , a0t and `t as associated policy functions):
Z
vt (a, η, i, j) = max
{u(c, `) + βψ j vt+1 (a0 , η 0 , i, j + 1)Q(η, dη 0 )}
(4)
0
c,a ,`

6

If agents were allowed to borrow up to a limit, it may be optimal for an agent with a low survival
probability to borrow up to the limit, since with high probability she would not have to pay back this
debt. Clearly, such strategic behavior would be avoided if lenders could provide loans at diﬀerent interest
rates, depending on survival probabilities (i.e. age). In order to keep the asset market structure simple and
tractable we therefore decided to prevent agents from borrowing altogether, very much in line with much of
the incomplete markets literature in macroeconomics; see Aiyagari (1994) or Krusell and Smith (1998) for
representative examples.

7

subject to:7
c + a0 = (1 − τ ss,t )wt εj αi η` + (1 + rt )a
−Tt [(1 − 0.5τ ss,t )wt εj αi η` + rt a], for j < jr ,

(5)

c + a0 = SSt + (1 + rt a
−Tt [SSt + rt a], for j ≥ jr ,

(6)

a0 ≥ 0, c ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ` ≤ 1.

(7)

2. Prices wt and rt satisfy:
µ

At Nt
rt = θα
Kt

wt = θ(1 − α)At

¶1−α
µ

− δ,

Kt
At Nt

¶α

(8)

.

(9)

3. The social security policies satisfy
SSt = bt R
τ ss,t

SSt
=
wt Nt

wt Nt
Φt (da × dη × di × {1, ..jr − 1})

(10)

Z

(11)

Φt (da × dη × di × {jr , ..., J}).

4. Transfers are given by:
T rt+1 =

Z

(1 − ψ j )a0t (a, η, i, j)Φt (da × dη × di × dj)

(12)

5. Government budget balance:
Z
Gt =
Tt [(1 − τ ss,t )wt εj αi η`t (a, η, i, j) + rt (a + T rt )]Φt (da × dη × di × {1, ..jr − 1}) +
Z
Tt [SSt + rt (a + T rt )]Φt (da × dη × di × {jr , ..., J}) +
Z
τ c,t ct (a, η, i, j)Φt (da × dη × di × dj) + (1 + rt )T rt
(13)
7

The half of social security taxes paid by employees is part of taxable income in the U.S. under current
law. Our definition of taxable income reflects this.

8

6. Market clearing:

aΦt (da × dη × di × dj)

(14)

εj αi η`t (a, η, i, j)Φt (da × dη × di × dj)

(15)

Kt =
Nt =
Z

Z

Z

ct (a, η, i, j)Φt (da × dη × di × dj) +

Z

a0t (a, η, i, j)Φt (da × dη × di × dj) + Gt =

Ktα (At Nt )1−α + (1 − δ)Kt

(16)

Φt+1 = Ht (Φt )

(17)

7. Law of Motion:
where the function Ht : M → M can be written explicitly as:
1. for all J such that 1∈J
/ :
Φt+1 (A × E × I × J ) =

Z

Pt ((a, η, i, j); A × E × I × J )Φt (da × dη × di × dj)

where
Pt ((a, η, i, j); A × E × I × J ) =

(18)
½

Q(e, E)ψ j if a0t (a, η, i, j) ∈ A, i ∈ I, j + 1 ∈ J
else
0
(19)

2.
t

Φt+1 ((A × E × I×{1}) = (1 + n)

½ P

i∈I

0

pi if 0 ∈ A, η̄ ∈ E
else

(20)

Definition 2. A Balanced Growth Path is a competitive equilibrium in which bt = b1 , τ c,t =
τ c,1 , Gt = ((1 + g)(1 + n))t−1 G1 , a0t (.) = (1 + g)t−1 a01 (.), ct (.) = (1 + g)t−1 c1 (.), `t (.) =
l1 (.), Nt = (1 + n)t−1 N1 , Kt = ((1 + g)(1 + n))t−1 K1 , Tt = (1 + g)t−1 T1 , τ ss,t = τ ss,1 ,
SSt = (1 + g)t−1 SS1 , rt = r1 , wt = (1 + g)t−1 w1 , T rt = (1 + g)t−1 T r1 for all t ≥ 1 and
Φt ((1 + g)t−1 A, E, I, J ) = (1 + n)t−1 Φ1 (A, E, I, J ) for all t and all A ∈ R+ . That is, per
capita variables and functions grow at constant gross growth rate 1 + g, aggregate variables
grow at constant gross growth rate (1 + n)(1 + g) and all other variables (and functions) are
time-invariant.8
Note that, in order to represent this economy on a computer, one first has to carry out
the standard normalizations by dividing the utility function and the budget constraint by At
to make the household recursive problem stationary.9
8

The notation Tt = (1 + g)t−1 T1 should be interpreted as follows: an agent with income y in period 1,
faces the same average and marginal tax rate as an agent with income (1 + g)t−1 y in period t.
9
See e.g. Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) for a detailed discussion of this normalization, for a model that
is very similar to ours.

9

3. Functional Forms and Calibration of the Benchmark Economy
In this section we discuss the functional form assumptions and the parameterization of the
model that we employ in our quantitative analysis.
3.1. Demographics
The demographic parameters have been set so that the model economy has a stationary
demographic structure matching that of the US economy. Agents enter the economy at age
20 (model age 1), retire at age 65 (model age 46) and die with certainty at age 100 (model age
81). The survival probabilities are taken from Faber (1982). Finally, the population growth
rate is set to an annual rate of 1.1%, the long-run average for the US. Our demographic
parameters are summarized in Table I.
Table I: Demographics Parameters
Parameter
Value
Target
Retir. Age: jr
46(65)
Compul. Ret. (assumed)
Max. Age: J
81(100)
Certain Death (assumed)
Surv. Prob.
Faber (1982) Data
Pop. Growth: n
1.1%
Data
The maximum age J, the population growth rate and the survival probabilities together
determine the population structure in the model. We chose J so that the model delivers a
ratio of people older than 65 over population of working age as observed in the data.
3.2. Preferences
We assume that preferences over consumption and leisure can be represented by a period
utility function of the form:
1−σ

(cγ (1 − `)1−γ )
U(c, `) =
1−σ

.

(21)

In order to calibrate the preference parameters we proceed as follows. First, we fix the
coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion to σ = 4. Then the discount factor β is chosen so that
the equilibrium of our benchmark economy implies a capital-output ratio of 2.7 as observed
in the data.10 The share of consumption in the utility function is chosen so that individuals
in active age work on average 13 of their discretionary time. The choice of σ and γ implies a
coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion of approximately 2.
Preference parameters are summarized in Table II.
10

For model parameters that are calibrated using data and equilibrium observations of the model it is
understood that all parameters jointly determine equilibrium quantities of the model. Our discussion relates
a parameter to that equilibrium target which is aﬀected most, in a quantitative sense, by the particular
parameter choice.
Our measure of capital includes nonresidential fixed assets (equipment, software and nonresidential structures) as well as private residential structures and consumer durable goods. The data comes from the 2000
BEA Fixed Assets and Durable Goods tables.

10

Table II: Preferences Parameters
Parameter Value
Target
β
0.9986 K/Y = 2.7
σ
4.0
Fixed
γ
0.3856 Avg Hours= 13
3.3. Endowments
In each period agents are endowed with one unit of time. Their labor productivity is composed
of a type specific component depending on ability αi , an age-specific average component εj
and a idiosyncratic stochastic component η t in a multiplicative fashion. The deterministic
component of eﬃciency units of labor is taken from Hansen (1993). It features a hump over
the life cycle, with peak at age 50.
Our principle for calibrating the ability component αi and the stochastic process governing
idiosyncratic productivity η t is to reproduce a cross-sectional age-dependent earnings variance
within our benchmark model that matches the statistics reported by Storesletten et al. (2004),
derived from the PSID. For the ability component of labor productivity we choose two types,
M = 2 with equal mass, pi = 0.5 for i = 1, 2. The types’ ability levels (α1 , α2 ) are chosen to
match Storesletten et al.’s (2004) finding that the variance of log-earnings
of a cohort√that
√
− 0.24
just entered the labor market is equal to 0.27, which yields as α1 = e
and α2 = e 0.24 .
Thus wages for high ability agents are, on average, 46% higher than median wages and wages
of low ability agents, correspondingly, 46% lower than median wages.11 We summarize the
calibration of ability in Table III.
Table III: Ability
Parameter Value pi
α1
0.6115 0.5
α2
1.6354 0.5
For the stochastic idiosyncratic productivity component we make the following assumptions. Households start their working life at the average productivity level η̄, as described
in section 2.2; from then on their productivity levels are governed by a seven state Markov
chain, whose states summarized in Table IV, and whose transition matrix is characterized by
high persistence; its second largest eigenvalue equals 0.865. With this stochastic process for
labor productivity the cross-sectional variance of log-earnings implied by our model increases
roughly linearly with age of the cohort, with an increase of about 0.0165 per year the cohort
ages, as in Storesletten et al.’s (2004) data.12
11

Note that we cannot simply take Storesletten et al.’s (2004) estimates for their stocastic income process,
since they estimate a process for labor income, whereas in our model labor supply is endogenous.
12
We obtained this stochastic process by first specifying a simple continuous-state AR(1) process for logproductivity log(η) that was then discretized into a seven state Markov chain using Tauchen and Hussey’s
(1991) method. The persistence and variance parameters of the AR(1) were chosen to achieve the linear
increase in the variance of log-earnings (with age of the cohort), with slope of 0.0165, as reported in the main
text.

11

Table IV: Stochastic Productivity
Parameter Value
Π
η1
0.447 0.034
η2
0.589 0.135
η3
0.749 0.214
η 4 = η̄
0.942 0.236
η5
1.185 0.214
η6
1.508 0.135
η7
1.986 0.034
3.4. Technology
We assume that the aggregate production function is of Cobb-Douglas form:
F (Kt , Nt ) = Ktα (At Nt )1−a

(22)

with capital share α, where we choose α = 0.36, in accordance with the long-run capital
share for the US economy. The depreciation rate is set to δ = 6.58% so that in the balanced
growth path the benchmark economy implies an investment to output ratio equal roughly to
25.5% as in the data.13 Finally, since in a balanced growth path per capita GDP is growing
at rate g, we choose g = 1.75% to match the long-run growth rate of per capita GDP for US
data. Technology parameters are summarized in Table V.
Table V: Technology Parameters
Parameter Value
Target
α
0.36
Data
δ
6.58% I/Y = 25.5%
g
1.75%
Data
3.5. Government Policies and the Income Tax Function
In order to parameterize the actual tax code we proceed as follows. First, we fix the proportional consumption tax rate to τ c = 5.2%, which is the consumption tax rate found by
Mendoza et al. (1994) for the US. The level of government consumption, G, is chosen so that
in a balanced growth path the government consumption share of GDP is 17%, as in the data.
The social security system is chosen so that the replacement rate (ratio of retirement
pension to the average wage) is 50%. The implied payroll tax required to finance benefits,
under the assumption of a balanced budget for the social security system, is uniquely pinned
down by our assumptions about demographics, and is equal to τ ss = 12.4%, as currently for
the US, excluding Medicare.
The principal focus of this paper is the income tax code. We want to use an income tax
code that provides a good approximation to the actual current tax code for the US and then,
in our policy experiment, vary this tax code in order to find the hypothetical optimal tax
code, given a particular social welfare function.
13

Notice that investment into consumer durables is included in aggregate gross investment when we compute
this ratio in the data.

12

We use a functional form for the income tax code that is theoretically motivated by the
equal sacrifice principle (see Gouveia and Strauss (1994)) and is fairly flexible in that it
encompasses a wide range of progressive, proportional and regressive tax schedules. Letting
T (y) denote total taxes paid by an individual with pre-tax income y, the tax code is restricted
to the functional form
³
´
− 1
T (y) = a0 y − (y −a1 + a2 ) a1

(23)

where (a0 , a1 , a2 ) are parameters.
Note that limy→∞ T (y)
= limy→∞ T 0 (y) = a0 so that the limiting marginal and average tax
y
rate equals a0 . For a1 = −1, we obtain a constant tax independent of income T (y) = −a0 a2 ,
for a1 → 0 we have a purely proportional system T (y) = a0 y. Finally, for a1 > 0 we have a
progressive system since:
³
´
1
T (y)
a1 − a1
t(y) =
= a0 1 − (1 + a2 y )
y
³
´
− 1 −1
T 0 (y) = a0 1 − (1 + a2 y a1 ) a1

(24)
(25)

and thus average (as well as marginal) taxes are a strictly increasing function of income y.
Gouveia and Strauss (1994) use this parametric class of tax function to approximate the
current US system and obtain values of a0 = 0.258 and a1 = 0.768. The parameter a2 is
chosen so that the government balances its budget in the balanced growth path. Note that
a2 is not invariant to units of measurement: if one scales all variables by a fixed factor, one
has to adjust the parameter a2 in order to preserve the same tax function.14 The policy
parameters employed as benchmark are summarized in Table VI.
Table VI: Policy
Parameter
τc
a0
a1
b
τ ss

Parameters
Value
5.2%
0.258
0.768
0.5
12.4%

4. The Computational Experiment
We will define the optimal tax code as that tax code (within the parametric class chosen)
with the highest ex-ante steady state expected utility of a newborn. With a given tax code
T, parameterized by (a0 , a1 , a2 ) is associated a balanced growth path with invariant measure
14

The parameter a2 depends on units in the following sense. Suppose we scale income by a factor λ > 0
(i.e. change the units of measurement). In order to let the tax system be unaﬀected by this change one has
to adjust a2 correspondingly: a2 y a1 = ã2 (λy)a1 and therefore ã2 = a2 λ−a1 .

13

ΦT (a, η, i, j) and value function vT (a, η, i, j). Our social welfare function is then given by:
Z
SW F (T ) =
vT (a, η, i, j)dΦT
{(a,η,i,j):a=0,j=1}
X
=
pi vT (a = 0, η = η̄, i, j = 1)
(26)
i∈I

and we aim at determining:
T ∗ = arg max SW F (T )
(a0 ,a1 )

(27)

Numerically, this is done by constructing a grid in the space of policy parameters (a0 , a1 ),
computing the equilibrium and the associated expected utility of a newborn for every grid
point and finding the welfare-maximizing (a0 , a1 )-combination. In conjunction with this analysis we will compare macroeconomic aggregates in the balanced growth path associated with
the optimal tax code with those arising in the balanced growth path of the benchmark tax
code. This analysis can be found in the next section.
The first stage of our quantitative analysis is confined to a positive and normative comparison of balanced growth path allocations. In the second stage of our analysis, we explicitly
compute the transitional dynamics induced by a reform from the benchmark economy towards the optimal tax code. In particular, starting from the initial balanced growth path
we induce an unexpected change of (a0 , a1 ) to their optimal levels (optimal in the sense of
the first part of our analysis), and adjust a2 along the transition path in order to guarantee
government budget balance in every period. In Section 6 we first discuss the time paths
of aggregate variables along the transition towards the new steady state. We then identify
the winners and losers of the reform by computing the welfare consequences for agents of
diﬀerent ages and economic status that are alive at the time of the implementation of the
tax reform. A brief discussion of the implied political economic consequences implied by the
welfare calculations concludes our quantitative analysis.

5. The Optimal Tax Code
We find that the optimal tax code, as defined above, is described by a0 = 0.172, a1 = 19.
Such a tax code is roughly equivalent to a proportional tax of 17.2% with a fixed deduction
of about $9, 400. Note that this optimal tax code, with flat marginal tax rate and sizeable
deduction comes close to the tax reform proposal advanced by Hall and Rabushka (1995),
who suggested a constant marginal tax rate of 19% with a deduction of $22, 500 (for a family
of four) for the U.S. economy.
Figures 1 and 2 display the average and marginal tax rates implied by the optimal income
tax code and, as comparison, of the benchmark income tax code.

14

Figure 1: Average Tax Rates under 2 Tax Systems
0.3
Benchmark
Optimal

Average Tax Rate

0.25
0.2

0.15
0.1

0.05
0
0

2

4

6
Income in $

8

10
4
x 10

We see that marginal tax rates (and consequently average tax rates) in the optimal tax
system are considerably lower for households in the upper tail of the income distribution, as
compared to the benchmark system. Also, due to the fixed deduction marginal tax rates are
(roughly) 0 for the first $9, 400 of income under the optimal system.
Figure 2: Marginal Tax Rates under 2 Tax Systems
0.3
Benchmark
Optimal

Marginal Tax Rates

0.25
0.2

0.15
0.1

0.05
0
0

2

4

6
Income in $

8

10
4
x 10

In order to assess how tax burdens diﬀer in both system, in Figure 3 we plot the total
dollar amount a household with particular income would pay less (or more) in income taxes
15

under the new, as compared to the old system. We see that households with small and
large incomes see their income tax burdens reduced, those with high incomes significantly,
whereas households in the middle of the income distribution face a higher income tax bill.
For example, a household with yearly income of $40,000 would pay more than $400 more in
income taxes per year under the new, compared to the old tax system.
Figure 3: Diﬀerence in Total Taxes Paid
1000
Increase in Tax Burden in $

500
0
-500

-1000
-1500
-2000
-2500
-3000
-3500
-4000
0

2

4

6
Income in $

8

10
4
x 10

In order to obtain a better understanding for the economic forces underlying the results
concerning the optimal tax code, in Table VII we compare the main macroeconomic aggregates associated with the optimal tax code with those obtained under the benchmark tax
system. In order to isolate the eﬃciency from the insurance and redistribution eﬀect it is also
instructive to present the corresponding numbers for a pure proportional tax system, without
exemption level.
To compare welfare across diﬀerent tax systems, we compute (as consumption equivalent
variation CEV ) the uniform percentage decrease in consumption, at each date and in each
event (and fixed labor-leisure allocation), needed to make a household indiﬀerent between
being born into the balanced growth path associated with a particular tax system and being
born into the benchmark balanced growth path. Positive CEV thus reflect a welfare increase
due to a tax reform, compared to the benchmark system.15
15

All welfare numbers in the remainder of this paper refer to this welfare measure. We normalize total labor
supply N, the capital stock K, output Y and consumption C such that the benchmark economy features
values for these variables equal to 1.

16

Table VII: Comparison across Tax Codes
Variable
BENCH. OPTIMAL
Parameter a0
0.258
0.172
Parameter a1
0.768
19.0
Interest Rate r
6.76%
6.74%
Average Hours Worked
0.333
−0.96%
Total Labor Supply N
1
0.54%
Capital Stock K
1
0.81%
GDP Y
1
0.64%
Aggregate Consumption C
1
0.70%
G
Gov. share in GDP Y
17.0%
16.89%
Total Income Tax as % of Y
10.66%
10.55%
Gini Coef. for Pre-tax Income
0.392
0.408
Gini Coef. for After-tax Income
0.371
0.386
Gini Coef. for Wealth
0.644
0.666
Gini Coef. for Consumption
0.280
0.290
ECV
0%
1.7%

PROP.
0.099
0.0
6.15%
5.94%
5.86%
13.88%
8.86%
8.93%
15.64%
9.13%
0.400
0.400
0.667
0.302
−0.95%

Notice that the optimal tax code implies higher labor supply and, higher capital accumulation than the benchmark economy, and as a result GDP per capita is 0.64% higher. This
reflects the reduced disincentive eﬀects to work and save for the households at the high end
of the income distribution, due to vastly reduced marginal income tax rates for that group.
For the labor supply decision, note that average hours worked actually decline by roughly one
percent after the reform, but total labor supply increases by half a percent, which is explained
by the fact that it is high-ability, high-productivity agents who expand their labor supply in
response to lower marginal tax rates for their income brackets. Finally, due to the increase
in economic activity triggered by the tax reform the fraction of GDP devoted to government
consumption and the average tax rate required to fund government outlays shrinks, leaving
a higher fraction of already higher output for private consumption and investment. In total,
aggregate consumption increases by a substantial 0.7%.
Providing better incentives to work and save comes at the price of creating a more dispersed income, wealth and consumption distribution. Table VII documents this with the Gini
coeﬃcients for income, consumption and wealth. First, under the optimal tax system pre-tax
income is more unequally distributed since high-ability, high productivity agents work and
save disproportionately more under the new tax code (see also the wealth Gini). But the
optimal tax system prescribes a substantial deduction of $9, 400, so that the after-tax income
Gini increases by roughly the same points as the pre-tax income Gini. More unequally distributed income leads to an increase in consumption inequality under the optimal, compared
to the benchmark system. Despite this slight increase in consumption inequality, the balanced growth path welfare gains of a tax reform amount to roughly 1.7%, in consumption
equivalent variation.16
16

It is important to point out here that our benchmark economy is able to account for most, but not all of
the observed wealth inequality. Castañeda et al. (2003) report a Gini coeﬃcient of wealth of 0.78, whereas
in our benchmark economy it amounts to 0.644. The divergence between the model and the data stems from

17

The comparison of the actual with a pure proportional tax system without deduction
shows even more dramatically that in this economy there exists a strong social desire for
redistribution and insurance, which the optimal tax system reflects with the fixed deduction.17
Even though GDP per capita and aggregate consumption are almost 9% higher in a purely
proportional system as compared the benchmark BGP, social welfare is lower under purely
proportional taxes. This is due to the fact that a purely proportional system does not provide
insurance against being born as a low type (ex-post one may call this insurance redistribution).
Second, it does not provide insurance against idiosyncratic income fluctuations: even agents
born into the new BGP with high ability (and average productivity) experience welfare gains
of only 4.5%, compared to the 9% increase in average consumption.18 But since agents born
with low ability suﬀer welfare losses of 2.8% in terms of consumption equivalent variation
and the utilitarian social welfare function weighs utility losses of low-utility agents more
heavily than utility gains of high-utility households, overall steady state welfare under a
purely proportional system is lower than under the benchmark.19

6. Transition to the Optimal Tax Code and Welfare Implications
In this section we shift attention to the quantitative implications of reforming the tax code
towards the optimal found in the previous section, taking full account of the transition path
induced by the tax reform. To do so we have to take a stand on how the tax code is adjusted
as the economy moves from the old to the new balanced growth path. We assume that
in period 1 the economy is in the BGP of the benchmark economy. Then, in period 2 an
unanticipated tax reform is carried out, imposing a0 = 0.172 and a1 = 19 from then on.
The parameter a2 is adjusted in every period to satisfy budget balance at each date of the
transition. Eﬀectively, this amounts to a reform that imposes a constant marginal tax rate
of 17.2% and the fixed deduction is adjusted in every period so that the government collects
enough revenues in order to finance a constant level of public consumption. Over time the
economy converges to its new BGP, and the tax system to the one defined and computed as
optimal in the previous section.20
the fact that the model is incapable of generating suﬃciently high wealth concentration at the very top of
the distribution, partially because it rules out saving for bequests by construction.
As Castañeda et al. (2003) suggest, in a model like ours the presence of a pay-as-you-go social security
system is crucial for our relative success of creating substantial wealth inequality, since it significantly reduces
the incentives of young and middle-aged agents to accumulate assets and thus leads to a large fraction of
agents in these age cohorts with no financial assets.
17
The fact that a proportional income tax of only 9.9% is needed to finance government spending of 15.6%
of GDP is due to the fact that savings incentives, and thus revenues from assets of deceased households are
substantial (of course, in addition to sizeable consumption taxes) with purely proportional taxes.
18
Also note that these agents work more with proportional taxes than under the benchmark system.
19
In other words, our social welfare function captures egalitarian concerns.
20
A detailed description of the computational method employed to compute transition paths for our economy is available upon requests by the authors. The method is identical to the one used by and documented
in Conesa and Krueger (1999) for a similar economy.

18

6.1. Dynamics of Aggregate Variables
Figure 4 documents the evolution of macroeconomic aggregates along the transition path.
Figure 4: Evolution of Aggregate Quantities along the Transition
Capital Stock
Period 1 = 1

1.005
1
0.995
0.99

Period 1 = 1

1.01

1.01

10

20

30

0.995
0.99

Average Hours Worked

0.99
0.98

1

40

1

10

20
30
Time

40

Output per Capita

1.005

1.01
Period 1 = 1

Period 1 = 1

1.01

10

20
30
Time
Labor Supply

40

1
0.99
0.98

10

20
30
Time

40

On impact of the reform the aggregate capital stock is predetermined by the savings
decisions in the previous period. Therefore, since the tax reform was unanticipated, the
aggregate capital stock does not react immediately to the reform. However, aggregate labor
supply increases on impact, due to the new lower marginal income tax rates for high-income
earners. In the first reform period the increase in labor supply amounts to more than 0.6%,
and converges to its new BGP level, which is roughly 0.5% higher than in the initial BGP. As
a consequence of the increase in labor supply and an initially fixed capital stock the capitallabor ratio falls and interest rates rise on impact. Then, as capital accumulation picks up
and the capital stock increases by about 0.81% in the new, as compared to the old BGP, the
interest rate falls below the initial BGP level (and wages increase above the initial BGP level,
see Figure 5).

19

Figure 5: Evolution of Prices along the Transition
Interest Rate

6.88

1.004

6.86

1.003

6.84

1.002

6.82
6.8
6.78

1.001
1
0.999

6.76

0.998

6.74

0.997

6.72

0.996

6.7

10

20

30

Real Wage

1.005

Period 1 = 1

In Percent

6.9

40

0.995

10

20
30
Time

40

Notice that total GDP and thus per capita GDP is monotonically increasing along the
transition path, due to both the expansion of labor supply and stronger capital accumulation.
With per capita income the income tax base grows along the transition path (over and above
the long-run growth rate of the economy, g). This transitional acceleration of economic
growth explains why the tax deduction can be monotonically expanded over time as well,
without increasing marginal taxes, reducing government outlays or violating the government
budget constraint.
Figure 6 displays the time pattern of the deduction along the transition path. It mirrors
the evolution of income per capita, starts at a level around $9, 300 and monotonically increases
until its final steady state value above $9, 400.
Figure 6: Evolution of the Tax Deduction along the Transition
10000
9900

Deduction in $

9800
9700
9600
9500
9400
9300
9200
9100
9000

5

10

15

20

20

25
30
Time

35

40

45

6.2. Welfare Consequences of the Reform
Explicitly considering the transitional dynamics induced by a fundamental tax reform allows
us to evaluate the welfare implications of such a reform for all individuals alive at the moment
the reform is implemented (rather than for agents born directly into the new balanced growth
path, as in the previous section). Such an analysis may also shed some light on the political
feasibility of a hypothetical reform.
Who gains from a potential reform? As Figure 7 suggests, the income-richest and agents
at the bottom of the income distribution. Individuals with bad productivity realizations
and very few assets gain from the reform because of the deduction whereas individuals with
average productivity realizations and few assets lose with the reform. Finally, individuals
with high productivity and/or large asset holdings and thus high labor and/or capital income
invariably benefit from the lower marginal tax rates induced by the reform. In the light of
Figure 3 (which shows the change of the tax burden across income) and Figure 6 (which
demonstrates that the tax system along the transition path mimics that of the final BGP
fairly closely) these results are not unexpected. Note that, as agents age, their average labor
productvity increases; thus, conditional on the same asset position, 45 year old households
are income richer than newborn households.

2

Different Productivities

1
0
-1
-2

Cons. Eq. Var.

Low Type, Newborn
Cons. Eq. Var.

3

0

3

20
30
40
Assets
Low Type, Age 45

2
1

Different Productivities

0
-1
-2

0

10

20
30
Assets

40

3

High Type, Newborn

2
1

Different Productivities

0
-1
-2

10

Cons. Eq. Var.

Cons. Eq. Var.

Figure 7: Welfare Consequences

0

3
2

10
20
30
40
Assets
High Type, Age 45
Different Productivities

1
0
-1
-2

0

10

20
30
Assets

40

However, even though a reform towards a flat tax with deduction promises significant balanced growth path welfare gains, our numerical analysis of the transition path indicates that
a significant fraction of the population alive at the date at which the reform is undertaken
will experience welfare losses from the reform, roughly 38%. Figure 8 displays the fraction of
the population in each age cohort that experiences welfare gains. Despite that, a clear majority, composed of income-poor and income-rich households would benefit from the reform,
even taking transitional costs into account. This suggests that a fundamental tax reform of
the type discussed in this paper may not only be desirable from a steady state utilitarian
perspective, but may also be politically feasible.
21

Figure 8: Fraction of Cohort with Welfare Gains
1
0.9
Fraction of Cohort

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
20

30

40

50

60
Age

70

80

90

100

Notice that the fraction of individuals with welfare gains is fairly constant among working
cohorts, but then increases with age of retired cohorts. Among the newborn generation, low
type households benefit and high types lose from the reform. This is due to the fact that
young individuals are born with the average productivity shock and have no assets. This
places the low types well within the range of income for which the large deduction of the new
tax code dominates the previous status quo. The high types, in contrast, start their life as
part of the middle class (and with very persistent income shocks, in expectation stay there
for a while) which suﬀers from the tax reform. For older generations, after retirement assets
are decumulated and thus incomes start to decline further and further with age, placing the
elderly into the income-poor category that benefits from the generous deduction under the
new tax code.
The results of our model indicate that a fundamental tax reform towards a flat tax with
deduction may be desirable for generations born in the far future, is likely to gain support
from a majority of the population currently alive, but may face stiﬀ opposition from the
middle class.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we have demonstrated, using a computable stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model, that under a utilitarian social welfare function the optimal income tax code
is well approximated by a flat tax rate schedule with a fixed deduction of roughly $9, 400.
Such a system implies lower marginal rates for high-productivity individuals as compared
to the current US tax code, and thus reduces the distortionary eﬀects on labor supply and
capital accumulation originating from high marginal income tax rates for households in the
upper tail of the income distribution. At the same time, the deduction pays tribute to the
social desire for equity and provides insurance against idiosyncratic labor income uncertainty.
Compared to the actual system, under the optimal tax system tax burdens would be reduced
22

for households in the lower and upper tail of the income distribution, whereas the middle
class would face a higher income tax bill. The long run welfare gains of a fundamental tax
reform towards a flat tax are sizeable, in the order of 1.7% uniformly higher consumption.
Are there large sums of money left on the table by not embarking on such a tax reform?
The second part of our analysis, based on an explicit calculation of the transition path
induced by such a reform suggests an aﬃrmative answer. More than 60% of the individuals
initially alive would experience welfare gains. However, the group of the US population
usually referred to as the middle class would almost unambiguously lose out, casting some
doubts about whether fundamental tax reform towards a flat tax is politically feasible, and
in fact desirable from a normative point of view.
There are several directions in which our analysis could be extended. In deriving our
normative results we necessarily have to take a stand on the social welfare function which
aggregates well-being of the heterogeneous population in our model. We conjecture that
employing an alternative social welfare function which places more weight on individuals
at the lower end of the distribution than a utilitarian functional (e.g. a Rawlsian welfare
function) would favor a more progressive income tax system than the one we have identified
as optimal.
In addition, our findings that the welfare benefits of a flat tax reform are by no means
uniform across the population when the transition path is considered explicitly, make it desirable to derive the optimal evolution of the income tax system over time. This, however,
would require, even in the parametric class of tax functions considered in this paper, to optimize over the tax function parameters in each period until a new, endogenously determined
balanced growth path is reached, which seems computationally infeasible at this point, unless
further, somewhat arbitrary, restrictions on the evolution of the tax parameters are imposed.
Finally, while the current US tax code (as well as our current paper) does not distinguish
between the source of taxable income when computing tax liabilities, the theoretical literature
on optimal capital taxation usually maintains that labor income and capital income can be
taxed at diﬀerent rates. There are at least two reasons why in our current model the optimal
capital tax is nonzero, unlike in Judd (1985) and Chamley (1986). Their result does not
generalize to a life cycle economy, as demonstrated by Erosa and Gervais (2002) and Garriga
(2003). Furthermore, Aiyagari (1995) shows that the presence of idiosyncratic uninsurable
uncertainty invalidates the result as well, opening up the question about the optimal capital
income tax in our current environment, if labor income taxes are allowed to be progressive and
thus can act as insurance mechanism against exactly the uncertainty that drives Aiyagari’s
result. We defer this extension of our current paper to ongoing and future research.

23

References
[1] Aiyagari, R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109, 659-684.
[2] Aiyagari, R. (1995): “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Constraints, and Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy, 103,
1158-1175.
[3] Aiyagari, R. and E. McGrattan (1998): “The Optimum Quantity of Debt,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 42, 447-469.
[4] Albanesi, S. and C. Sleet (2003): “Optimal Policy with Endogenous Fiscal Constitutions,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Discussion Paper 190..
[5] Benabou, R. (2002): “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy:
What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Eﬃciency?,” Econometrica, 70,
481-517.
[6] Berliant, M. and M. Gouveia (1993): “Equal Sacrifice and Incentive Compatible Income
Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 51, 219-240.
[7] Castañeda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez and J.V. Rios-Rull (1999): “Earnings and Wealth Inequality and Income Taxation: Quantifying the Trade-oﬀs of Switching to a Proportional
Income Tax in the U.S.,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[8] Castañeda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez and J.V. Rios-Rull (2003): “Accounting for Earnings
and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111, 818-857.
[9] Chamley, C. (1986): “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with
Infinite Lives,” Econometrica, 54, 607-622.
[10] Caucutt, E., S. Imrohoroglu and K. Kumar (2001): “Growth and Welfare Analysis of
Tax Progressivity in a Heterogeneous-Agent Model,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 6,
546-577.
[11] Conesa, J. and D. Krueger (1999): “Social Security Reform with Heterogeneous Agents,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 757-795.
[12] Domeij, D. and J. Heathcote (2004): “On the Distributional Eﬀects of Reducing Capital
Taxes,” International Economic Review, 45, 523-554.
[13] Erosa, A. and M. Gervais (2002): “Optimal Taxation in Life Cycle Economies,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 105, 338-369.
[14] Garriga, C. (2003): “Optimal Fiscal Policy in Overlapping Generations Models,” mimeo.
[15] Golosov, M., N. Kocherlakota and A. Tsyvinski (2003): “Optimal Indirect and Capital
Taxation,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 569-587..
24

[16] Gouveia, M. and R. Strauss (1994): “Eﬀective Federal Individual Income Tax Functions:
An Exploratory Empirical Analysis,” National Tax Journal, 47, 317-339.
[17] Hall, R. and A. Rabushka (1995) The Flat Tax, (2nd Ed.), Stanford University Press,
Stanford.
[18] Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-969.
[19] Judd, K. (1985): “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,” Journal
of Public Economics, 28, 59-83.
[20] Krusell, P. and Smith, A. (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.
[21] Mendoza, E., A. Razin and L. Tesar (1994): “Eﬀective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics:
Cross-Country Estimates on Factor Income and Consumption,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 34, 297-323.
[22] Mirrless, J. (1971): “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 38, 175-208.
[23] Mirrlees, J. (1974): “Notes on Welfare Economics, Information and Uncertainty,” in
Essays on Economic Behavior under Uncertainty, edited by M. Balch, D. McFadden
and S. Wu, Amsterdam: North Holland.
[24] Saez, E. (2002): “Optimal Progressive Capital Income Taxes in the Infinite Horizon
Model,” NBER Working Paper 9046.
[25] Storesletten, K., C. Telmer and A. Yaron (2004), “Consumption and Risk Sharing over
the Life Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 609-633.
[26] Tauchen, G. and R. Hussey (1991), “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59, 371-396.
[27] Varian, H. (1980): “Redistributive Taxation as Social Insurance,” Journal of Public
Economics, 14, 49-68.
[28] Ventura, G. (1999): “Flat Tax Reform: A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,” 23, 1425-1458.

25

