NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MONETARY POLICY RULE FOR AUTOMATIC
PREVENTION OF A LIQUIDITY TRAP?
Bennett T. McCallum
Working Paper 11056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11056
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

The author is indebted to Vitor Gaspar, Stefan Gerlach, Marvin Goodfriend, James Harrigan, Edward Nelson,
Maurice Obstfeld, and Vincent Reinhart for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

A Monetary Policy Rule for Automatic Prevention of a Liquidity Trap
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 11056
January 2005
JEL No. E52, E3, F41
ABSTRACT
In analyses of "liquidity trap" problems associated with the zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal
interest rates, it is important to emphasize the difference between policy rule changes, intended to
help escape an existing ZLB situation, and maintained policy rules designed so as to avoid ZLB
situations. Analysis assuming that rule changes would lead to a new RE equilibrium immediately
seems implausible. Accordingly, the paper focuses on the design of a rule that should retain
stabilization effectiveness even if the economy is temporarily shocked into a ZLB situation.
The rule considered is one that uses as its instrument variable a weighted average of an interest rate
and the rate of depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. With a small weight attached to the
depreciation term, it will be nearly irrelevant in normal situations but call for strong adjustments
when the ZLB condition prevails. Stabilizing properties of this "MC" rule are studied within a small
open economy model developed by McCallum and Nelson. Results indicate that under ZLB
conditions the MC rule will provide strong stabilizing policy actions yet, under conditions such that
the ZLB constraint is not relevant, the MC rule need not hinder monetary policy.
Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of
Industrial Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bmcallum@cmu.edu

1. Introduction
Among monetary economists, a major topic of interest during recent years has been
the possibility of a liquidity trap, i.e., a situation in which monetary policy stimulus cannot be
obtained by the usual method of lowering the setting of the central bank’s interest rate
instrument because that rate is at its lower bound of zero. It would be better, I suggest, to use
the term “zero lower bound situation,” rather than “liquidity trap,” since the latter seems to
imply a priori that there is no available mechanism for generating monetary policy stimulus.
In any event, dozens of papers on the subject have appeared, including notable items by
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), Wolman (1998), Krugman (1998), Reifschneider and
Williams (1999), McCallum (2000), Goodfriend (2000), Orphanides and Williams (2000),
Svensson (2001), Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2001), Jung, Teranishi, and
Watanabe (2001), Coenen and Wieland (2003), Woodford (2003), Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003, 2004), and Auerbach and Obstfeld (2003, 2004). Recent experiences in Japan have,
of course, added intense concern from the practical perspective.
One of the more prominent results to come out of this literature is an irrelevance
proposition pertaining to open-market purchases, put forth by Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003), according to which “quantitative easing” is to no avail. Instead, “the key to effective
central-bank action to combat a deflationary slump is the management of expectations”
(2003, p. 8). At face value, this proposition seems to contradict results by Auerbach and
Obstfeld (2003), Coenen and Wieland (2003), and others who find a role for open market
purchases of “unconventional” assets.1 It will be argued below, however, that there is no
actual theoretical inconsistency; that the different papers presume different types of policy

1

experiments.2 One crucial distinction is whether or not the policy experiment considered
involves a change in the policy rule. If there is a credible rule change in an expansionary
direction, then—as is shown below—monetary policy can be effective in bringing an
economy out of a zero lower bound (ZLB) situation.
This last statement supposes, however, that the policy change in question is fully
understood and believed so that a new rational expectations equilibrium becomes operative
immediately. This, however, appears to be a highly dubious proposition. Accordingly, it
would seem to be of some importance to consider how a central bank could regularly follow
a policy rule that, if sustained, would keep the economy out of a ZLB situation automatically.
A major objective of the present paper is, accordingly, to develop one such rule. That task
will be undertaken in Section 3, after Section 2 begins by expanding upon the topics just
mentioned. Then in Sections 4 and 5 a small open economy model, based on optimizing
behavior but with nominal price stickiness, will be specified and calibrated. Simulation
results with this model and variants of our proposed policy rule are reported in Section 6, so
as to explore the properties of the rule (which are found to be highly promising). Two
relevant theoretical issues are discussed in Section 7 and a brief conclusion follows.
2. Alternative Policy Experiments
It is expositionally useful to begin with the policy experiment of Eggertsson and
Woodford (2003), henceforth referred to as E&W. It involves analysis of the stabilization
properties of an interest rate policy regime that is specified to incorporate “quantitative
easing.” That term is taken by E&W (2003) to mean that the monetary base supply function,
which supports (i.e., implements) their interest rate rule given money demand behavior,
1

Assets, that is, that are not perfect substitutes for the short-term security that is normally used in open market
operations.

2

includes an unusual nonlinear component that calls for extra open market purchases
whenever the interest rate is zero. These purchases are evidently reversed, however, as soon
as the interest rate rises above zero. (The interest rate in question, denoted Rt, is “the riskless
nominal interest rate on one-period obligations…” (E&W 2003, p. 10)) One could simply
view this function as a base-money-supply policy rule, include the base money stock as a
variable, and solve the model in a standard and familiar RE fashion, if it were not for the
non-linear component and the restriction that the interest rate must be non-negative.3 What
E&W do with the resulting model is to show that the behavior of prices and output in the
model’s RE equilibrium is independent of the parameters that describe the quantitativeeasing component of the base supply rule. Whatever the extent of the additional base-money
supply specified by this component, then, there will be no effect on inflation or output in the
RE equilibrium. That is the E&W irrelevance proposition. Note, crucially, that it pertains to
the nature of a single ongoing RE equilibrium for a given policy rule that involves certain
specified behavior when the ZLB is operative, not to the adoption of a new rule. The
irrelevance proposition is arguably not surprising, given that any “extra” base money
supplied when Rt = 0 is removed immediately as soon as Rt > 0.4
The policy experiment considered by Auerbach and Obstfeld (2003) is quite different.
It begins with a policy rule in place, one that specifies a constantly growing level of the
monetary base, and the economy in a ZLB situation with the interest rate Rt equal to zero.
Then the authors postulate a change in the base money rule, either a one-time upward shift in
2

This point is also made by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004), but with a different emphasis.
The model used by E&W is rather standard, relative to the recent monetary policy literature, but is slightly
more “monetarist” than most in that the utility function, which includes real money balances as an argument, is
not assumed to be separable.
4
It is my impression that proponents of quantitative easing for Japan have almost invariable had in mind a new
policy that, among other features, would entail a target inflation rate high enough to imply a positive steadystate interest rate on overnight bank loans.
3

3

the path of the base or an increase in its slope (the rate of growth of the base)—in either case
a change that is sustained permanently. The experiment presumes a forseen upward jump in
the natural real rate of interest after 5 periods that would bring the ZLB episode to an end in
any event, but each of the two considered policy rule changes would have effects on the path
of prices and possibly output in the interim. The increased base growth-rate policy also has
the effect of bringing the ZLB episode with Rt = 0 to an end sooner than would otherwise be
the case. The Auerbach and Obstfeld results are of particular interest because the model
utilized is in most respects similar to that of E&W.
In light of the foregoing discussion, I would suggest that the basic difference in
outcomes is that the E&W experiment concerns the effects of an unusual design feature of
one maintained policy rule whereas the Auerbach and Obstfeld experiment has to do with
effects of a change from one policy rule to another. In one case the monetary rule utilizes an
interest rate instrument and in the other case the monetary base, but it appears that this
distinction is not crucial. As hinted above, E&W could utilize a policy rule specified as a
base rule that includes an analogous quantitative easing component and develop a similar
irrelevance result for that case. Furthermore, for a change in a monetary rule to be effective
when an economy is in a ZLB situation, it is not necessary for the rule to be one that governs
base quantities; it could as well be an interest rate rule that is altered.
For an extremely simple illustration of this last point, it will be sufficient to use a
closed-economy model with full price flexibility. Consider the following two-equation
system, which is so familiar as to require very little explanation at this point:5

5

Explanation of a model that includes (1)(2) as a special case will be provided below. The present system
differs from the model of E&W primarily by positing flexible prices, which is irrelevant to the current point.

4

(1)

yt = b0 + b1(Rt − Et∆pt+1) + Etyt+1 + vt

(2)

Rt = µ0 + ∆pt + µ1(∆pt − π*) + µ2 yt.

Here yt and pt denote the logs of an output variable and the price level so ∆pt is inflation
while Rt is the one-period nominal interest rate. The term vt represents a preference shock
that is generated by an exogenous stochastic process, which is assumed to be AR(1)—i.e.,
autoregressive of order one—with parameter ρ. Equation (2) is a Taylor-style rule in which
the central bank is depicted as setting an interest rate instrument Rt each period so as to
tighten policy when inflation exceeds its target value π* and/or when output is high. In
(1)(2), yt should be interpreted as the output gap, yt − y t, with y t for simplicity assumed
constant at the value zero. With flexible prices we then have yt = 0 in each period. Thus
there are only two endogenous variables to be determined by the system, Rt and ∆pt. This
model should be understood to also include the requirement that ∆pt must not approach −∞ as
t → ∞, because of a transversality condition that obtains in the underlying optimizing model.
To obtain a rational expectations (RE) solution, we first substitute out Rt and using
yt = 0 obtain
(3)

0 = b0 + b1[µ0 − µ1π* + (1 + µ1)∆pt − Et∆pt+1] + vt.

The minimum state variable (MSV) solution is of the form
(4)

∆pt = φ0 + φ1vt,

implying Et∆pt+1 = φ0 + φ1ρvt. Then substitution into (3) and application of a standard
undetermined coefficient procedure yields the requirement that
(5)

0 = b0 + b1[µ0 − µ1π* + (1+µ1)(φ0 + φ1vt) − φ0 − φ1ρvt] + vt

5

holds identically for all realizations of vt. That implies unique values for φ0 and φ1 and yields
the MSV solution
(6)

∆pt = π* − (b0 + b1µ0)/µ1 − [b1(1−ρ+µ1)]-1vt.

Of course, Taylor (1993) and many others prescribe that the central bank set µ0 = r, the longrun average real rate of interest, and we observe from (1) that this rate equals −b0/b1. So
adherence to this recommendation implies that the second term on the right-hand side of (6)
vanishes and we have ∆pt = π* − [b1(1−ρ+µ1)]-1vt as the MSV solution for inflation.
Suppose, then, that an economy is of form (1)(2) except that it also includes the
requirement that Rt ≥ 0. Then (6) would be the RE solution if the parameter values and the
distribution of vt were such that this inequality was never binding. But suppose that such is
not the case and that the economy is in a ZLB situation with Rt = 0. Next, suppose that in
some period there is a policy change that amounts to an increase in the target inflation rate π*
to a value high enough that the ZLB will never be effective in the future. Then the new RE
equilibrium will yield immediately an inflation rate high enough to escape the ZLB situation.
By contrast, an increase in the value of the policy parameter µ1 would in that situation have
no necessarily constructive effect toward bringing the economy out of the ZLB.6 This
contrast is analogous to that of the Auerbach-Obstfeld and E&W results.
The simplicity and starkness of the foregoing example will probably lead many
readers to object, to say something like “But that is totally implausible; the economy’s agents
would be very unlikely to know about, understand, and believe in the policy change even if

6

The solution for Rt is Rt = r + π* − [(1/b1)(1+µ1)/(1−ρ+µ1)]vt. Here the coefficient on vt is positive, but the
direction of effect depends upon the sign of vt-1. Furthermore, if ρ = 0, the magnitude of the coefficient is
independent of µ1. Alternatively, one might ask whether an increased value of µ1 would, with a sustained rule,
help to prevent ZLB situations. The simulation results presented below suggest that the answer is “no,” since
larger values of µ1 evidently imply (given other parameter values) increased variability of Rt.

6

the central bank has every intention of carrying it out.” With that objection I would entirely
agree. More generally, many proponents of the hypothesis of rational expectations find it
attractive mainly for consideration of alternative maintained policy rules, i.e., for application
to situations prevailing after some time has passed (since any previous rule change) and the
economy has settled into a new stochastic equilibrium. To these economists—e.g., Lucas
(1980, p. 205), Lucas and Sargent (1981, p. xxxvii), Kydland and Prescott (1977) —
immediate application of RE after a policy change seems dubious. Partly for this reason,
E&W (2003), McCallum (2000), Jung, Teranishi, and Watanabe (2001), Reifschneider and
Williams (2000) and a few others have concentrated attention on rules for preventing a ZLB
situation, rather than (or in addition to) schemes for escaping a ZLB “trap” in which an
economy finds itself. In that spirit we move on to the discussion of a new rule proposal.7
3. A Rule for Use At or Away From the ZLB
Let us now turn to the main topic of the present paper, which is the development and
exploration of a monetary policy rule that is appropriate for use at all times, whether or not
short-term nominal interest rates are at their ZLB.8 The very simple basic idea is to combine
two component rules, designed for normal and ZLB conditions, by means of a weighted
average of their respective instrument settings. The first of these two component rules could
be written as a standard Taylor-type formulation as follows:
(7)

Rt = r + ∆pt + µ1(∆pt − π*) + µ2(yt − y t ) + et,

µ1, µ2 ≥ 0.

Here Rt is a short-term nominal interest rate instrument and, for simplicity, we have entered

7

There is some interest in a policy of “helicopter drops,” i.e., repeated gifts of money to the public, in contrast
to monetary policy actions that involve only open-market actions by the central bank. A brief analysis is
presented in Appendix A.
8
Obviously, if such a rule is in force during a ZLB episode, there is no need to devise an “exit strategy.”

7

the current value of inflation and the output gap as the variables to which the rule responds.9
In (7) π* is the target for inflation and r is the long-term average real rate of interest, while et
is a random policy shock that reflects unsystematic behavior by the monetary authority. We
suppose that in normal times, when the ZLB on Rt is not binding, the central bank wishes to
utilize (7) as its monetary policy rule, so as to keep ∆pt close to π* and yt close to y t on
average.
When Rt is at its lower bound of zero, however, the central bank will be unable to
respond as implied by (7) if the gap measures ∆pt − π* and yt − y t together call for a
reduction in Rt. In previous work, including McCallum (2000) and (2003), I have
accordingly suggested a rule for adjusting the foreign exchange rate, st in logarithmic terms,
in such occasions. The version of this rule given in the more recent of these two papers is as
follows:
(8)

∆st = ∆q +∆pt − µ1(∆pt − π*) − µ2(yt − y t ) − et,

µ1, µ2 ≥ 0.

Here we have minus signs on the two gap measures because an increase in the value of
∆st − ∆pt represents a loosening, not a tightening, of monetary policy. 10
Next we take a weighted average of the two preceding expressions, after changing the
signs on all terms in (8). Let 1 − θ, with 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, be the weight on the Rt instrument. Then
the resulting rule is as follows:
(9)

[(1−θ)Rt + θ(−∆st)] = (1−θ)r − θ∆q + (1−2θ)∆pt + µ1(∆pt − π*) + µ2(yt − y t ) + et.

To facilitate understanding of the latter, first suppose that that the interest rate Rt equals zero,
i.e., is at its ZLB. Then (9) becomes a rule for setting the value of the rate of exchange rate
9

It would be possible to use instead expected future values or lagged expectations of current values, etc.

8

depreciation, ∆st. The formula might look a bit strange, but when R = 0, an implied steadystate relationship is r = −∆p. Then using the latter with (9) and rearranging we obtain
(10)

∆st = ∆q +∆pt − (µ1/θ) (∆pt − π*) − (µ2 /θ)(yt − y t ) − (1/θ)et.

Clearly, the latter is of exactly the same form as the ∆st rule (8), although it has a different
numerical value for two of the response coefficients.
What about the interpretation of (9) when Rt is not at the ZLB? To gain an intuitive
idea regarding this case, suppose that the nominal exchange rate were to behave in
conformity with the current inflation rate and the long run average rate of real exchange rate
depreciation. Suppose, that is, that ∆st = ∆pt + ∆q holds on a period-by-period basis. Then
substitution into (9) yields
(11)

Rt = r + ∆pt + (µ1/(1−θ))[∆pt − π*] + (µ2 /(1−θ))[yt − y t ] + (1/(1−θ))et,

which has the form of a standard Taylor-type rule! So (9) works in a highly intuitive manner
in both of these reference cases
How would the composite rule (9) be implemented? To do so, the central bank would
each period make purchases (or sales) in the money market or foreign exchange market—or
preferably both—so as to adjust (1−θ)Rt − θst to the value indicated by (9), taking st-1 as
given. In this regard, note that buying money market securities tends to drive Rt downward
and st upward, so both components of the weighted average [(1−θ)Rt + θ(−∆st)] ≡ MCt move
in the same (downward) direction. Alternatively, buying foreign exchange would tend to
drive st upward and Rt downward, so again both components move in the desired direction.

10

Here and in what follows St = log-1st is the home country price of foreign exchange. Also, ∆q is the trend rate
of growth of the real exchange rate minus the average inflation rate abroad.

9

Clearly, when instead a monetary tightening is desired, it would be possible to sell money
market securities and/or foreign exchange, moving MCt in the upward direction.11
Since the rule is designed to be used at all times, operational procedures should be the
same both at and away from the ZLB, so that market participants will understand that one
rule is in effect. Accordingly, it would be desirable to have a secondary rule for determining
what fraction of open market purchases will, during a given period, be made in the foreign
exchange market. One possibility would be to have a fixed fraction, such as 0.25. (Note that
this fraction does not need to equal θ, and probably should not.) Such an arrangement would
imply that that the central bank would be making a large volume of purchases from the
money market when at the ZLB, even though those purchases would not (in principle) have
any effect on the value of MCt. Other rules that would increase the fraction as Rt gets closer
to zero would not have this latter property, but would be more difficult for market
participants to understand.
It is likely that at this point many readers will have guessed the reason for using the
symbol MCt to denote our composite measure. It is that this measure has some resemblance
to a “monetary conditions index.” The latter concept has been viewed rather unfavorably by
most monetary economists in recent years, but that does not necessarily make it an
undesirable policy indicator. It is my impression that the typical mode of presentation has
made the concept appear to be dimensionally incoherent,12 for most proponents have used
written expressions such as (1−θ)Rt − θst , rather than (1−θ)Rt + θ(−∆st). 13 But in such cases

11

Of course there are limits on a central bank’s ability to increase MCt, since it will hold only finite stocks of
foreign and domestic assets.
12
Thus I, for one, have been disturbed by the practice of taking a weighted average of two terms that have the
units 1/years and yen/dollar, for example. But if the latter is expressed in rate of change form, as in (9), it too
can have the units 1/years.
13
See, e.g., Ball (1999), Gerlach and Smets (2000), and the recent contribution by Detken and Gaspar (2003).

10

the authors may actually have had in mind an exchange rate expressed in relation to some
reference value, which leaves open the possibility that the dimensions of the two terms are in
fact consistent. That is not to suggest that the numerical specifications of monetary
conditions indexes considered or used by actual central banks have been ones that are well
designed. In Section 6 below it will be argued that a very small weight—on the order of
0.025—should be attached to the exchange rate term, whereas personal experience tells me
that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand was at one time discussing a possible monetary
conditions index with a weight close to 1 − 0.025 = 0.975, i.e., one almost 40 times as large.
In short, the present discussion is not intended to express approval of previous discussions of
monetary condition indexes, but merely to acknowledge the extent of similarity between
them and the policy rule (9) here under investigation.
Another matter that requires brief attention is the notion of interest rate smoothing,
which is widely viewed as a practice much utilized by actual central banks. Can inertial
behavior of Rt be accommodated by rules such as (9)? Certainly there would be no analytical
problem created by writing a partial adjustment equation for MCt, with the adjustment
moving the actual value of MCt toward a value such as that on the right-hand side of (9).
Alternatively, one could apply smoothing only to the Rt component, by writing (7) in a
partial adjustment form before taking a weighted average of (7) and (8).14 In this case the
rule would be written as
(9’)

[(1−θ)Rt + θ(−∆st)] = (1−µ3)(1−θ)r − θ∆q − [(1−θ)(1−µ3) + θ]µ1π*
+ [(1−θ)(1−µ3)(1+µ1) + θ(µ 1−1)]∆pt + [(1−θ)(1−µ3) + θ]µ2(yt − y t )] + µ3Rt-1 + et,

14

If policy is “superinertial,” as featured in Rotemberg-Woodford (1997) and Woodford (2003, pp. 100-101),
then the partial-adjustment formulation in (9’) is not appropriate, but this does not create any difficulties for the
analysis developed below.

11

which will be used below. Here (and in what follows) µ3 is the interest rate smoothing
parameter (0 < µ3 < 1).
4. Model Specification
In order to explore the properties of a rule such as (9) or (9’), one needs to combine it
with an appropriately specified model of an economy and then conduct analytical exercises
to determine how the economy is predicted to perform with different variants of the rule.
Clearly the model needs to pertain to an open economy, and most contemporary analysts
would prefer that it be a rational expectations model based on optimizing behavior by the
economy’s individual households and firms while also incorporating some form of nominal
price stickiness. The model that will be used below is one that was developed by McCallum
and Nelson (1999) and utilized subsequently by them (2000) in an exploration of
relationships between CPI inflation and exchange rate depreciation. This “M&N” model is
not econometrically estimated, but is calibrated to match important selected characteristics of
the economies of interest. It differs from many other contributions in the area, however, in
the manner in which imported goods are treated. In particular, the M&N model treats
imports not as finished goods, ready for immediate consumption, but instead as raw-material
inputs to the home economy’s producers. This alternative modelling strategy leads to a
cleaner and simpler theoretical structure, relative to the standard treatment, and is empirically
attractive. Since the optimizing, general equilibrium analysis is spelled out in McCallum and
Nelson (1999), here I will take an informal expository approach designed to facilitate
understanding of the model’s structural equations.

12

It is well known that optimizing analysis leads, in a wide variety of infinite-horizon
models possibly involving imperfect competition, to a consumption Euler equation that can
be expressed or approximated in the form
(12)

ct = Etct+1 + b0 + b1rt + vt,

b1 < 0,

where ct is the log of a Dixit-Stiglitz consumption-bundle aggregate Ct of the many distinct
goods that a typical household consumes in period t. In (12), rt is the real interest rate on
home-country one period bonds (private or government) and vt is a stochastic shock term that
pertains to household preferences regarding present vs. future consumption. In closed
economy analysis, relation (12) is often combined with a log-linearized, per-household,
overall resource constraint to yield an “expectational” or “optimizing” IS function. That step
presumes that investment and capital are treated as exogenous. The simplest version of that
assumption is that the capital stock is fixed; since endogenizing capital greatly complicates
the analysis, the constant-capital specification will be used here.
For an open-economy extension, one might be tempted to write the economy’s percapita resource constraint as yt = ω1ct + ω2gt + ω3 xt – ω4 imt, where yt, gt, xt, and imt are
logarithms of real output, government consumption, exports, and imports with ω1, ω2, ω3,
and ω4 representing steady-state shares of output for consumption, government purchases,
exports, and imports. But if imports are exclusively material inputs to the production of
home-country goods, and Yt = ln-1 yt is interpreted as units of output, not value added, then
the relevant resource constraint is
(13)

yt = ω1ct + ω2gt + ω3xt.
For import demand to be modelled in an optimizing fashion, assume that output of

consumer goods is effected by producers all with production functions of the same CES

13

form, with labor and material imports being the two variable inputs. Then the costminimizing demand for imports is15
(14)

imt = yt − σqt + const.

where σ is the elasticity of substitution between materials and labor in production, and where
“const.” denotes some constant.16 Also, qt is the log price of imports in terms of produced
consumption goods. We will refer to Qt = ln-1 qt as the real exchange rate. Let Pt and St be
the home country money price of goods and foreign exchange, with Pt* the foreign money
price of home-country imports. Then if pt, st, and pt* are logs of these variables, we have
(15)

qt = st – pt + pt*.

Symmetrically, we assume that export demand is given as
(16)

xt = yt* + σ*qt + const.

where yt* denotes income abroad and σ* is the price elasticity of demand from abroad for
home-country goods. Since the economy is small, we take yt* to be exogenous.
Now consider output determination in a sticky-price version of the model. Taking a
log-linear approximation to the home-country production function, we have
yt = α1at + α1nt + α2 imt + const.,
where nt and at are logs of labor input and a labor-augmenting technology shock term,
respectively. For simplicity suppose that labor supply is inelastic, with 1.0 units supplied per
period by each household. Thus with full price flexibility we would have nt = 0 and the

15

In the model used below there is also a small adjustment included for the effects of imperfect competition.
That is, the expressions “const.” in different equations appearing below will typically refer to different
constant magnitudes.

16

14

flexible-price, natural rate (or “potential”) value of yt will be y t = α1 at + α2 imt + const. so
that y t = α1at + α2[ y t − σqt] + const., or
(17)

y t = (1 − α2)-1α1 at – [σα2/(1 − α2)] qt + const.

But while y t would be the economy’s output in period t if prices could adjust promptly, we
assume that prices adjust only sluggishly. Then if the economy’s demand quantity as
determined by the rest of the system differs from y t , the former quantity yt prevails—with
workers departing from their (inelastic) supply schedules so as to provide whatever quantity
is needed to produce the demanded output, with imt given by (14).
In such a setting, the precise way in which prices adjust has a direct impact on
demand and consequently on production. There are various models of gradual price
adjustment utilized in the recent literature that are intended to represent optimizing behavior
in the context of nominal adjustment costs. In the analysis that follows, I will use
(18)

∆pt = (1+β)-1 (βEt∆pt+1 + ∆pt-1) + κ(yt − y t) + ut,

κ>0

where β is a discount factor and ut is a behavioral disturbance. This form of equation has
been fairly prominent,17 primarily because it tends to impart a more realistic degree of
inflation persistence than does the Calvo-Rotemberg model (which is theoretically more
attractive). For an extensive discussion of relevant issues, see Woodford (2003).
A standard feature of most open-economy models is a relation implying uncovered
interest parity (UIP). Despite its prominent empirical weaknesses, accordingly, the basic
M&N model incorporates one:
(19)

Rt – Rt* = Et∆st+1 + ξt.

15

We include a time-varying “risk premium” term ξt, however, that may have a sizeable
variance and may be autocorrelated. In the main investigation below, moreover, a crucial
departure from pure UIP will be assumed to prevail.
In previous applications of this model it has been assumed, as in most recent research
in monetary economics, that the monetary authority conducts policy by adjusting a oneperiod nominal interest rate in response to prevailing (or forecasted future) values of inflation
and the output gap, ~y t = yt − y t , as in (7) above. For present purposes, however, we will be
using the rule (9’), now written as
(20)

[(1−θ)Rt + θ(−∆st)] = (1−µ3)(1−θ)r − θ∆q − [(1−θ)(1−µ3) + θ]µ1π*
+ [(1−θ)(1−µ3)(1+µ1) + θ(µ 1−1)]∆pt + [(1−θ)(1−µ3) + θ]µ2(yt − y t )] + µ3Rt-1 + et,

of which (7)—possibly with smoothing—is a special case when θ = 0.
To complete the model, we need only to include the Fisher identity, (1 + rt) =
(1 + Rt) / (1 + Et∆pt+1), which we approximate in the familiar fashion:
(21)

rt = Rt − Et∆pt+1.

Thus we have a simple log-linear system in which the ten structural relations (12)-(21)
determine values for the endogenous variables yt, y t , ∆pt, rt, Rt, qt, st, ct, xt, and imt.
Government spending gt and the foreign variables pt*, yt*, Rt* are taken to be exogenous—as
are the shock processes for vt, at, et, and ξt. 18

17

See Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Gali and Gertler (1999), and Woodford (2003).
During the past few years, several quantitative optimizing open-economy models have been developed that
are more sophisticated and complex than ours. Outstanding examples include Kollmann (2002), Laxton and
Pesenti (2003), and Smets and Wouters (2002).

18

16

One might note parenthetically a few features of the model. First, it would be
possible to append a money demand function such as
(22)

mt – pt = γ0 + γ1yt + γ2Rt + ηt,

and one of this general form—perhaps with ct replacing yt—could be consistent with
optimizing behavior. But, as many writers have recognized, that equation would serve only
to determine the values of mt that are needed to implement the Rt policy rule. Second, with
the structure given above, a useful measure of the foreign trade balance on goods and
services account—i.e., net exports—is
(23)

nett = xt − (imt + qt),

where it is assumed that ω3 = ω4. This measure is used in what follows. Also, it is possible
to calculate the log of the GDP deflator as
(24)

ptDEF = [pt − ω3(st + pt*)]/(1 − ω3).

Finally, it might be said that an advantage of the M&N strategy of modelling imports as
material inputs to the production process is that the relevant price index for produced goods
is the same as the consumer price index, which implies that the same gradual price
adjustment behavior is relevant for all domestic consumption. Such advantages would not
constitute a satisfactory justification, of course, if in fact most imports were consumption
goods. This is not the case, however, at least for the United States. Instead, an examination
of the data suggests that (under conservative assumptions) intermediate productive inputs
actually comprise a larger fraction of U.S. imports than do consumer goods (including
services).19

19

For the year 1998, imported consumer goods amounted to $453 billion while imports of business inputs came
to $624 billion, approximately. These figures are based on an examination of categories reported in the August
1999 issue of the Survey of Current Business. For several categories it is clear whether they are composed

17

There is one way in which the model developed in M&N (1999) differs significantly
from the 10-equation formulation just presented. Specifically, the former includes a
somewhat more complex form of consumption vs. saving behavior, one that features habit
formation. Thus in place of the time-separable utility function that leads to equation (12),
M&N assumed that each period-t utility term includes Ct/(Ct-1)h, with 0 ≤ h < 1, rather than Ct
alone. That specification gives rise to the following replacement for (12):
(25)

ct = h0 + h1ct-1 + h2 Etct+1 + h3 Etct+2 + h4(log λt) + vt.

In the latter, λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the household’s budget constraint, which obeys
(26)

log λt = const. + Et log λt+1 + rt,

and there are constraints relating the hj parameters to others in the system.20 Inclusion of
this feature results in a model in which there is somewhat more persistence in consumption
and output fluctuations than with the basic formulation. In the present study, accordingly, I
have again included this habit-formation modification in the base-case model.
5. Calibration and Model Properties
Calibration of the model draws on M&N (1999) but differs in several ways that are
appropriate for present purposes. For the parameter governing spending behavior, I retain
here the h = 0.8 value taken from an early version of Fuhrer (2000), but for my base case
have adopted the assumption that γ, the counterpart of −b1 in (1), equals 0.5 rather than 1/6,
in order to reflect the greater responsiveness of investment spending (since the latter is not

predominantly of consumer or business goods. For others, judgemental assignments were required. Those
assignments are as follows, with the reported figure being the fraction of the category classified as “business
inputs:” Automotive vehicles, engines, and parts, 25%; Travel, 25%; Passenger fares, 25%; Foods, feed, and
beverages, 50%; and Other private services, 75%.
20
For details and additional discussion, see M&N (1999a), Amato and Laubach (2004), and the basic study by
Fuhrer (2002).

18

included explicitly in the model).21 For σ, the elasticity of substitution in production (and
therefore the elasticity of import demand with respect to Qt), I now use 0.6 (instead of 0.333)
so that, with the same absolute value used for the elasticity of export demand with respect to
Qt, the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied. In (6), the imported inputs share parameter α2
is taken to equal ω3, the share of exports in domestic production. The steady state value of
this share of imports (and exports) to domestic production is taken to be 0.15 in our base
case, and can be altered to represent differing degrees of openness. For the base-case share
of government consumption I take ω2 = 0.2. Finally, in the price adjustment relation the
specification is that κ = 0.03. The latter value is based on my reading of a wide variety of
studies, plus conversion into non-annualized fractional terms for a quarterly model. Also,
quasi-realistic parameters for a Taylor-style interest rate policy rule will be specified as µ1 =
0.5, µ2 = 0.5, and µ3 = 0.8, the latter reflecting considerable interest rate smoothing. Below I
refer to these as “standard” values, but also include cases with other values for µ1 and µ3.
The stochastic processes driving the model’s shocks must also be calibrated, of
course. For both foreign output and the technology shock, I have specified AR(1) processes
with AR parameters of 0.95, rather than the 1.0 values used in M&N (1999). The innovation
standard deviations (SD) are 0.03 and 0.007, respectively.22 The UIP risk premium term ξt
and the consumption shock vt are generated by an AR(1) processes with AR parameter 0.5
and innovation standard deviations of 0.02 and 0.01. Government consumption (in logs)
follows an AR(1) process, with AR parameter 0.97 and innovation SD of 0.02. Finally, the ut
and et shock processes are taken to be white noise with SD values of 0.002 and 0.0017,
respectively.
21

The parameter in question, γ, is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption when h = 0.

19

Before using the foregoing model to discuss the policy rule (20) developed above, we
should briefly investigate its properties with θ = 0 (i.e., with a Taylor-style Rt rule) to
establish, if possible, that they are at least moderately consistent with our understanding of
the characteristics of actual economies. Consider first the values shown in Table 1, where
each cell reports standard deviations, in annualized percentage units, of quarterly
observations on the four variables ∆pt, ~y t, Rt, and ∆st. These SDs are averages across 400
simulations of length 200 (with 50 start-up periods discarded), so they approximate
population magnitudes. Since constant terms are all set to zero, the SD values not only
indicate the variability of the four variables but can also be thought of as representing rootmean-square targeting errors, for cases in which the policy rule is intended to keep some
variable close to a chosen target value. Looking across the first row of cells, we see that
increased values of µ1, the policy coefficient attached to inflation, lead to reductions in the
average targeting errors for inflation—just as the Taylor style rule is intended to do. Over
part of the range increased µ1 values also reduce the variability of the output gap, but with
large µ1 magnitudes there is a readily apparent tradeoff (between inflation and output gap
stabilization). We also see that increased activism with the interest rate instrument,
represented by larger µ1 values, gives rise to greater variability of the interest rate instrument
itself, Rt. Exchange rate depreciation variability is almost unaffected by the magnitude of µ1
when small, but increases sharply when µ1 becomes extremely large. All of these features of
the simulation results are consistent with one’s understanding of how the model should work.
With respect to the magnitudes themselves, we focus on the second cell in the top
row, where µ1 = 0.5 and the Rt smoothing parameter equals 0.8, because these are the policy22

These and other values given in this paragraph are given in terms of quarterly fractional units.

20

rule values that are intended to be roughly representative of ones found in actual economies
such as those of the United States, the euro area, the UK, etc. Doing so, we note that the
reported SD values [2.35, 1.96, 2.48, 18.51] are encouragingly similar to statistics for actual
economies including the United States over 1955-1996 [2.41, 2.23, 2.80, 12.48] or the euro
area 1980-2002 [1.44, 0.83, 1.63, 19.28] or the UK 1972-2001 [6.8, 2.3, 3.1, 14.6].23
Also revealing are properties of impulse response functions. In that regard, Figure 1
reports the responses of six model variables to a unit shock in the monetary policy rule for
the reference case just described. Since that type of shock is an unexpected upward blip in
the interest rate instrument, Rt, it represents an unsystematic and unexpected tightening in
monetary policy. Figure 1 indicates that such an event would induce a fall in output that is
gradually eliminated, a fall in the inflation rate that returns smoothly to its original level over
a number of periods (quarters), a sharp appreciation in nominal and real exchange rates, and
an increase in net exports. These are all responses that accord with economists’ standard
understanding of the effects of an unexpected tightening of monetary policy. Next, in Figure
2, we depict the impulses in response to a positive disturbance in the IS function, i.e., an
increase in consumers’ desire to consume in the present (relative to the future). In this case,
both output and inflation rise and only gradually return to their original values. The nominal
interest rate rises, as governed by the policy rule, to help to stabilize these movements in
output and inflation. The real exchange rate appreciates and only slowly returns to its
original level. Also, net exports fall, as a result of the increased income levels that imply an
increased magnitude of import demand.

23

For details, see McCallum (2004), which also shows reasonably good matches with respect to the first
autocorrelations of these four variables for the economies mentioned (and also Japan).

21

In Figure 3, we find responses to a positive technology shock. Real income increases
and returns to its initial level only very slowly, since the shock is highly persistent—close to
a random walk. Inflation falls slightly, and monetary policy lets the one-period interest rate
fall in order to stabilize inflation—to which it responds more strongly than output. The trade
balance deteriorates, since import demand is boosted by the increased level of income, and
the real exchange value of domestic goods falls, since they are relatively cheaper to produce
than before the shock. Finally, in Figure 4 we depict a shock to uncovered interest parity,
i.e., an unexpected and unsystematic exogenous depreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
Since prices are sticky, this translates into an unexpected depreciation also in the real
exchange rate. That induces an increase in net exports and therefore an increase in domestic
output, with a very small rise in inflation.24
In sum, the responses in Figures 1-4 seem reasonably consistent with those that one
would expect from a sensible macro/monetary model of an open economy, and thereby
provide substantial encouragement to use of that model for the purpose at hand, i.e., to
investigate the stabilizing properties of the MC policy rule (20).
6. Simulation Results
The objective now is to presents results, based on analysis of the model just
described, illustrating the properties of the MC equation (20) as a monetary policy rule.
Ideally, one would like to conduct this analysis with an extended version of the model that
includes the nonlinear constraint Rt ≥ 0. At present I do not have the necessary
computational resources to proceed in this fashion, so only linear-model results will be

24

Note parenthetically that this type of response does not reflect how net exports would behave in response to a
change in the monetary policy rule. McCallum (2003) estimates that an increase in the inflation target rate,
intended to be permanent, would induce a decrease in net exports (the opposite of a “beggar-thy- neighbor
effect).

22

reported below. They seem to be sufficient, however, to make the two essential points.
These are as follows:
(i) Under conditions implying that monetary policy via an interest rate rule would be
immobilized by the ZLB constraint, the MC rule will provide policy actions that are strongly
stabilizing.
(ii) Under conditions such that the ZLB constraint is not relevant, the MC rule would not
significantly—if at all—hinder monetary policy.
Together, these two points appear to establish the potential desirability of the MC rule (20).
To develop point (i), the procedure is to conduct simulations in which (20) is the
policy rule and the interest rate Rt is held fixed at a constant value. For this to be done, one
of the structural equations of the model must as a computational matter be eliminated. As in
McCallum (2000), the one chosen is the UIP condition (19). As in that previous case,
however, the actual conceptual step is not the elimination of UIP but instead its modification
to a more general condition, involving some element of the “portfolio balance” theory,
together with recognition that it is operationally redundant.25 (Discussion is provided below.)
The relevant simulation results are presented in Tables 2 and 3. In the first of these the
policy parameters µ2 and µ3 are held fixed at the values 0.5 and 0.8, respectively, so that the
results are comparable to those in the upper cell row of Table 1. With θ = 1, as in the first
cell row of Table 2, the MC rule is simply a rule for setting the rate of depreciation (or
appreciation) of the exchange rate. The figures in this cell row indicate that with µ1 at the
“realistic” value of 0.5, both inflation and the output gap are excessively variable (in relation
to actuality and to the comparable values in Table 1). But the entries in the first cell row of

23

Table 2 also show clearly that inflation is effectively stabilized by moving to increased (more
aggressive) values of µ1, a result implying that effective stabilization can be provided by the
exchange rate rule. Crucially, use of smaller values for θ in the rule have effects that, when
Rt = 0, are in some respects similar to those from adoption of larger µ1 magnitudes. Thus
while keeping µ1 = 0.5 we look with interest to the other cell rows in Table 2, where smaller
θ values are specified, and find much improved performance. With θ = 0.1, for example, the
SD values for inflation and the output gap are reduced to magnitudes close to those in the
second column of Table 1. In fact, with θ = 0.025, the MC rule SD values with µ1 = 0.5
dominate26 those in Table 1. The same is true, moreover, for µ1 = 0.05. With large values of
µ1, however, small θ settings have the effect of making ∆st excessively responsive to
fluctuations in inflation and the output gap, leading to large SD values for this instrument
variable.
The foregoing comparisons are all based on the assumption that µ3 = 0.8, i.e., that
there is considerable smoothing of short-term interest rates. Table 3 provides values
analogous to those of Table 2 but with µ3 = 0, i.e., no smoothing. In this case there is
apparently no possibility of literally dominating the Table 1 results, i.e., obtaining lower
variability for all four variables, ∆pt, y% t , Rt, and ∆st. Results are quite encouraging,
nevertheless, with small values of θ and µ1. In any event, the main point of interest is not
whether performance is better than with an Rt instrument in the absence of any ZLB problem.
It is, instead, whether the rule (20) can provide stabilizing power even with Rt immobilized
by the ZLB constraint. Table 3, like Table 2, indicates that such stabilization is indeed
25

In this case the exogenous variability provided by the UIP shock term ξt is not eliminated, but instead is
transferred to the policy rule (and included in addition to the et term).

24

provided, since the SD of inflation falls sharply as we move to the right (by increasing the µ1
parameter values) or downward (by decreasing θ).
The second task, involving point (ii), is to show that, in the absence of a ZLB
situation, use of MC rule (20) would not seriously hinder the stabilizing effects of monetary
policy, relative to the standard case with an interest rate instrument. The relevant simulations
now do not impose any ZLB feature at all.27 The results for the case with interest rate
smoothing (µ3 = 0.8) are shown in Table 4. These are to be compared with the SD values in
the top cell row of Table 1, which are for the standard interest rate rule with smoothing.
Consider column two, with the realistic value of 0.5 for µ1. With θ = 1.0, we have the case in
which the MC rule amounts to a pure exchange-rate rule and we find that variability of
inflation and the output gap is distinctly higher than in Table 1 for the same µ1 value. But if
we set θ = 0.1, as in row two of Table 4, the MC results improve sharply and would no
longer be considered to be significantly worse, relative to the case with a pure Rt rule. So
this result tends to establish the point at hand, that serious deterioration is not induced by use
of the MC rule when it is unnecessary. Furthermore, the results are better even than that, for
with θ = 0.025, the SD values from rule (20) are as low or lower (than in Table 1) for all four
variables. Thus the MC rule is unambiguously more effective than the Rt rule in this
particular case, even without taking any account of the former’s crucial advantage, namely,
to be usable in cases in which the ZLB constraint is in effect.28
Analogous results are presented in Table 5 under the assumption that µ3 = 0, rather
26

I.e., are all smaller than.
The outcomes are, accordingly, more favorable than if the possibility of a ZLB were correctly recognized
(i.e., the constraint Rt ≥ 0 was actually imposed). But in light of (i), the outcomes reported are relatively more
favorable for the reference case with θ = 0 and so our conclusion is conservative (i.e., the error works against
our conclusion).

27

25

than µ3 = 0.8. The conclusions are much the same. With respect to the results in both Tables
4 and 5 it must be recognized that comparisons that do not impose any ZLB constraint are
not the same as the ones that would be fully appropriate theoretically, i.e., comparisons of the
Rt and MC rules with solutions that have the ZLB constraint binding occasionally. But it
would appear that the comparison being made is conservative (in the sense of working
against our argument) since there is less weight assigned to the interest rate component by
the MC rule than with the reference case, and this component’s stabilizing power should
actually be excluded.
The main findings presented to this point are that the MC rule does provide effective
stabilization even with Rt at the ZLB and that the MC rule can perform at least nearly as well
as the Rt rule when the ZLB is irrelevant. There are many ways in which one would like to
check the robustness of these findings with respect to alterations in the model utilized. One
that will be considered here is to introduce a somewhat more realistic assumption with
respect to information available to the model’s monetary policy makers. In particular, it will
be assumed that the central bank cannot observe current values of inflation and the output
gap when choosing instrument settings for the current period. In rule (20), that is, Et-1∆pt and
Et-1 ~y t will be used in place of actual values of ∆pt and ~y t. Results are shown in Table 6, all
based on the policy-rule parameter values µ1 = 0.5, µ2 = 0.5, and µ3 = 0.8. In the first column
we find SD values under the assumption that the ZLB is irrelevant. The pure interest rate
rule case appears in the last cell row (θ = 0), and the other rows show that with small values
of θ there is no substantial deterioration in performance from use of the MC rule (20). Then
in column two we have results for the case in which the ZLB condition Rt = 0 is imposed.
28

A caveat should be mentioned, namely, that the results of our simulations are subject to sampling error.

26

Here again we see that the MC rule is effective, in the sense that SD values for inflation and
the output gap are reduced as the specified value of θ is decreased, despite the assumed
immobilization of the interest rate.
The one other model modification that is explored in the present paper concerns the
economy’s openness, as measured by ω3, the average share of output that is exported (and
imported). In the simulations for Table 6, this share is doubled to 0.30. The results reported
in columns three and four are analogous to those in columns one and two. And again they
are supportive of the suggestion that the MC rule (20) could be useful in improving
macroeconomic performance for an economy that has some danger of a ZLB constraint
arising.
7. Analytical Issues
There are a few theoretical issues, bypassed in the foregoing presentation, that need to
be discussed. The first of these has to do with the “elimination” of the UIP condition (19) in
the solutions in which the ZLB constraint is imposed. In that regard, most analysts
(including myself) would normally include UIP as one component of an open-economy
macroeconomic model—despite the existence of much empirical evidence that is, at least on
the surface, strongly inconsistent with UIP on a quarter-to-quarter basis. So how can UIP
legitimately be avoided here? The answer is as follows.
It is well known that to be consistent with the data, UIP relations must include a
discrepancy term, typically referred to as a risk premium. Thus included in (19) is a risk
premium ξt that has a large variance relative to other shock terms and furthermore is serially
correlated. Often ξt is treated as exogenous, but there are plausible reasons for believing that

Differences of less than 2-3 percent between values should not, accordingly, be taken too seriously.

27

it would be related to the relative amounts of outside domestic and foreign nominal liabilities
outstanding. For example, a hypothesis widely entertained during the 1970s might be
expressed as
(27)

ξt = λ[Bt – (Bt* + st)] + ζt

where Bt and Bt* are logs of domestic and foreign government debt (including base money)
and ζt is an exogenous stochastic shock term. Substituting and recognizing that lags could be
involved, we then write
(28)

Rt – Rt* = (Etst+1 – st) + λ (L)[Bt – Bt* − st] + ζt,

which is similar to equations prominent in several older writings of Dornbusch (e.g., 1987, p.
7). This “portfolio balance” hypothesis has receded from its earlier prominence because
various empirical studies failed to find empirical support. But it is, I suggest, quite
reasonable to believe that some such relation obtains in fact, probably with weak or transitory
effects of the Bt – Bt* variable. And if such is the case, then our procedure above is fully
justified. For (28) indicates that even with Rt = 0, st can be affected by central bank
purchases of foreign exchange since they alter the value of Bt – Bt*. Yet the precise
specification of relation (28) need not be known, and the relation need not be included in the
model, for exactly the same reason that money demand functions are not needed in analyses
that presume use of an interest rate instrument. Thus appending (28) to the model would
have no effect on the implied behavior of ∆pt, xt, yt, or ∆st; it would merely specify the
magnitude of open-market purchases of foreign exchange needed to implement the MC
policy rule (20). In the present context, this conclusion is important because it implies that
our model, with the implicit adoption of (27) and (28), features additional state variables
relative to the case in which pure UIP holds, and is therefore not one to which the Eggertsson

28

and Woodford (2003, 2004) invariance proposition applies.
Another issue neglected above concerns the argument, developed in the context of a
closed economy model, of Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2001). In a series of papers,
these authors have suggested that a ZLB situation could arise for reasons quite different from
those presumed above. In our analysis, as in that of Krugman (1998), Eggertsson amd
Woodford (2003, 2004), Auerbach and Obstfeld (2004), Coenen and Wieland (2003), and
most other writers on the ZLB issue, it is assumed that the relevant RE solution is one in
which inflation fluctuates around the target value specified by the usual interest rate policy
rule. If the target inflation rate plus the steady state real rate of interest is a moderately high
value, such as 4-5 percent per year, unusually large shocks would be required to push the
system to the vicinity of the ZLB. By contrast, Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe suggest
that there are multiple RE equilibria and the relevant one may instead be located at the ZLB
value of Rt, even in the absence of shocks. My position, argued most extensively in
McCallum (2002), is that this ZLB equilibrium is not plausible, because it fails to be E-stable
in the sense developed by Evans and Honkapohja (2001). Such a failure implies that this
(apparent) RE equilibrium would not be learnable in a setting that recognizes that individual
are not miraculously endowed with knowledge of the economy’s parameters, but need to
learn about them over time by observation of the economy’s behavior. The usual RE
equilibrium, focused upon by the other papers mentioned above, is by contrast E-stable and
learnable under standard assumptions. On the basis of this contrast, I would argue that the
usual RE equilibrium is the only one of these two that is plausible as a description of the
behavior of an actual economy.

29

8. Conclusions
Let us close with a brief summary of the paper’s arguments. It begins by
emphasizing the difference between policy rule changes, intended to help escape an existing
ZLB situation, and maintained policy rules designed so as to avoid the “liquidity trap”
aspects of a ZLB situation. Analysis assuming that rule changes would be quickly
recognized, understood, and believed—so that a new RE equilibrium would be relevant
immediately—seems implausible. Accordingly, the paper focuses not on policy changes for
escaping a liquidity trap, but on the design of a policy rule that should retain stabilization
effectiveness for monetary policy even if the economy is temporarily shocked into a situation
in which the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates makes demand stimulation via
interest rate reductions infeasible.
The particular policy rule considered in detail is one that uses as its instrument or
indicator variable a weighted average of the usual short-term interest rate and the rate of
depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. With a small weight attached to the depreciation
term, inclusion of the latter would be nearly irrelevant in normal situations. But when the
ZLB condition Rt = 0 prevails, then adjustments in the weighted average—which has some
similarities to a monetary conditions index—require large movements in the depreciation rate
(effected by central bank purchases of foreign exchange). These would affect aggregate
demand by another channel, and would provide stabilization power—with no need for any
additional exit strategy.
Stabilizing properties of this MC rule are studied by means of stochastic simulations
with a model of a small open economy developed by McCallum and Nelson (1999). The

30

latter differs from other small-scale models based on optimizing behavior (but with sticky
prices) by treating imports as inputs to the economy’s production processes, rather than as
consumer goods. The simulations indicate that: (i) under conditions implying that monetary
policy via an interest rate rule would be immobilized by the ZLB constraint, the MC rule
would provide strong stabilizing policy actions; yet (ii) under conditions such that the ZLB
constraint is not relevant, the MC rule would not significantly—if at all—hinder monetary
policy. Together, these two sets of results are supportive of the idea that a monetary policy
of the MC type could be useful for an economy with a low target inflation rate.

31

Appendix A
The object here is to briefly discuss the effectiveness of “helicopter drop” policy for
escaping a ZLB situation. Would such a policy be successful? I suggest that it would be
ineffective if the economy possesses Ricardian properties, as in the case of the canonical
model used by E&W (2003) and many others. The first step of the argument is as follows.
A “helicopter drop” is a transfer (gift) of money to households. In this regard, note
that a transfer of $K is equivalent to the combination of two operations, namely,
(i) A lump-sum tax reduction of $K financed by the sale of $K of T-bills to households (i.e.,
a gift of $K of T-bills to households), and
(ii) An open-market purchase of $K worth of T-bills.
But, it is well known that (i) has no effect if the economy is Ricardian and that (ii) has no
effect at the ZLB (where base money and T-bills are perfect substitutes at the margin). Thus
the combined operation—the helicopter drop—will have no effect.
The second step of the argument concerns a sequence of such operations. Wouldn’t
an ongoing sequence violate a transversality condition if there were no inflationary effect,
since the nominal money stock is growing without bound in the proposed experiment? Well,
yes, it would if the ZLB situation were to go on forever. But analysis of ZLB issues typically
pertains to situations in which an economy, with a positive steady-state nominal interest rate,
is at the ZLB as the result of some negative shock. In such cases, the economy will escape
the ZLB of its own accord at some point in the finite future, after which time pt will tend to
grow in line with mt. So, since transversality results pertain to the infinite future they are not
relevant. [One could obtain effects from repeated helicopter drops by using a non-Ricardian
model, such as the overlapping-generations model used in McCallum (2000, pp. 876-880).]

32

Table 1
Results with Standard Interest Rate Rule
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , Rt, & ∆st

µ3 = 0.8

µ3 = 0.0

µ1 = 0.05

µ1 = 0.5

µ1 = 5.0

µ1 = 50.0

3.28
2.19
2.82
18.59
6.27
2.07
7.03
19.14

2.35
1.96
2.48
18.51
2.92
1.68
4.70
18.56

1.36
1.69
3.82
19.35
1.35
1.54
7.80
21.97

0.74
2.35
11.26
27.70
0.58
3.01
28.16
46.82

33

Table 2
Results with MC Rule (20) when ∆Rt = 0 (with µ3= 0.8)
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , and ∆st

θ = 1.0
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.025
θ = 0.01

µ1 = 0.05

µ1 = 0.5

µ1 = 5.0

µ1 = 50.0

34.41
13.28
31.75
3.44
2.44
8.33
1.60
1.81
14.69
1.16
1.63
22.17

9.87
4.53
10.38
2.65
2.27
9.45
1.38
1.86
17.26
1.02
1.81
26.10

2.32
2.38
11.02
1.31
2.20
19.81
0.78
2.47
36.44
0.57
2.94
53.72

0.79
2.73
38.21
0.48
3.54
65.56
0.26
4.64
103.75
0.16
5.33
128.61

Table 3
Results with MC Rule (20) when ∆Rt = 0 (with µ3 = 0)
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , and ∆st

θ = 1.0
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.025
θ = 0.01

µ1 = 0.05

µ1 = 0.5

µ1 = 5.0

µ1 = 50.0

34.41
13.28
31.75
1.51
1.79
15.78
1.03
1.63
28.46
0.95
1.71
36.29

9.87
4.53
10.38
1.30
1.83
18.42
0.90
1.90
33.24
0.82
2.06
42.46

2.32
2.38
11.02
0.74
2.55
38.99
0.48
3.31
67.52
0.40
3.72
83.21

0.79
2.73
38.21
0.24
4.77
108.04
0.11
5.66
141.37
0.08
5.94
152.08

34

Table 4
Results with MC Rule (20) with No ZLB ( µ3 = 0.8)
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , Rt, ∆st

θ = 1.0

θ = 0.1

θ = 0.025

θ = 0.01

µ1 = 0.05

µ1 = 0.5

µ1 = 5.0

µ1 = 50.0

10.39
2.63
12.84
9.36
2.92
2.16
2.61
16.94
3.13
2.19
2.61
18.22
3.20
2.19
2.73
18.38

3.63
2.41
9.32
1.65
2.26
1.94
2.69
16.42
2.31
1.96
2.41
18.01
2.31
1.95
2.41
18.39

1.45
2.17
10.97
6.22
1.29
1.73
4.26
17.30
1.34
1.69
3.88
18.87
1.36
1.68
3.84
19.19

0.62
3.15
19.87
29.87
0.69
2.51
12.63
24.41
0.73
2.39
11.60
27.91
0.74
2.37
11.39
27.69

Table 5
Results with MC Rule (20) with No ZLB ( µ3 = 0.0)
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , Rt, ∆st

θ = 1.0

θ = 0.1

θ = 0.025

θ = 0.01

µ1 = 0.05

µ1 = 0.5

µ1 = 5.0

µ1 = 50.0

10.39
2.63
12.84
9.36
5.79
2.03
6.91
18.28
6.19
2.06
6.98
18.97
2.30
2.07
6.98
19.10

3.63
2.41
9.32
1.65
2.74
1.67
4.94
17.57
2.88
1.65
4.69
18.47
2.91
1.67
4.69
18.58

1.45
2.17
10.97
6.22
1.28
1.57
7.74
20.67
1.33
1.55
7.72
21.52
1.33
1.54
7.68
21.72

0.62
3.15
19.87
29.87
0.55
3.05
27.14
45.76
0.57
3.01
27.96
46.89
0.58.
3.02
28.20
47.17

35

Table 6
MC Rule (20) with Model Alterations (µ1 = 0.5; µ3 = 0.8)
Cell entries are standard deviations of ∆pt, y% t , Rt, and ∆st
Case with
Case with
Case with
ω3 = 0.30
Et-1∆pt and
Et-1∆pt and
Et-1 y% t in
Et-1 y% t in
No ZLB
policy rule.
policy rule.
No ZLB.
ZLB, Rt=0
θ = 1.0
∆st rule
θ = 0.1

θ = 0.025

θ = 0.01

θ = 0.0
Rt rule

3.66
2.51
9.31
1.46
2.49
2.08
2.56
16.77
2.58
2.07
2.25
18.54
2.61
2.30
2.29
18.78
2.62
2.09
2.33
18.99

9.85
4.61
0.00
10.30
3.00
2.54
0.00
10.43
1.75
2.18
0.00
17.78
1.41
2.07
0.00
25.29

36

3.23
2.21
9.26
1.55
2.13
2.26
2.68
15.56
2.16
2.32
2.24
17.23
2.19
2.35
2.27
17.51
2.20
2.36
2.28
17.67

Case with
ω3 = 0.30
ZLB,
Rt = 0
9.69
4.70
0.00
10.33
2.32
2.30
0.00
7.82
1.12
1.86
0.00
11.18
0.89
1.92
0.00
15.08

Figure 1
Impulse Responses, Rt Rule, Shock to Policy Rule

2

0

0
q

y

0.5

-0.5
-1

-2
0

10

-4

20

0

10

20

0

10

20

-0.5
10
20
0
10
Responses to Unit Shock to Monetary Policy

20

0

0

-0.5

ds

5

delta p

0.5

0

10

-5

20

2

0.5

R

net

1
0
-1

0

37

0

Figure 2
Impulse Responses, Rt Rule, Shock to IS Function

0.5

1

0
q

y

2

0
0

10

-1

20

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

ds

delta p

-1

-0.5

0

10

-0.5

20

10

20

0

10

20

1

R

net

0.2

0

0
0

0
-1

-2
10
20
0
10
Responses to Unit Shock to Consumption Behavior

38

20

Figure 3
Impulse Responses, Rt Rule, Shock to Technology

1
q

y

0.5

0

0

10

0

20

0

10

20

0

10

20

-0.4
10
20
0
10
Responses to Unit Shock to Technology

20

1

0

ds

delta p

0.5

-0.5

0

10

0

0
net

R

0.5

-0.5

20

0
-0.05
-0.1

0.5

0

39

-0.2

Figure 4
Impulse Responses, Rt Rule, Shock to Exchange Rate

0.2

2
q

y

1
0

0
0

10

-1

20

0
-0.5

0

10

10

20

0

10

20

10

20

1
0
-1

20

0.04

0.5

R

net

0.02
0
-0.02

0

2
ds

delta p

0.5

0

0

-0.5
10
20
0
Responses to Unit Shock to UIP

40

References
Amato, J.D., and T. Laubach (2004) “Implications of Habit Formation for Optimal Monetary
Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 305-325.
Auerbach, A.J., and M. Obstfeld (2003) “The Case for Open-Market Purchases in a Liquidity
Trap,” NBER WP 9814.
_________________________ (2004) “Monetary and Fiscal Remedies for Deflation,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 71-75.
Ball, L. (1999) “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” In J.B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy
Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001) “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal
of Economic Theory 96, 40-69.
Coenen, G., and V. Wieland (2003) “The Zero-Interest-Rate Bound and the Role of the
Exchange Rate for Monetary Policy in Japan,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 10711101.
Detken, C., and V. Gaspar (2003) “Maintaining Price Stability Under Free-Floating: A
Fearless Way Out of the Corner?” European Central Bank WP 241.
Dornbusch, R. (1987) “Exchange Rate Economics: 1986,” Economic Journal 97, 1-18.
Eggertsson, G.B., and M. Woodford (2003) “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Liquidity Trap,”
NBER WP 9968.
_____________________________ (2004) “Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 76-79.
Evans, G.W., and S. Honkapohja (2001) Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Fuhrer, J.C. (2000) “Habit Formation in Consumption and its Implications for MonetaryPolicy Models,” American Economic Review 90, 367-390.
Fuhrer, J.C., and G.R. Moore (1995) “Inflation persistence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
110. 127-159.
Gali, J., and M. Gertler (1999) “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.
Gerlach, S., and F. Smets (2000) “MCIs and Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review
44, 1677-1700.

41

Goodfriend, M. (2000) “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy,” Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 1007-1035.
Jung, T., Y. Teranishi, and T. Watanabe (2001) “Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Working Paper, Hitotsubashi University.
Kollmann, R. (2002) “Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: Effects on Welfare and
Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 989-1015.
Krugman, P. (1998) “It’s Baaack! Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (no.2), 137-187.
Kydland, F.E., and E.C. Prescott (1977) “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85, 473-491.
Laxton, D., and P. Pesenti (2003) “Monetary Rules for Small, Open, Emerging Economies,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1109-1146.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1980) “Rules, Discretion, and the Role of the Economic Advisor.” In S.
Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lucas, R. E., Jr., and T.J. Sargent (eds.) (1981). Rational Expectations and Econometric
Practice. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
McCallum, B.T. (2000) “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal
Interest Rates,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 870-904.
_____________ (2002) “Inflation Targeting and the Liquidity Trap,” in N. Loayza and R.
Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges. Central Bank of Chile.
_____________ (2003) “Japanese Monetary Policy, 1991-2001,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Quarterly 89 (Winter), 1-31.
_____________ (2004) “The Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism in Industrial
Countries,” Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
McCallum, B.T., and E. Nelson (1999) “Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-Economy
Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 553-578.
_____________ and _________ (2000) “Monetary Policy for an Open Economy: An
Alternative Framework with Optimizing Agents and Sticky Prices,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 16, 74-91.

42

Orphanides, A., and V. Wieland (2000) “Efficient Monetary Policy Design Near Price
Stability,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 14, 327-365.
Reifschneider, D., and J.S. Williams (2000) “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low
Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 936-966.
Rotemberg, J.J., and M. Woodford (1997) “An Optimization Based Econometric Framework
for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. MIT Press.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2002) “Openness, Imperfect Exchange Rate Pass-Through, and
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 947-981.
Svensson, L.E.O. (2001) “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of
Escaping from a Liquidity Trap,” Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies 19,
277-312.
Taylor, J.B. (1993) “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Wolman, A.S. (1998) “Staggered Price Setting and the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest
Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 84 (Fall), 1-24.
Woodford, M. (2003) Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton University Press.

43

