NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW LAW AND INSTITUTIONS SHAPE FINANCIAL CONTRACTS:
THE CASE OF BANK LOANS
Jun Qian
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 11052
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11052
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

We appreciate helpful comments from Franklin Allen, Thorsten Beck, Ross Levine, Andrei Shleifer, Amir
Sufi, and seminar/session participants at Bank of England, Boston College, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia, Harvard, INSEAD, London Business
School, and the Financial Intermediation Research Society meetings in Capri, Italy. Geraldine Hough, JeanMarc Donics, Daniel Yang, and Zhe Xu provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from
Boston College is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are responsible for all remaining errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Jun Qian and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

How Law and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The Case of Bank Loans
Jun Qian and Jun Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 11052
January 2005
JEL No. K0, G2, O5
ABSTRACT
We examine empirically how legal origin, creditor rights, property rights, legal formalism, and
financial development affect the design of price and non-price terms of bank loans in almost 60
countries. Our results support the law and finance view that private contracts reflect differences in
legal protection of creditors and the enforcement of contracts. Loans made to borrowers in countries
where creditors can seize collateral in case of default are more likely to be secured, have longer
maturity, and have lower interest rates. We also find evidence, however, that ?Coasian? bargaining
can partially offset weak legal or institutional arrangements. For example, lenders mitigate risks
associated with weak property rights and government corruption by securing loans with collateral
and shortening maturity. Our results also suggest that the choice of loan ownership structure affects
loan contract terms.
Jun Qian
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
qianju@bc.edu
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
In recent years, a substantial body of empirical evidence has linked laws and institutions to
the development of financial and economic systems. Pioneered and developed by La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV hereafter), among other authors, this literature
documents that the historical origin of a country’s legal system, in particular, countries with
English common-law origin vs. French civil-law origin, is strongly correlated with financial and
economic “outcomes”. For example, countries with English origin (French origin) provide the
strongest (weakest) legal protections to both shareholders and creditors (LLSV, 1998, 2000a).
Countries with English origin also seem to have better institutions, including less corrupt
governments (LLSV, 1999), more efficient courts and bankruptcy procedures (Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, DLLS hereafter, 2003), and more informative accounting
standards. These better institutions, in turn, seem to lead to better outcomes for the financial
system. Relative to firms in French-origin countries, firms in English-origin countries have more
dispersed shareholder ownership (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, LLS hereafter, 1999),
rely more on external capital markets to raise funds (LLSV, 1997), have higher values (LLSV,
2002), and can enter a new market or industry more easily (DLLS, 2002).
Despite these connections from legal origin to institutions to financial/economic outcomes,
less is known about how these three links connect and relate to each other. In particular, does
legal origin, through its shaping of a country’s laws and institutions, cause observed differences in
outcomes? If so, through what channels? Related to the LLSV results, there is evidence that legal
origin does play an important role in explaining differences in financial systems and in economic
growth.1 For example, the English common law system is superior to the French civil law system

1

First, there is the finance and growth literature supporting the view that developing financial system stimulates
economic growth (e.g., McKinnon, 1973; King and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998). The second strand of
literature attempts to establish the link and causality of law, finance, and growth: for example, Levine (1999) provides
2

in its ability to adapt to evolving economic conditions (e.g., Hayek, 1960; Posner, 1973; Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine, 2003b). As a result, firms in French civil law countries face higher
obstacles in accessing external finance than those in English common law countries (e.g., Beck et
al., 2003c).2
There are factors, however, that can alter the financial and economic outcomes as predicted
by LLSV papers. Perhaps the most important of these factors flows from the Coasian view that,
with low transactions costs, individuals can privately contract and protect each other’s rights and
interests irrespective of the law. According to this logic, “Coasian bargaining” allows agents to
undo the detrimental effects of a weak legal system. If some private contract terms substitute for
legal protections, for example, then links between legal institutions and outcomes ought to be
partially – or even fully – offset. It is reasonable to believe that an important aspect of the
transaction costs in Coasian bargaining is the efficiency of a country’s institutions.3
This paper studies how laws and institutions in different countries shape the ownership of
bank loans as well as the price and non-price terms of these contracts. We employ a data set of
loans originated between 1994 to 2003 in about 60 countries, and test how loan terms vary across
countries in a reduced form setting. We argue that bank loan contracts depend on country-level
variables incorporating legal and institutional factors, and on loan-level variables incorporating
borrower and loan characteristics. Our main focus is on the effects of country-level factors.

evidence at country level, Rajan and Zingales (1998) at the industry level, and Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic
(1998) find firm-level evidence. Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) show that financial deregulation in U.S. banking was
followed by accelerated growth.
2

Other endeavors on understanding institutions include examining the endowment of geography and disease
environment in former colonial countries (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, 2002; Beck, DemirgüçKunt, and Levine, 2003a), property rights (e.g., Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff, 2002), and religion and cultural
beliefs (e.g., Greif, 1994; Stulz and Williamson, 2003).

3

In this regard, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) differentiate laws and institutions governing transactions between the
government/elites and ordinary citizens (property rights institutions) from those governing the transactions among
ordinary citizens (contracting institutions).
3

Specifically, we examine the basic pricing term (the interest rate), two non-price terms (loan
maturity and the secured status of the loan), along with three ownership variables (the number of
lenders, the share of each loan held by banks located in the same country as the borrower, and the
share of each loan held by government-owned banks). We test how these loan attributes vary with
differences in creditor rights, property rights, government corruption, the functioning of the courts,
and financial and economic development. While other studies have tested how a single dimension
of the loan contract responds to country-level variables, ours is the first to explore in a
multivariate setting how ownership and contracts are determined. This multi-dimensional
approach allows us to provide a more complete characterization of how the overall availability of
credit may respond to the contracting environment.4
We draw three broad conclusions from our findings. First, consistent with the law and
finance view, a country’s laws and institutions are important in shaping private contracts. We find
that protection of creditors’ rights in the law is perhaps the most important of these factors.
Unlike most existing research, we differentiate creditor rights along two different dimensions:
Creditors’ ability to seize collateral in the case of default versus their ability to oust incumbent
management during reorganization. We find that creditors’ ability to take collateral is crucial in
shaping terms of the loan contracts, while their ability to oust management is not. For example, as
creditor’s ability to take collateral increases, bank loans are more likely to be secured by collateral,
and tend to have longer maturity and lower interest rates. Our results suggest that a contract term
that potentially reduces lender risk – collateral – is seen most commonly where it is most easily
4

Giannetti (2003) links private firms’ financing decisions including loans to cross-country institutional variables,
whereas Esty and Megginson (2003) consider only loan ownership and Esty (2004) considers foreign (loan)
ownership. Outside of lending, Jappelli et al. (2002) look at mortgage markets and judicial efficiencies; Bergman and
Nicolaeivsky (2003) look at corporate charters before and after IPO in Mexico; Kaplan, Martel, and Stromberg (2003)
and Lerner and Schoar (2004) examine private equity contracts in developed and developing countries; Aggarwal,
Klapper, and Wysocki (2003) examine the investment allocation choices of actively-managed US mutual funds in
emerging economies; and Rossi and Volpin (2004) examine cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions.
Finally, Sufi (2004) examines loan ownership in the U.S.
4

enforceable in the law. Consistent with this interpretation, once banks secure the loan with
collateral, firms can borrow at a lower cost, as loan interest rates decline when creditor rights
strengthen. How do lenders insure repayment where creditor rights are weak? First, in addition to
imposing higher interest rates, lenders ‘put the borrower on a short leash’ by reducing maturity.
Second, loan ownership is more diffuse in countries with weak creditor rights protection.
Diffusion of ownership reduces the risk to lenders directly via diversification, but it also may
preclude borrowers from engaging in strategic default by increasing the ex-post cost of
restructuring bad loans (e.g., Bolton and Scharfstein, 1996; Esty and Megginson, 2003; Diamond,
2004). Thus, loan ownership may act as yet another tool for lenders operating in countries where
their bargaining power is otherwise relatively weak (due to the legal arrangement).
We also find that greater legal formalism in a borrower’s country, previously shown in
DLLS (2003) to lead to slower and less efficient courts, significantly alters the terms of loan
contracts. First, loans made in countries with greater formalism are more likely to be secured and
tend to have longer maturity. Second, legal formalism seems to affect the terms of the contracts
differently for rated vs. unrated firms. With greater formalism, a larger fraction of unrated loans
are owned by domestic banks (banks located in the same country as the borrower), while the
opposite is true for rated loans. Moreover, interest rates on loans to rated borrowers rise with
more formalism, whereas rates are unrelated to formalism for loans to unrated borrowers. We
argue that interest rates on loans to unrated borrowers, where local lenders are dominant, do not
reflect the costs of using the courts (legal formalism) because local lenders usually re-contract or
workout loans privately. In contrast, interest rates to rated borrowers increase with the costs of
using courts because foreign lenders expect to use courts for defaulted loans. This interpretation is
consistent with Mian (2004), who finds that foreign lenders in Pakistan are more likely to use
courts to restructure defaulted loans, compared to domestic banks. Overall our results are
5

consistent with the implications from DLLS (2003), who find that more legal formalism raises
contracting costs.
Second, our results document the potential importance of ‘Coasian bargaining’ in
offsetting the costs of a weak institutional or legal framework. For example, government
corruption and property rights, while very significant in explaining collateral and maturity, are not
significantly related to loan interest rates.5 This suggests that much of the risks associated with
lending in countries where legal protections are weak and government expropriation risk is high
may be substantially mitigated through private contracting. For example, the use of collateral
decreases as property rights protection improves, whereas loan maturity increases significantly
when government corruption improves. Thus, where the risk of government expropriation is high,
banks seem able to protect themselves with collateral and by putting the borrower on a ‘short
leash’. Maturity may act as an especially important tool for banks operating in these environments
because shortening loan duration mitigates risk even absent a well-functioning legal regime (e.g.,
Diamond, 2004).
Third, our empirical work illustrates how loan ownership structure interacts with price and
non-price loan contract terms. For example, we find that decreased loan concentration (i.e. more
banks participating in a loan) comes with a greater likelihood that collateral is used. Diffuse loan
ownership – which again may reduce strategic defaults – may therefore complement collateral as a
mechanism to solve borrower control problems. As noted above, we find that the share of loans
owned by domestic banks increases with legal formalism due to their ability to restructure loans

5

Using similar data sets like ours, Bae and Ghoyal (2004) link loan interest rates (only) to cross country legal and
institutional variables. They find no effect of creditor rights (combining ability to take collateral and oust
management) on loan rates, similar to our results. They do not, however, split the creditor rights variable into two
components, as we do. Also, they do find a negative relationship between property rights and interest rates on loans,
based on loans made to Asian countries, in which interest rates on loans are not based on a markup over LIBOR rates
as loans from other regions are priced. We drop Asian loans in our interest rate regressions because the rates are not
comparable to the spreads from other regions in Dealscan.
6

privately. In addition, interest rates decline with the participation of domestic banks, perhaps
suggesting their better ability to assess borrower risk and perhaps solve control problems than
foreign banks. Esty (2004) finds similar results with a sample of project finance loans.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review related strands of
literature on the forces that shape bank loan contracts across different borrower countries, and we
describe our key legal and institutional variables. In Section III, we describe our sample of bank
loans around the globe, and then present the main empirical results. Section IV concludes the
paper. The Appendix contains explanations of all the variables that we use in the paper.
II. Financial Contracts, Legal Protection, and Institutions
In this section we briefly review related strands of literature on law, finance, institutions,
and financial contracting between business counterparties. We then use these theoretical
arguments to motivate our empirical model.
Our point of departure is the now well-established set of links between legal and
institutional variables and financial-system “outcomes” measured at the country level. LLSV
(1997, 1998) differentiate countries with legal systems derived from those in England, France,
Germany and Scandinavia. In addition to these four legal origins, LLSV also characterize another
group of countries as having “socialist origin” – the countries that have evolved from socialist,
centrally planned economies to market-based economies. LLSV find that countries with English
common-law and French civil-law origins are at the extremes. For example, relative to the French
legal-origin countries, the English common-law countries have larger financial systems as a share
of GDP, they have bigger securities markets, more IPOs, more diffuse ownership of public equity,
higher Tobin’s Q, and higher dividend payouts that are more closely tied to profits. In addition,
the English group of countries offers stronger legal protection of shareholders and creditors, and
they have more efficient courts and judicial systems. Not surprisingly, countries with socialist
7

origin are much closer to French-origin countries than to English-origin countries in terms of their
legal and financial systems.
Before describing our approach in detail, it is worth briefly describing the “Coasian view”
(Coase, 1937, 1960) that private parties, absent significant transaction costs, can reach an optimal
contract – or move toward an optimal contract – even when certain aspects of the contract are not
specified in the law. At first blush, the strong link between a country’s laws/institutions and the
fitness of its financial system undercuts, to some degree, the Coasian logic. That is, if transactions
costs were low enough and all contracts enforceable, then all positive NPV investments would be
financed – no financial system would have “better” outcomes than any other. The Coasian logic
dictates that financial counterparties living in systems with “weak” institutions will find clever
ways to offset, or partially offset, the limitation and weakness of those institutions. Applied to the
case of bank loan contracts, for example, lenders might seek extra protection beyond what is
provided by the legal system through bargaining. The final contract might include protection
clauses not provided by law upon agreement from both the lender and borrower, so long as the
costs of writing and enforcing these clauses are lower than the benefits of adding them. Even if
the ‘Coase Theorem’ held exactly, we might still be able to observe differences in the terms of
contracts. Thus, our empirical strategy will help illustrate how financial counterparties attempt to
offset the costs of contracting in a country with weak laws/institutions.
Despite the work of LLSV and others, we still know very little about how, exactly, these
legal and institutional variables affect specific aspects of the financial contracts themselves (as
opposed to outcomes like the size of equity or debt markets relative to GDP). Our aim is thus to
test directly how differences in the contracting environment affect the specific terms of bank loans
to large corporate borrowers.

8

We consider two sets of explanatory variables that will affect the design of bank loans.
The first set of variables incorporate micro-level aspects of the loan, the borrower, and the lender.
These measures have been employed widely in the bank loan literature and, for our purposes,
should be thought of as control variables. For example, larger borrowers and borrowers with
highly rated debt pay lower interest rates and are more likely to be able to borrow on an unsecured
basis relative to smaller and less well-rated borrowers (Strahan, 1999).
The second set of variables describes the country-level factors. These include: (1)
variables capturing basic legal protections (creditor rights, property rights, and the risk of
government corruption); (2) the functioning of the courts (legal formalism); (3) legal origin; and
(4) development (both financial and economic).6 These country-level differences are the focus of
the paper. Taken together they measure how well a country enforces contracts and protects
investors in practice. While creditor and property rights specify the basic legal protections, the
efficiency of the courts can be thought of as a proxy for the transaction costs in the
implementation of these legal protections, in that the actual protection of creditors can be weak in
a country despite comprehensive protections provided by law due to the costly implementation
process.
In the remainder of this section, we describe the variables and briefly review why each
may affect the design of bank loans. It is reasonable to assume that certain aspects of law and
institutions will have first-order impact, while others will probably be less important. We examine
those aspects of the legal system and a country’s institutions that we view as potentially being
most important. For other aspects of the law, whose impact we cannot measure directly, we
include the legal-origin dummy variables, as in LLSV.
6

Country-level factors also include measures on a country’s macro-economic condition, including business cycles,
but this is not the focus of our paper.
9

Creditor Rights
Creditor rights are of paramount importance for lenders in determining their basic legal
protections against borrower expropriation. We start with a single index to measure a borrower
country’s overall creditor rights. The index, developed in LLSV’s “Law and Finance” (1998)
paper, begins at zero and adds one for each of the following conditions that hold: (1) secured
creditors gain possession of assets once the petition for reorganization receives approval (i.e. there
is no automatic stay on creditors’ ability to seize collateral); (2) secured creditors are ranked first
in the distribution of proceeds; (3) there are restrictions such as creditors’ consent for going into
reorganization; and, (4) management does not stay in control of the firm during the reorganization.
A higher score indicates stronger creditor rights. This index is available for about 100 countries
from the World Bank.
We use these conditions to develop two additional indices. The first focuses on conditions
(1) and (2), which specify ways that managers can prevent secured lenders from getting paid in
full when the firm is in financial distress. Thus, a higher score (from 0 to 2) indicates stronger
creditors’ ability to seize collateral under default/distress scenario. Clearly the utility of collateral,
both as a control mechanism and as a tool to reduce loss given default, increases with the index by
making it easier for lenders to take (or threaten to take) control of assets.7 Thus, we would expect
stronger creditor rights to be associated both with greater use of collateral (a cost to borrowers) but
lower interest rates (a benefit). The second index keys on the last two categories of the index
above, indicating what the borrower firm’s managers can do to remain in control of the firm’s
7

Our results linking the law of the borrower’s country to loan terms will, if anything, understate the true impact of
law for most small and domestic borrowers. Most of our data are syndicated loans, which is a market dominated by
large multinational banks serving large borrowers. Many of these loans are arranged and negotiated in either London
or New York, and the loan contracts often include a “choice of law” clause that allows the law of the U.S. or U.K. to
supercede the laws in the borrower’s country. However, local insolvency laws often override these clauses in the
event of default (Esty and Megginson, 2002; Norton, 1997). Thus, to the extent that attempts to export U.S. or U.K.
law succeed in non-default states, our results will tend to be attenuated.

10

assets despite poor firm performance. With a higher score (0 to 2), creditors have stronger ability
to oust management during reorganization following poor performance.8 Because we need the
disaggregated information on bankruptcy law to compute these two sub-indices, we lose a
significant number of countries. Hence, we report our results first using the broad creditor rights
index, and then using the two sub-indices.
Property Rights
While creditor rights specify lenders’ ability to control defaulting borrowers, our property
rights measure examines more broadly the extent to which the government and law protect private
property generally. The property rights measure is an index ranging from 0 to 5, with a higher
score indicating better protection of private properties, from the Index of Economic Freedom
(IEF), published by the Heritage Foundation. The index measures the degree to which private
property rights are protected and accounts for the possibility that such property will be
expropriated. In addition, it analyzes the independence of the judiciary, the existence of
corruption within the judiciary, and the ability if individuals and businesses to enforce contracts.9
Government Corruption
To measure government corruption, we follow LLSV (1998, 1999) and use data from the
International Country Risk Guide (ICRG hereafter).10 This measure, similar to the property rights
8

It is also important to point out that the creditor rights index is constructed based on whether the protection of
creditors’ rights (along one of the four dimensions) is provided by the borrower country’s law. All the other countrylevel variables (property rights, corruption, and legal formalism) are constructed based on surveys, and thus may
contain more measurement error.

9

For a list of variables considered for the index, see Appendix A.1. In compiling the index, the authors of IEF utilize
sources from Economist Intelligence Unit, ILT Report, 1999; U.S. Department of Commerce, National Trade Data
Bank of the U.S. and Country Commercial Guides; U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 1998; and World Bank, Country Briefs, 1998.

10

The ICRG (of the PRS Group, Inc.) rating for each of the more than 120 countries comprises 22 variables in 3
categories of country risk, political (including corruption), financial, and economic, based on which a composite
country risk measure is constructed. Details are available at http://www.icrgonline.com/.
11

measure, is part of ICRG’s “political risk” composite index. The variable ranges from 0 to 10,
with lower scores indicating that “high government officials are likely to demand special
payments and illegal payments are generally expected throughout lower levels of government.”
Unlike ICRG’s financial and economic indices, which are based on mostly statistical models and
data, the corruption index (as well as other political risk measures) is assessed based on ICRG
staff’s subjective analysis of “qualitative” political information.
Both the property rights and the corruption indices measure the risk of expropriation from
the government or powerful elites of a country. In contrast, the other variables in our model, such
as the creditor rights index and the institutional variables described below, measure the risk of
expropriation from individuals or firms, which are typically the counterparty to the contract. With
country-level evidence, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) argue that expropriation by government
and elites hinders financial system development and overall economic growth because individuals
cannot contract around this type of risk. In particular, standard tools used to offset credit risk, such
as collateral in a bank loan contract, may be less effective in mitigating the risk of expropriation
from government or elites. In contrast, shortening the maturity of the contract may be a more
robust tool to handle such risk. By comparing the impact of government corruption with the
impact of the other law and institution variables on bank loan contracts, we can draw inference on
the relative importance of these two kinds of risks.
Legal Formalism
Legal formalism measures how efficiently the courts of the borrower’s country enforce
contracts (DLLS, 2003). Court efficiency matters because lenders’ ability to enforce or threaten to
enforce specific aspects of a loan contract (e.g. covenants) or take away collateral will depend on
the costs of using the legal system. Court efficiency may also matter more broadly for the

12

borrower as an indicator of how costly it is to enforce contracts beyond the loan agreement (e.g.
contracts with suppliers, workers, etc.) Based on extensive surveys of Lex Mundi/Lex Africa
association of law firms, DLLS have constructed measures based on how courts handle two types
of cases: Collection of a bounced check, and eviction of a (non-paying) tenant, with a higher score
in either category implying that the court system is slower (with more bureaucracy) and less
efficient.11 These measures are highly positively correlated across countries, and we choose to use
the check-based formalism index for our study as the process of collecting a check through a court
is more closely related to creditors’ desire of collecting their investment back from the borrowers
(although other contracts matter to the borrower too).
With more legal formalism (i.e. a higher score on the index) in a borrower country, it takes
longer for lenders to collect money or assets from a borrower. In anticipation of this, lenders may
shorten the length of the loan and “put the borrower on a short leash.” Alternatively, with more
efficient courts, it becomes easier (and quicker) for lenders to seize control of the firm’s assets
from the firm’s managers when they are allowed to do so. Thus more efficient courts can actually
lower borrowers’ bargaining power when negotiating with the lenders.
Residual Impact of Legal Origin and Financial Development
As discussed above, there are potentially other aspects of legal protection and institutional
efficiency that we do not consider but can affect the design of loans. Since LLSV have
demonstrated that almost all of these variables are highly correlated with indicators of legal origin,
we include these legal origin indicators to proxy for possible omitted variables. We also control
11

DLLS sent questionnaires to law firms around the globe, which cover the step-by-step evolution of an eviction and
a check collection before local courts in 115 countries’ largest cities. The questions are divided into two parts: 1)
description of the procedure of the hypothetical case, including estimates of the actual duration at each stage, whether
written submissions are required, specific laws applicable, the form of appeal, the existence of alternative
administrative procedures; 2) multiple choice questions are used to collect additional information. See Appendix A.2
for the seven categories of legal formalism.

13

for economic and financial development in most of our empirical models. Financial development
equals the ratio of total private domestic bank credit to GDP, averaged over the 1994 to 1997
period;12 economic development equals the log of GDP per capita, averaged over the 1994 to 2002
period.
III. Empirical Methods & Results
III.1 Data
We build a sample of bank loans made to large borrowers located in almost 60 countries
(excluding the U.S.). Loan information comes from the Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan
database, which provides detailed coverage of bank lending to large corporations. The dataset
dates back to the late 1980s, but coverage of lending to companies outside the U.S. was quite
sparse until the middle of the 1990s. Hence, we begin our sample with loans originated in 1994
and include loans originated through the middle of 2003.
Dealscan allows us to identify which banks are lending to which firms in each year, and to
observe in detail various terms of the loans at origination, including the interest rate (measured as
a basis point spread over LIBOR, inclusive of all fees), whether or not the loan is secured, the
maturity of the loan, the number of lenders involved (many of the loans are syndicated), as well as
the identity of the borrower and lender. From these last two pieces of information, we construct
the share of the loan held (at origination) by banks located in the same country as the borrower,
and the share held by banks controlled by governments (although not necessarily the borrower’s
government).13 These ownership and contract features serve as the basis for the dependent

12

We obtain times series data for all countries from Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2002), which does not provide data
on financial development after 1997.
13

Information is based on the Bankscope database. Banks are considered government controlled if more than 25% of
the shares are owned by governments. The home country of a bank is based on the location of the bank holding
company. For example, Citibank’s affiliate operating in India is classified as a U.S. bank.
14

variables in our models. The qualitative variable is coded as follows: The secured lending
indicator equals one if the loan is secured and zero if it is not. For this model, we estimate a Probit
and report marginal effects (rather than Probit coefficients). Thus, the reported coefficients
represent the change in the probability per unit change in the relevant explanatory variables. (For
indicator variables, the coefficient represents the change in the probability associated with moving
the indicator from 0 to 1.) The other models are estimated with OLS, where the dependent
variable equals the log of the number of lenders, the percent of the loan held by government banks
(ranging from 0 to 100), the percent held by domestic banks (0 to 100), the log of the loan
maturity (in months), and the log of the basis point spread of the loan interest rate over LIBOR.
Beyond these loan contract terms, Dealscan also includes information on the type of loan
(e.g. lines of credit versus term loans), the purpose of the loan (e.g. debt repayment, commercial
paper backup line of credit, general corporate purpose, etc), and the size of the loan.14 We control
in our model for loan type and loan purpose with indicator variables, and we control for loan size
by including the log of the commitment amount (in U.S. dollars).15 We also include an indicator
variable equal to one for loans denominated in one of the following major currencies: U.S. dollars,
Euros, German DM, British pounds, or Japanese Yen.
For borrower characteristics, Dealscan contains information on Moody’s and S&P senior
debt rating at the close of the loan, which we include to control for borrower risk. We use the
Moody’s rating unless it is missing, in which case we use S&P, while unrated firms constitute the
omitted category. We include an indicator for multinational firms, and a set of 1-digit SIC

14

The Dealscan data allow us to observe the commitment amount at origination, but not the amount of funds actually
taken down by the borrower.
15

Any effects of inflation are absorbed by year fixed effects.

15

indicator variables.16 We also drop loans to firms in SIC 4 (utilities), 6 (financials) and 9 (public
sector) because firms in these sectors are more apt to be government owned or government
protected monopolies; hence, the risks of these kinds of firms may be very different from
manufacturing and trade firms. Dealscan has only very sparse information on borrower sales, but
by including the size of the loan in the models we are able to absorb the bulk of differences based
on borrower size.
Given the selection of banks and firms in Dealscan databases, we acknowledge that the
results will reflect the effects of cross-country differences in law and institutions on financial
contracting between large banks and large borrowers. To some extent focusing on these data
limits the generality of our findings, but we think that loans to smaller borrowers are likely to be
shaped significantly by a set of social, cultural and relationship variables that would be difficult or
impossible to observe and control across a large number of countries (Petersen and Rajan, 1994).
In our view, individual country-level studies, rather than cross-country comparisons, would offer a
more fruitful way to understand financial contracting for small firms.17
Table 1 reports summary statistics on the loan terms by the legal origin of the borrower
country. The loans are of similar size on average in the five country groups, ranging from $133 to
$224 million. Pricing appears similar in the English, French, German and Scandinavian legalorigin countries, with a mean spread over LIBOR ranging from 164 to 180 basis points. In
contrast, loan spreads are considerably higher in the formerly Socialist countries (230 bps). These
large pricing differences likely reflect, at least in part, the differences in average borrower risk for
this latter group. For the non-price contract terms, the share of loans that are secured ranges from

16

A company is defined to be multinational if its parent and the company itself operate in different countries.

17

For example, Allen, Qian, and Qian (2004) show that the private sector in China, despite poor legal protections and
inadequate financing through standard channels, has been growing very fast, relying on alternative governance
mechanisms and financing channels such as reputation and relationships.
16

a low of 27 percent (in the German countries) to a high of 75 percent (in the Scandinavian
countries). Note that this variable is missing for about 1/2 of our sample. Average maturity
ranges from 50 to 72 months across the groups.
Ownership also varies considerably across country groups. For example, government
ownership of our sample of loans is highest in the formerly Socialist countries (22 percent) and the
Scandinavian countries (12 percent). The percentage of loans held by domestic banks is by far the
lowest in the Socialist countries, presumably because of the relatively low level of financial
development in these countries. In contrast, in the German legal-origin countries, domestic bank
ownership of loans predominates (71 percent).
III.2 Regression Models
In our regression models, we begin by testing in reduced form the effects of country-level
variables on ownership of loans and the price and non-price terms of these loans. We then
consider how the ownership variables interact with the contract terms in our last set of results.
These latter regressions cannot be viewed as pure reduced forms because the ownership and
contract terms may be determined jointly. Thus, it is difficult to determine the causal links
between the two. Nevertheless, we think these results help illustrate the extent to which
ownership affects banks’ ability to enforce loan contract terms. Last, we report all of our models
separately for rated and unrated borrowers.
We control for borrower characteristics with six ratings indicators (AAA, AA, A, BBB,
BB, and B or worse) and six one-digit SIC industry indicators; we also control for loan
characteristics with a full set of loan purpose indicators, log of loan size, and an indicator for lines
of credit. We also include indicators for legal origin, with the English legal-origin countries
serving as the omitted category. To control for business cycle conditions, the models include year
fixed effects and the growth rate in GDP (in $s) during the year in which the loan was originated.
17

To control for the level of economic and financial development, we include the log of per-capita
income in the country and the ratio of private bank credit to GDP. And, we include the variables
testing how specific aspects of the financial contracting environment affect ownership and loan
terms, as described in Section II above.
Table 2 reports mean values for the country-level variables across the five legal-origin
groupings. Consistent with the earlier research of LLSV, countries with French or Socialist legal
origins tend to have weak protection of creditor & property rights, and their courts tend to have a
high degree of legal formalism. In addition, government corruption seems higher in these
countries relative to the German or Scandinavian legal-origin countries. Because we have many
loans for each country (compare the number of observations in Tables 1 and 2), but no variation
on our key explanatory variables within countries, we cluster the error across all loans made in a
single country to account for possible dependence in the error.18
Tables 4-6 report the main regression results, while Tables 7-9 then reproduce these results
after separating the data based on whether or not the borrower has a credit rating. Table 4 focuses
on reduced form models of ownership, and Table 5 on reduced form models of the price and nonprice terms of loans. In Table 6, we introduce the ownership variables as right-hand side variables
in the regressions for loan terms.
III.3 Unobserved Heterogeneity
Before describing these results, it is worth acknowledging the potential problem of
unobserved firm-level heterogeneity. As noted, we do attempt to control for borrower attributes
by including loan size, ratings indicators, and industry indicators in our regressions; but lenders
clearly have access to more information than that, and they may use their additional information to
18

For example, measurement error in a county-level legal or institutional variable would induce correlation in the
model error across all loans to borrowers living in that country.
18

set loan terms. Therefore, there is the possibility that omitted firm-level characteristics may bias
our results.
We deal with this problem in two ways. First, we have obtained a sample of borrowerlevel observable characteristics by manually matching Dealscan loan data with annual reports
from the Worldscope database. In Table 3, we report the correlation between firm size (log of
market capitalization), profits (net income divided by book value of assets) and leverage (total
debt to assets) and our legal and institutional variables for this sub-sample. These correlations are
very low and not statistically significant, with the exception that the log of (firm) market value is
positively correlated with the corruption index (ρ = 0.33). Consequently, other than corruption
there seems to be little room for omitted firm attributes to bias our coefficients of interest.
As a second test, we report our results in Tables 4-6 with and without those firm-level
variables that we can observe. This second approach is especially important given that firm size
and corruption are found to be correlated. If omitting observable dimensions of firm risk (which
includes firm size as proxied by loan size) does not change the coefficients of interest, it seems
implausible to us that omitting unobservable dimensions will create an important source of bias.
As it turns out, our results are robust to the exclusion of these control variables.
III.4 Results
Ownership
The concentration of ownership of bank loans seems to be higher – that is, the number of
lenders is lower – in countries that are better developed economically (Table 4, columns 1 and 2).
Moreover, as found in Ongena and Smith (2000), better protection of creditor rights is associated
with fewer lenders (marginally significant). These results suggest that diversification – spreading
a syndicated loan across many lenders – is one of the tools that banks can use to mitigate legal,

19

institutional and other non-business risks. We also find, as do Ongena and Smith (2000) and Esty
and Megginson (2003), that ownership concentration is significantly lower in the civil law
countries (French and German legal origin), controlling for the observable legal and institutional
variables. Esty and Megginson argue that lenders attempt to forestall strategic default in countries
where creditor rights are weak through diffuse ownership, which could also explain our findings.19
While there may be validity to this argument, better protection of property rights and lower levels
of government corruption seem to come with more, rather than fewer, lenders. These dimensions
of country risk may be better dealt with by concentrating the loan amongst banks that understand
political or government expropriation risk, rather than through diversification.
The share of loans held by government banks is lower in better-developed economies, and,
controlling for observables, is much higher in the formerly Socialist countries and Scandinavian
countries (Table 4, columns 3 and 4). We conversely find that the share of loans held by domestic
banks is much lower in the Socialist and Scandinavian countries (columns 5 and 6). For financial
development, we find a much higher share of loans held by domestic banks, although this finding
is true almost by definition because our measure of financial development is based on the size of
the domestic banking system (relative to GDP).
We also find that legal formalism is associated with much greater holdings of loans by
domestic banks. The effect is large economically as well as statistically. For example, a standard
deviation increase in legal formalism (an increase of 1.1) comes with an increase in the share held
by domestic banks of about 10 percent of the loan. Mian (2004) shows that foreign lenders are
more likely than domestic lenders to resolve defaulted loans in a formal court procedure. He
argues that foreign lenders are less able to establish long-term relationship capital with borrowers
19

See Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) and Diamond (2004) for theories explaining why diffusion of ownership can
reduce the possibility of strategic default, and Sufi (2004) for empirical evidence on U.S. firms and banks.

20

and exploit this relationship during private workouts, thus they resort to formal legal procedures.
If the cost of using courts increases with legal formalism (as argued by DLLS), then our results
would support Mian’s conclusions, as foreign lenders will be less willing to lend where court
procedures are slow and cumbersome.20
Contract Terms
Table 5 reports reduced form results for the loan contract terms. As noted, we use two
specifications for the creditor rights index. The index in Panel A of Table 5 includes all four
conditions of creditor protection described in Section II, and ranges from 0 to 4. In Panel B the
overall creditor index is split into two: The first (ranging from 0 to 2) indicates creditors’ ability to
oust management during reorganization, while the second (also ranging from 0 to 2) indicates their
ability to seize collateral under a default/distress scenario (i.e. secured creditors gain possession of
assets once the petition for reorganization receives approval, and secured creditors are ranked first
in the distribution of proceeds).21
We first find that collateral is significantly more common in countries with stronger
creditor rights (columns 1 and 2 of Panel A). From Panel B (columns 1 and 2), we see that this
result is driven by creditors’ rights to seize collateral, while their ability to oust management does
not have much impact on any of the three contract terms. Our result thus reflects a kind of
‘Coasian’ bargaining whereby a contracting tool (collateral) is used more where courts are more
willing to enforce its terms. This effect is large economically as well as statistically. For example,
the coefficient in Panel B suggests that a borrower in Mexico (index on creditors’ rights to seize

20

We also show in Table 4 that in countries where financial markets are better developed, the domestic ownership
share is higher. This result, however, is difficult to interpret because of an obvious and mechanical reverse causality.
We include it for consistency with the other results, but the other coefficients in the model are not sensitive to the
exclusion of this variable.
21

The sample size is smaller in Panel B than that in Panel A, because the split creditor rights indexes are available for
only 49 countries from the LLSV (1998) paper.
21

collateral = 0) would be 25 percent less likely to post collateral compared to a similar borrower in
the U.K. (index on creditors’ rights to seize collateral = 2). The same Coasian bargaining
argument can also explain the positive relation between economic and financial development and
secured lending (positive and significant in Panel A; still positive but not significant in Panel B).
In developed countries, lenders have access to liquid financial markets to sell collateral if
necessary, making secured lending a more effective contracting tool.
We also find greater use of collateral in countries with more legal formalism, and where
there is a higher risk of government expropriation (i.e. weak property rights), although these
results are again weaker in Panel B. The coefficient on property rights protection in Panel A
implies that a standard deviation increase in property rights protection comes with about a 15
percentage-point decline in the probability that a loan is secured.
The maturity of banks loans also appears to be shaped by the contracting environment
(Table 5, columns 3 and 4 in Panels A and B). We find that stronger creditor rights, in particular
creditors’ ability to seize collateral, are associated with longer term lending, and the coefficient is
again large economically. From Panel B and using the example from above, the coefficient on
creditors’ ability to take collateral suggests that loan maturity would be about 25 percent longer in
the U.K. compared to Mexico. We also find that increased risk of corruption or expropriation of
property by governments is associated with shorter term lending.
Somewhat to our surprise, we find a positive link from legal formalism to loan maturity.
One potential explanation may be that legal formalism acts as a broader measure of contracting
costs beyond just the ex-post enforcement costs associated with adjudicating a dispute in the
courts. Thus, writing longer-term contracts (increasing loan maturity) may help minimize costs by
reducing the likelihood of rewriting contracts and enforcing them through courts. The greater use

22

of collateral in countries where legal formalism is high may be the means by which lenders protect
themselves against the greater risk of lending long term.22
In the last two columns of Table 5, we test how the pricing of loans reflects the countrylevel legal and institutional variables.23 We find almost no impact of any of the legal or
institutional variables on the loan interest rate except for creditors’ rights/ability to seize collateral.
This suggests that the contracting tools emphasized above – ownership, collateral and maturity –
seem to be affected more by the contracting environment than the price. This non-result, we
argue, is quite striking given the strong links found with non-price terms of loans. Recall that
where government risk is high, banks loans tend to be secured and they tend to have shorter
maturity. The fact that we find no effect of government risk on loan prices suggests that these
non-price contracting tools allow banks to control this risk effectively. This does not mean that
borrowers face no costs of operating where government expropriation is more likely, because
collateral is costly for them. However, it reflects a kind of “Coasian” effect whereby contracting
can help offset, if not fully remove, some of the impediments to investment from poor institutions.
While institutional variables do not affect interest rates, creditors’ ability to take collateral
in default does have a significant impact on the cost of capital. From Table 5 Panel B, and using
the same example one more time, interest rate spreads on loans are about 38% higher in Mexico
compared to the U.K. Taken with our earlier results, we can now describe how creditor rights
regarding their ability to take collateral shape loan contracts, a central result of our paper: With
strong rights, creditors concentrate their holdings, are more apt to use collateral, lend on a long-

22

The results on loan maturity are robust when we re-run the regressions by 1-digit SIC of borrowers. For example,
creditor rights and legal formalism both enter positively and significant in six out of seven segments (negative but
insignificant for 1 segment).
23

Since most of the loans in the sample are float-rate loans and the interest rates are measured by the mark-up over
LIBOR, term-structure factors should not affect our results. As mentioned above, since interest rates on loans made to
Asian countries are structured differently, we drop Asian loans in our interest rate regressions.
23

term basis, and charge lower rates. How do lenders cope with weak legal protection, where
collateral is less useful to control borrowers? Our results suggest that loan ownership
concentration is reduced (thus reducing the strategic default problem and facilitating
diversification of risk across lenders), maturity is shortened (thus effectively putting borrowers on
a short leash), and interest rate is higher (thus pricing for the possible losses in default).24 Finally,
from Panel B we can see that the other dimension of the creditor rights, i.e., their ability to oust
management, does not seem to affect any of the loan contract terms. The difference between the
two dimensions of creditor rights may stem from the fact that in our sample of syndicated loans,
foreign banks, which play leading roles in the syndicate, should be much more concerned about
whether they can take and sell loan collateral than oust an incompetent manager in countries with
very different institutional and economic background from their own.
In Table 6, we add the ownership terms as right-hand-side variables in the loan contract
regressions. Adding loan ownership has little effect on the links from the legal and institutional
variables to the loan terms. However, ownership itself is significantly correlated with collateral
and pricing of loans. For example, loan concentration is strongly associated with collateral,
whereas the participation of domestic banks is strongly related to pricing. Loans with a greater
number of participating banks are more likely to be secured. A one standard deviation increase in
the number of participating banks increases the probability that a loan is secured by about 7
percentage points. This suggests a complementarity between two control mechanisms: collateral
(to raise the direct cost associated with default to borrowers) along with diffuse ownership (to
raise the deadweight costs associated with default, thus preventing strategic default).

24

There are additional tools for lenders to overcome poor protection of creditor rights. For example, Siegel (2004)
shows that Mexican firms that cross list in New York (voluntarily) follow U.S. securities laws and protect investors
beyond what is required in Mexico. Jappelli and Pagano (2002) examine private credit bureaus and public credit
registers and find that better information sharing leads to more bank lending and lower defaults.
24

Participation in a loan by domestic banks is also very strongly correlated with the loan
interest rate.25 A standard deviation increase in this percentage (41 percentage points) comes with
an eight to 12 percent reduction in the loan interest rate (the all-in spread). This decline suggests
that domestic banks have an advantage relative to foreign banks in overcoming information and
control problems. With asymmetric information, uninformed foreign banks may require higher
loan interest rates when relatively well-informed domestic banks are unwilling to fund a
significant portion of the deal.26 According to this adverse selection explanation, most opaque
borrowers will be served by domestic banks to avoid paying this ‘lemons’ discount. And, there is
some evidence for this allocation of borrowers to banks in our results. For example, the models in
Table 4, where we explain domestic bank ownership share with country and borrower
characteristics, suggest that rated firms (i.e. transparent firms) are more likely to be served by
foreign banks. The share of loans held by local banks is 11 percentage points lower for B-rated
firms relative to unrated firms (coefficients not reported in Table 4).27 Mian (2004) finds similar
patterns in Pakistan.

25

We also find a negative relation between shares held by government banks and interest rates, although this result is
not statistically significant. LLS (2002) find that government ownership of banks slows down economic growth,
while Sapienza (2004) finds that state-owned banks in Italy charge lower interest rates to firms with political
connections with the banks.
26

However, since we only observe contract terms at the loan closing date, we cannot compare the subsequent
performance of the loans. La Porta et al. (2003) examine related lending in Mexico (banks lend to firms controlled by
banks’ owners) and find that related loans have lower interest rates, are less likely to post collateral, more likely to
default and have lower recovery rates, compared to unrelated ones.
27

In fact, relative to unrated firms, the percentage held by domestic banks is 13 points lower for AAA rated firms, 3
points lower for AA rated firms, 8 points lower for A rated firms, 13 points lower for BBB rated firms, 14 points
lower for BB rated firms, and 11 points lower for firms with B rating or below.

25

Rated v. Unrated Borrowers
Tables 7 through 9 report the same set of regressions for rated and unrated borrowers.28
These results suggest that the effects of most of the legal variables are greater for the unrated firms
than for rated firms. For example, creditor rights are not related to ownership concentration
(column 2, Table 7) or maturity (column 4, Tables 8 and 9) for the rated borrowers. Similarly,
legal formalism is strongly related to loan maturity (column 3, Tables 8 and 9) only for the unrated
borrowers.29 This makes sense because large and rated companies may have greater freedom than
unrated companies to move their financial business around the world and thus find favorable
contracting environments. In contrast, government risk appears to affect loan ownership (Table 7)
to both rated and unrated firms.
We also find two interesting difference across these sets of borrowers, both related to legal
formalism. First, formalism is positively related to the domestic ownership share to unrated firms
but negatively related to the domestic share for rated borrowers (columns 5 and 6, Table 7). Thus,
foreign lenders seem to avoid lending to unrated and presumably relatively opaque firms in
countries where legal formalism is high. Our interpretation of this result is that domestic lenders
have an especially big comparative advantage for unrated borrowers where legal formalism is
high. The reason is that local banks have the ability to restructure loans without access to the legal
system, whereas foreign lenders do not have this ability (Mian, 2004). The fact that foreign
lenders hold a greater share of loans to rated borrowers where legal formalism is high indicates
some substitution away from domestic banks for larger and rated firms in countries where the
domestic banking system specializes in lending to unrated firms. Second, the interest rate on loans

28

We do not have enough observations on collateral to estimate the probit model for the rated firms alone. Results for
unrated loans are not sensitive to dropping firm control variables used in Tables 4 through 6.
29

However, separating the sample into secured and unsecured lending does not change the positive link from legal
formalism to maturity.
26

to rated borrowers increases with legal formalism, but interest rates are unrelated to formalism for
unrated borrowers (columns 5 and 6, Tables 8 and 9). In contrast to unrated borrowers (served by
local banks), rated borrowers bear the cost of the legal system because their foreign lenders have
to rely on the courts to collect on bad loans.
IV. Conclusions
In this paper we examine how legal origin, creditor and property rights, the quality of the
courts, and economic and financial development affect the design of bank loan contracts across a
wide cross section of countries. Our results support the law and finance view that private
contracts reflect differences in legal protection of creditors and properties, as well as the cost of
writing and enforcing contracts. In particular, we find that secured lending is less common in
countries with undeveloped financial markets and weak protection of creditor rights. At the same
time, weak protection of creditor rights, in particular creditors’ rights to seize collateral, comes
with greater diffusion of loan ownership, shorter term lending, and higher interest rates. Thus, we
can begin to paint a clearer picture of why creditor rights are important in generating good
financial outcomes. With them, lenders can control borrowers with collateral because they know
they will be able to take assets, or credibly threaten to take assets, ex post in default. Collateral is
probably even more useful where economic and financial development allows assets to be
liquidated, as we find more secured lending in countries with higher income per capita. In
contrast, lenders resort to diffuse ownership, short maturity, and higher interest rates to control
borrowers in countries where creditor rights are weak.
Our results also suggest that contracting costs, as measured by legal formalism, shape the
terms of bank loans. Where legal formalism is high, domestic banks are the main lender to
unrated firms. In these environments, loan maturity tends to be longer (to reduce contracting

27

costs) while the use of collateral tends to be more common (to reduce risk). We do not find,
however, that interest rates reflect legal formalism for unrated borrowers. For rated borrowers,
legal formalism is associated with a greater role of foreign banks. For these borrowers, interest
rates do increase significantly with legal formalism. This pricing relationship, we argue, reflects
foreign banks’ greater reliance on the legal system to collect on defaulted loans.
As a final caveat, we only explore empirically the terms of loans actually made; borrower
access to credit may be limited where property rights and corruption are most problematic.
Studying credit access may require more detailed firm-level data than is currently available across
a wide range of countries.

28

Appendix: Brief Descriptions of All the Variables and Their Sources

A.1. Legal Variables

Variables

Description

Sources

Legal Origin

Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial code of
each country
Equals 1 if the reorganization procedure imposes restrictions, such as
creditors consent; it equals 0 otherwise

Reynolds and Flores
(1989), LLSV (1998)
Bankruptcy and
reorganization laws;
LLSV (1998)
Bankruptcy and
reorganization laws;
LLSV (1998)

Restrictions for
going into
reorganization
No automatic stay
on secured assets

Secured creditors
first

Management does
not stay

Creditor rights
Index

Equals 1 if the reorganization procedure does not impose an
automatic stay on the assets of the firm on filing the reorganization
petition. Automatic stay prevents secured creditors from gaining
possession of their security. It equals zero if such a restriction does
exist in the law
Equals 1 if secured creditors are ranked first in the distribution of the
proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt
firm. Equals zero if nonsecured creditors, such as the government and
workers, are given absolute priority
Equals 1 when an official appointed by the court, or by the creditors,
is responsible for the operation of the business during reorganization.
Equivalently, this variable equals one if the debtor does not keep the
administration of its property pending the resolution of the
reorganization process. Equals zero otherwise
An index aggregating different creditor rights. The index is formed by
adding “1” when: (1) the country imposes restrictions, such as
creditors' consent or minimum dividends to file for reorganization; (2)
secured creditors are able to gain possession of their security once the
reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay); (3)
secured creditors are ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds
that result from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt firm; and
(4) the debtor does not retain the administration of its property
pending the resolution of the reorganization. The index ranges from
zero to four.

Bankruptcy and
reorganization laws;
LLSV (1998)
Bankruptcy and
reorganization laws;
LLSV (1998)

Bankruptcy and
reorganization laws;
LLSV (1998)

Secondary source: LLSV(1997, 1998)

29

A.2. Institutional Variables

Variables
Check-based
Legal
Formalism

Property Rights
Index

Corruption

Definition

Original Source

The Index measures substantive and procedural statutory
intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial courts,
and is formed by adding up these indices: 1) professionals
vs. laymen; 2) written vs. oral elements; 3) legal
justification; 4) statutory regulation of evidence; 5) control
of superior review; 6) engagement formalities; 7)
independent procedural actions.
Variables includes freedom from government influence
over the judicial system, commercial code defining
contracts, sanctioning of foreign arbitration of contract
disputes, government expropriation of property, corruption
within the judiciary, delays in receiving judicial decisions,
and legally granted and protected private property.
ICR's assessment of the corruption in government. Lower
scores indicate that "high government officials are likely to
demand special payments" and "illegal payments are
generally expected throughout lower levels of government"
in the form of "bribes connected with import and export
licenses, tax assessment, policy protection, etc." Average of
the months of April and October of the monthly index
between 1982 and 1995. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower
scores for higher levels of corruption (we changed the scale
from its original" range going from zero to six)

Survey of Lex Mundi/Lex
Africa association of law
firms; DLLS (2003), and
details available at
http://iicg.som.yale.edu/

2000 Index of Economic
Freedom (Heritage
Foundation)

International Country Risk
Guide; LLSV (1998)

A.3. Miscellaneous Country-level Variables
Variable
Economic
Development

Description

Financial
Development

Average of Log (per capita GDP) over the period 1994-2002;
measures a country’s overall economic status (developed vs.
developing countries)
Claims on private sector by banks as share of
GDP, averaged over the 1994 to 1997 period

Percentage
change in GDP

Percent change in GDP in two adjacent years, measuring
business cycle of a country

Sources
World Bank

Demirguc-Kunt and Levine
(2000)
World Bank

30

References:
1. Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2003. “Unbundling Institutions: Law vs. Politics,” working
paper, MIT.
2. ____, ____, and James Robinson, 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91 (5), 1369-1401.
3. ____, ____, and ____, 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the
Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1231-1294.
4. Aggarwal, Reena, Leora Klapper, and Peter Wysocki, 2003. “Portfolio Preferences of Foreign
Institutional Investors,” working paper, Georgetown University.
5. Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian, 2004. “Law, finance, and economic growth in China,”
forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
6. Bae, Kee-Hong and Vidhan K. Ghoyal, 2003, “Property Rights Protection and Bank Loan Pricing,”
mimeo, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
7. Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2003a. “Law, Endowments, and Finance,”
Journal of Financial Economics 70, 137-181.
8. ____, ____, and ____, 2003b. “Law and Finance: Why Does Legal Origin Matter?” Journal of
Comparative Economics 31, 653-675.
9. ____, ____, and ____, 2003c. “Law and Firms’ Access to Finance,” working paper, working paper,
University of Minnesota.
10. Bergman, Nittai, and Daniel Nicolaievsky, 2003, “Investor Protection and the Coasian View,” working
paper, Harvard University.
11. Bolton, Patrick and David Scharfstein, 1996, “Optimal Debt Contracts and the Number of Creditors,”
Journal of Political Economy 104, 1-25.
12. Coase, Ronald, 1937. “The nature of firm,” Economica, Vol. 4, 386-405.
13. ____, 1960. “The problem of social cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 3, 1-44.
14. Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, 2002. Financial Structure and Economic Growth: Crosscountry Comparisons of Banks, Markets, and Development, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
15. ____, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of Finance 53,
2107-37.
16. Diamond, Douglas, 2004, “Committing to Commit: Short-term Debt When Enforcement is Costly,”
AFA Presidential Address.
17. Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andre Shleifer, 2002. “Regulation
of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.
18. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 2003. “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 453-517.
31

19. Esty, Benjamin, 2004, “When do Foreign Banks Finance Domestic Projects? New Evidence on the
Importance of Legal and Financial Systems,” mimeo, Harvard Business School.
20. ____, and Megginson, William L., 2003, “Creditor Rights, Enforcement, and Debt Ownership
Structure: Evidence from the Global Syndicated Loan Market,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 38, 37-59.
21. Giannetti, Mariassunta, 2003. “Do Better Institutions Mitigate Agency Problems? Evidence from
Corporate Finance Choices,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 185-212.
22. Hayek, Friedrich, 1960. The Constitution of Liberty, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
23. Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano, 2002. “Information Sharing, Lending and Defaults: Cross-country
Evidence,” Journal of Banking and Finance 26.
24. ____, ____, and Magda Bianco, 2002. “Courts and Banks: Effects of Judicial Enforcement on Credit
Markets,” forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
25. Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1996. “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3), 639-70.
26. Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, 2002. “Property rights and finance,”
American Economic Review 92, 1335-1356.
27. Kaplan, Steven, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg, 2003, “How do Legal Differences and Learning
affect Financial Contracts?” NBER Working Paper no. 10097.
28. King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108 (3), 717-738.
29. La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999. “Corporate Ownership
Around the World,” Journal of Finance 54 (2), 471-517.
30. ____, ____, and ____, 2002. “Government Ownership of Banks,” Journal of Finance 57 (1), 265-302.
31. ____, ____, ____, and Robert Vishny, 1997. “Legal determinants of external finance,” Journal of
Finance 52, 1131-1150.
32. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
33. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 1999, “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 15, 222-279.
34. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 2000a, “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance,” Journal of
Financial Economics 58 (1-2).
35. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 2000b, “Agency Problems and Dividend Policy Around the World,”
Journal of Finance 55 (1), 1-34.
36. ____, ____, ____, and ____, 2002. “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance
57, 1147-1170.

32

37. ____, ____, and Guillermo Zamarripa, 2003. “Related Lending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(1), 231-268.
38. Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, 2004, “Does Legal Enforcement Affect Financial Transactions?
The Contractual Channel in Private Equity,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
39. Levine, Ross, 1999. “Law, finance, and economic growth,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 8, 3667.
40. ____, and Sara Zervos, 1998. “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American Economic
Review 88, 537-558.
41. McKinnon, R., 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. Brookings Institution Press.
42. Mian, Atif, 2004, “Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor Economies,” mimeo,
University of Chicago.
43. Norton, Joseph J., 1997, “International Syndicated Lending and Economic Development in Latin
America: The Legal Context,” London Institute of International Banking & Development Law.
44. Ongena, Steven, and David Smith, 2000. “What Determines the Number of Bank Relationships? Crosscountry Evidence,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 9 (1), 26-56.
45. Petersen, Mitch, and Raghuram Rajan, 1994. “The benefits of firm-creditor relationships: Evidence
from small-business data,” Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.
46. Posner, Richard A., 1973. Economic Analysis of the Law, Little-Brown, Boston, MA.
47. Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic
Review 88, 559-87.
48. Rossi, Stefano, and Paolo Volpin, 2004. “Cross-country Determinants of Mergers and Acquisitions,”
Journal of Financial Economics 74, 277-304.
49. Sapienza, Paola, 2004. “The Effects of Government Ownership on Bank Lending,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 72, 357-384.
50. Siegel, Jordan, 2004. “Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities
Laws?” forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
51. Strahan, Phillip, 1999. “Borrower Risk and the Price and Nonprice Terms of Bank Loans,” working
paper, Banking studies function, New York Fed.
52. Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson, 2003. “Culture, openness, and finance,” forthcoming, Journal of
Financial Economics 70, 261-300.
53. Sufi, Amir, 2004, “Agency and Renegotiation in Corporate Finance: Evidence from Syndicated
Loans,” mimeo, MIT.

33

Table 1
Summary Statistics for Loan-Level Variables
Summary statistics on the loan terms by the legal origin of the borrower country are presented here. The
source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample of loans including those originated in 1994 through
the middle of 2003. Loans from to firms in financial or regulated industries, as well a public sector loans,
are dropped.
Groups of Countries (by legal origins)
English Legal Origin
Number of Lenders
Percent held by Government Banks
Percent held by Domestic Banks
One if Secured
Maturity (Months)
Drawn All-in Spread (BPS over LIBOR)
Loan Size (MM$s)

Mean
(1)
5.1
5.2
29.3
0.33
61
164
176

Standard
Deviation
(2)
6.6
16.2
36.9
41
113
444

Number of
Loans
(3)
8,957
8,957
8,957
4,123
7,652
2,018
8,957

French Legal Origin
Number of Lenders
Percent held by Government Banks
Percent held by Domestic Banks
One if Secured
Maturity (Months)
Drawn All-in Spread (BPS over LIBOR)
Loan Size (MM$s)

7.4
5.9
30.6
0.59
66
180
160

8.4
17.2
36.4
42
120
376

5,427
5,427
5,427
1,538
4,542
2,655
5,427

German Legal Origin
Number of Lenders
Percent held by Government Banks
Percent held by Domestic Banks
One if Secured
Maturity (Months)
Drawn All-in Spread (BPS over LIBOR)
Loan Size (MM$s)

6.0
6.7
70.7
0.27
50
170
159

6.9
15.7
38.9
35
114
468

5,526
5,526
5,526
2,062
5,242
657
5,526

Scandinavian Legal Origin
Number of Lenders
Percent held by Government Banks
Percent held by Domestic Banks
One if Secured
Maturity (Months)
Drawn All-in Spread (BPS over LIBOR)
Loan Size (MM$s)

6.9
12.5
20.2
0.75
72
164
224

7.3
19.8
29.0
48
135
456

372
372
372
36
274
215
372

Socialist Legal Origin
Number of Lenders
Percent held by Government Banks
Percent held by Domestic Banks
One if Secured
Maturity (Months)
Drawn All-in Spread (BPS over LIBOR)
Loan Size (MM$s)

5.3
21.5
9.6
0.49
62
230
133

5.3
32.4
23.1
43
147
491

1,086
1,086
1,086
472
873
268
1,086

34

Table 2
Summary Statistics for Country-Level Variables
Summary statistics for (borrower) country-level variables across five legal-origin groupings are presented
here. The mean for each variable is obtained by taking the simple average of the scores/index of the group
countries. Detailed descriptions and sources for the variables are presented in Appendix A.1.
Groups of Countries (by legal origins)
English Legal Origin
Property Rights (1 to 5, 5 means best protection of property)
Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism (1 to 7, 7 means most formal)
Creditor Rights (0 to 4, 4 means greatest level of creditor protection)
Corruption (1 to 10, 10 means least corrupt)

Mean
(1)
3.92
2.75
2.46
5.70

Standard
Deviation
(2)
0.94
0.85
1.04
2.53

Number of
Countries
(3)
36
34
28
33

French Legal Origin
Property Rights (1 to 5, 5 means best protection of property)
Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism (1 to 7, 7 means most formal)
Creditor Rights (0 to 4, 4 means greatest level of creditor protection)
Corruption (1 to 10, 10 means least corrupt)

3.24
4.29
1.43
5.24

0.95
1.01
1.05
1.84

49
40
46
51

German Legal Origin
Property Rights (1 to 5, 5 means best protection of property)
Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism (1 to 7, 7 means most formal)
Creditor Rights (0 to 4, 4 means greatest level of creditor protection)
Corruption (1 to 10, 10 means least corrupt)

5.00
3.15
2.00
8.03

0.00
0.44
1.00
1.68

5
6
5
6

Scandinavian Legal Origin
Property Rights (1 to 5, 5 means best protection of property)
Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism (1 to 7, 7 means most formal)
Creditor Rights (0 to 4, 4 means greatest level of creditor protection)
Corruption (1 to 10, 10 means least corrupt)

4.80
3.15
1.75
10.00

0.45
0.59
0.96
0.00

5
5
4
5

Socialist Legal Origin
Property Rights (1 to 5, 5 means best protection of property)
Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism (1 to 7, 7 means most formal)
Creditor Rights (0 to 4, 4 means greatest level of creditor protection)
Corruption (1 to 10, 10 mean least corrupt)

2.76
3.98
2.13
6.23

0.94
0.49
0.97
1.13

21
15
23
9

35

Table 3
Correlation Matrix of Firm Characteristics and Legal and Institutional Variables
This table reports the Pearson correlation coefficient between three firm characteristics from Worldscope with four
legal and institutional variables which are the focus of our regressions. The sample of firms all appear on both
Dealscan and Worldscope, and was selected in a stratified random sample (by country, with a maximum of 20 firms
per country) subject to this data constraint. The table contains the correlation, the p-value in parentheses, and the
number of observations in square brackets.

Firm Characteristic:
Firm Size Log of Market
Capitalization

Profitability Net Income / Assets

Leverage Total Debt /
Assets

Property Rights

0.09
(0.06)
[386]

-0.03
(0.56)
[404]

-0.03
(0.56)
[405]

Check-Based Index of Legal Formalism

-0.06
(0.25)
[402]

0.06
(0.25)
[420]

0.06
(0.25)
[421]

Creditor Rights

-0.01
(0.84)
[402]

-0.06
(0.18)
[420]

-0.07
(0.18)
[421]

Corruption

0.33
(0.00)
[401]

-0.01
(0.88)
[419]

-0.01
(0.88)
[420]

36

Table 4
Regressions Relating Loan Ownership to Country Characteristics

Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are
clustered by borrower country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency,
and an indicator for multinational companies. The source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample
of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003. Loans to firms in financial or
regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without firm
controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Firm Controls Included?
R-squared
Estimation Technique

Log of
Number of Lenders
(1)
(2)
0.219
0.273
(3.76)** (6.08)**
0.170
(5.28)**
0.220
0.258
(2.03)*
(2.48)*
0.252
0.279
(1.96)*
(1.92)*
-0.166
-0.035
(1.09)
(0.21)
0.054
-0.027
(0.31)
(0.15)
-0.150
-0.146
(2.49)*
(2.16)*
0.001
-0.067
(0.01)
(0.80)
0.002
0.003
(0.75)
(1.49)
-0.064
-0.067
(1.62)
(1.58)
0.030
0.021
(0.52)
(0.31)
0.081
0.099
(0.94)
(1.07)
0.066
0.087
(1.77)*
(2.28)*
11,083
11,083
57
57
Yes
No
0.21
0.15
OLS
OLS

Share Held by
Government Banks
(3)
(4)
-0.949
-0.942
(1.87)*
(1.73)*
-0.329
(1.33)
1.234
1.465
(0.64)
(0.74)
2.894
3.204
(1.06)
(1.13)
12.043
12.248
(4.67)** (4.64)**
13.869
14.056
(3.22)** (3.16)**
-2.951
-2.942
(2.55)*
(2.37)*
-1.084
-0.952
(0.47)
(0.39)
-0.016
-0.016
(0.31)
(0.31)
0.342
0.425
(0.45)
(0.52)
-0.034
-0.033
(0.04)
(0.04)
3.266
3.135
(1.90)*
(1.73)*
-0.414
-0.449
(0.65)
(0.68)
11,083
11,083
57
57
Yes
No
0.09
0.09
OLS
OLS

Share held by
Domestic Banks
(5)
(6)
3.353
2.282
(2.76)**
(1.46)
-3.685
(6.06)**
-12.936 -13.979
(1.70)*
(1.66)*
13.513
11.493
(2.16)*
(1.74)*
-10.906 -18.792
(1.11)
(1.81)*
-26.847 -26.816
(3.46)** (3.26)**
3.179
2.277
(0.67)
(0.44)
17.703
20.108
(3.10)** (3.27)**
-0.098
-0.142
(0.82)
(1.03)
-2.614
-2.350
(0.97)
(0.77)
9.272
10.045
(2.97)** (3.07)**
-8.640
-8.940
(1.88)*
(1.74)*
1.491
1.585
(0.55)
(0.55)
11,083
11,083
57
57
Yes
No
0.29
0.26
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

37

Table 5
Regressions Relating Loan Contract Terms to Country Characteristics

Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are
clustered by borrower country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency,
and an indicator for multinational companies. The source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample
of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003. Loans to firms in financial or
regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without firm
controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.
Panel A: Single Creditor Rights Index (ranging from 0 to 4)

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Firm Controls Included?
R-squared (pseudo for probits)
Estimation Technique

Secured Indicator
(1)
(2)
-0.013
-0.023
(0.42)
(0.66)
-0.037
(2.87)**
0.102
0.096
(1.21)
(1.06)
-0.308
-0.314
(3.59)**
(3.29)**
0.347
0.375
(2.24)*
(2.63)**
-0.230
-0.221
(3.85)**
(3.58)**
0.085
0.090
(1.77)*
(1.89)*
0.172
0.168
(1.90)*
(1.76)*
0.000
0.001
(0.25)
(0.52)
0.081
0.077
(2.67)**
(2.40)*
0.076
0.077
(2.61)**
(2.48)*
-0.213
-0.210
(4.69)**
(4.70)**
-0.023
-0.026
(0.76)
(0.83)
4,474
4,474
46
46
Yes
No
0.23
0.2
Probit
Probit

Log of Maturity in
Months
(3)
(4)
-0.544
-0.549
(4.09)**
(4.07)**
0.005
(0.25)
-0.012
-0.025
(0.14)
(0.28)
-0.198
-0.203
(1.69)*
(1.77)*
-0.176
-0.200
(1.71)*
(1.80)*
-0.196
-0.205
(1.52)
(1.59)
-0.061
-0.059
(1.33)
(1.28)
-0.120
-0.125
(1.45)
(1.62)
0.002
0.002
(1.29)
(1.28)
0.095
0.092
(3.04)**
(3.04)**
0.133
0.136
(4.50)**
(4.64)**
0.032
0.034
(0.68)
(0.72)
0.093
0.095
(3.16)**
(3.42)**
9,578
9,578
57
57
Yes
No
0.33
0.32
OLS
OLS

Log of Drawn All-in
Spread
(5)
(6)
-0.302
-0.378
(6.00)**
(5.87)**
-0.154
(8.15)**
-0.080
-0.080
(0.56)
(0.51)
0.012
-0.057
(0.10)
(0.45)
-0.108
-0.200
(0.64)
(1.14)
-0.376
-0.355
(1.42)
(1.18)
-0.221
-0.203
(1.48)
(1.13)
0.027
-0.007
(0.17)
(0.05)
0.004
0.004
(0.97)
(1.05)
-0.018
0.007
(0.38)
(0.14)
-0.027
-0.016
(0.26)
(0.15)
0.005
-0.044
(0.04)
(0.31)
-0.045
-0.044
(0.48)
(0.41)
3,608
3,608
42
42
Yes
No
0.52
0.43
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

38

Table 5 (continued)
Regressions Relating Loan Contract Terms to Country Characteristics

Panel B: Two Creditor Rights Indices (each ranging from 0 to 2)

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights: ability to oust management
Creditors' rights: ability to take collateral
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Firm Controls Included?
R-squared (pseudo for probits)
Estimation Technique

Secured Indicator
(1)
(2)
-0.004
-0.015
(0.14)
(0.46)
-0.038
(2.86)**
0.289
0.273
(2.88)** (2.62)**
-0.232
-0.239
(2.78)** (2.64)**
0.338
0.355
(2.25)* (2.62)**
0.038
0.046
(0.83)
(1.00)
0.042
0.035
(0.53)
(0.41)
0.001
0.001
(0.28)
(0.53)
0.037
0.042
(0.97)
(0.99)
0.126
0.123
(2.55)*
(2.27)*
0.034
0.040
(1.44)
(1.72)
-0.080
-0.078
(1.37)
(1.27)
0.008
0.004
(0.27)
(0.14)
4,286
4,286
38
38
Yes
No
0.24
0.22
Probit
Probit

Log of Maturity in
Months
(3)
(4)
-0.526
-0.532
(3.88)** (3.84)**
0.001
(0.05)
0.003
-0.018
(0.04)
(0.20)
-0.206
-0.216
(1.89)*
(2.02)*
-0.246
-0.285
(2.44)*
(2.52)*
-0.088
-0.086
(1.74)*
(1.70)*
-0.144
-0.141
(1.71)*
(1.75)*
0.003
0.003
(1.61)
(1.60)
-0.018
-0.022
(0.42)
(0.49)
0.128
0.125
(2.69)*
(2.68)*
0.092
0.097
(2.32)*
(2.38)*
0.086
0.081
(1.59)
(1.49)
0.106
0.106
(3.79)** (4.06)**
9,222
9,222
42
42
Yes
No
0.33
0.32
OLS
OLS

Log of Drawn All-in
Spread
(5)
(6)
-0.291
-0.367
(5.36)** (5.32)**
-0.153
(7.93)**
-0.352
-0.357
(2.61)*
(2.48)*
-0.091
-0.156
(0.90)
(1.48)
-0.295
-0.393
(1.78)*
(2.68)*
-0.402
-0.421
(2.98)** (2.95)**
-0.027
-0.058
(0.15)
(0.35)
0.003
0.004
(0.84)
(1.08)
-0.026
0.016
(0.28)
(0.19)
-0.191
-0.188
(2.09)*
(2.02)*
0.076
0.109
(0.72)
(1.10)
0.161
0.133
(1.05)
(0.80)
0.008
0.023
(0.09)
(0.29)
3,494
3,494
30
30
Yes
No
0.54
0.46
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

39

Table 6
Regressions Relating Loan Contract Terms to Country Characteristics

With Loan Ownership Variables Included as Regressors
Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are clustered by borrower
country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency, and an indicator for multinational companies. The
source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003.
Loans to firms in financial or regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without
firm controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
Log of Number of Lenders
Share held by Government Banks
Share held by Domestic Banks
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Firm Controls Included?
R-squared (pseudo for probits)
Estimation Technique

Secured Indicator
(1)
(2)
-0.041
-0.046
(1.71)
(1.62)
-0.047
(3.13)**
0.066
0.053
(3.02)**
(2.99)**
0.000
0.000
(0.62)
(0.48)
0.000
0.000
(0.17)
(0.67)
0.091
0.090
(1.08)
(1.00)
-0.315
-0.321
(3.70)**
(3.38)**
0.369
0.394
(2.30)*
(2.69)**
-0.236
-0.221
(3.58)**
(3.18)**
0.091
0.093
(1.91)*
(1.85)*
0.179
0.172
(1.87)*
(1.70)*
0.000
0.001
(0.12)
(0.41)
0.090
0.085
(3.02)**
(2.70)**
0.074
0.072
(2.46)*
(2.25)*
-0.223
-0.215
(4.88)**
(4.62)**
-0.025
-0.028
(0.80)
(0.91)
4,474
4,474
46
46
Yes
No
0.24
0.21
Probit
Probit

Log of Maturity in
Months
(3)
(4)
-0.546
-0.551
(4.08)** (4.07)**
0.005
(0.24)
0.012
0.012
(1.00)
(1.03)
0.002
0.002
(1.80)*
(1.69)*
0.001
0.001
(1.58)
(1.63)
-0.010
-0.022
(0.11)
(0.25)
-0.215
-0.219
(1.93)*
(2.01)*
-0.191
-0.210
(1.86)*
(1.90)*
-0.204
-0.210
(1.59)
(1.62)
-0.055
-0.053
(1.20)
(1.16)
-0.127
-0.134
(1.60)
(1.78)*
0.002
0.002
(1.33)
(1.33)
0.097
0.094
(3.13)** (3.12)**
0.128
0.130
(4.28)** (4.37)**
0.028
0.031
(0.63)
(0.67)
0.092
0.093
(3.24)** (3.47)**
9,578
9,578
57
57
Yes
No
0.33
0.32
OLS
OLS

Log of Drawn All-in
Spread
(5)
(6)
-0.303
-0.367
(6.09)**
(6.12)**
-0.162
(8.15)**
-0.016
-0.101
(1.41)
(6.69)**
-0.003
-0.002
(1.42)
(0.93)
-0.003
-0.002
(4.53)**
(2.66)*
-0.066
-0.066
(0.52)
(0.46)
0.077
0.015
(0.75)
(0.13)
-0.146
-0.243
(0.93)
(1.37)
-0.421
-0.396
(1.77)*
(1.39)
-0.168
-0.180
(1.32)
(1.10)
-0.038
-0.061
(0.27)
(0.39)
0.003
0.004
(0.94)
(1.14)
-0.009
0.003
(0.21)
(0.07)
-0.023
-0.025
(0.24)
(0.24)
-0.026
-0.053
(0.22)
(0.39)
-0.031
-0.030
(0.39)
(0.31)
3,608
3,608
42
42
Yes
No
0.53
0.45
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

40

Table 7
Regressions Relating Loan Ownership to Country Characteristics

Rated vs. Unrated Borrowers
Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are
clustered by borrower country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency,
and an indicator for multinational companies. The source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample
of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003. Loans to firms in financial or
regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without firm
controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Rated?
R-squared
Estimation Technique

Log of
Number of Lenders
(1)
(2)
0.207
0.180
(3.34)**
(4.41)**
0.155
0.337
(5.10)**
(14.48)**
0.227
0.032
(2.15)*
(0.11)
0.212
0.377
(1.74)*
(1.93)*
-0.204
-0.277
(1.31)
(0.83)
0.063
-1.003
(0.35)
(1.91)
-0.138
-0.363
(2.30)*
(1.54)
0.022
-0.297
(0.26)
(1.64)
0.001
0.017
(0.48)
(2.65)*
-0.073
0.006
(1.82)*
(0.07)
0.037
0.145
(0.61)
(0.80)
0.082
-0.008
(0.91)
(0.05)
0.063
0.264
(1.75)*
(2.34)*
10,324
759
57
32
No
Yes
0.16
0.43
OLS
OLS

Share Held by
Government Banks
(3)
(4)
-1.009
-0.297
(2.02)*
(0.23)
-0.308
-0.882
(1.19)
(2.33)*
1.341
-1.460
(0.68)
(0.44)
2.538
4.197
(0.87)
(1.74)*
13.164
6.030
(4.99)**
(1.08)
14.079
10.720
(3.18)**
(1.48)
-2.911
-2.189
(2.42)*
(0.90)
-0.869
-2.140
(0.37)
(0.80)
-0.022
0.129
(0.41)
(1.37)
0.395
-0.001
(0.50)
(0.01)
-0.009
0.569
(0.01)
(0.35)
3.329
1.881
(1.88)*
(0.78)
-0.486
0.465
(0.71)
(0.21)
10,324
759
57
32
No
Yes
0.09
0.16
OLS
OLS

Share held by
Domestic Banks
(5)
(6)
3.488
-3.518
(2.49)*
(2.00)*
-3.656
-1.917
(5.61)** (2.57)*
-13.489
9.837
(1.74)*
(1.55)
14.384
16.729
(2.15)* (4.59)**
-10.139
-8.585
(1.00)
(1.09)
-28.084
-2.550
(3.65)**
(0.22)
3.314
13.946
(0.69)
(2.41)*
18.213
-12.540
(3.25)**
(1.61)
-0.067
-0.275
(0.55)
(1.35)
-2.891
3.688
(1.10)
(2.12)*
9.614
-7.286
(3.26)** (2.75)**
-9.263
-6.769
(1.98)*
(2.49)*
1.464
-0.451
(0.54)
(0.13)
10,324
759
57
32
No
Yes
0.3
0.29
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

41

Table 8
Regressions Relating Loan Contract Terms to Country Characteristics

Rated vs. Unrated Borrowers
Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are
clustered by borrower country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency,
and an indicator for multinational companies. The source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample
of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003. Loans to firms in financial or
regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without firm
controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Rated?
R-squared (pseudo for probits)
Estimation Technique

Secured Indicator
(1)
(2)
-0.017
(0.51)
-0.035
(2.77)**
0.097
(1.05)
-0.309
(3.44)**
0.302
(1.89)*
-0.227
(3.98)**
0.093
(1.82)*
0.164
(1.73)*
0.001
(0.64)
0.063
(1.92)*
0.066
(2.25)*
-0.210
(4.20)**
-0.028
(0.87)
4,343
46
No
0.23
Probit

Log of Maturity in
Months
(3)
(4)
-0.550
-0.367
(3.98)**
(2.34)*
0.010
-0.083
(0.51)
(2.31)*
0.001
-0.251
(0.01)
(1.42)
-0.206
-0.138
(1.63)
(0.89)
-0.096
-0.472
(0.84)
(2.55)*
-0.184
-0.392
(1.41)
(1.30)
-0.056
-0.207
(1.18)
(1.34)
-0.115
0.045
(1.33)
(0.34)
0.002
0.005
(1.10)
(0.77)
0.098
-0.012
(2.84)**
(0.24)
0.135
-0.025
(4.35)**
(0.24)
0.027
0.151
(0.55)
(1.65)*
0.091
-0.006
(2.97)**
(0.09)
8,883
695
57
32
No
Yes
0.32
0.47
OLS
OLS

Log of Drawn AllIn Spread
(5)
(6)
-0.285
-0.364
(6.01)** (3.58)**
-0.155
-0.139
(7.23)** (7.06)**
-0.047
-0.347
(0.30)
(1.84)*
0.080
-0.521
(0.67)
(3.53)**
-0.127
-0.215
(0.71)
(0.93)
-0.375
0.041
(1.33)
(0.11)
-0.222
-0.112
(1.37)
(0.60)
0.028
0.138
(0.15)
(0.87)
0.005
-0.003
(1.11)
(0.49)
-0.020
-0.019
(0.35)
(0.48)
-0.045
0.283
(0.42)
(2.23)*
0.017
-0.051
(0.12)
(0.49)
-0.058
0.024
(0.54)
(0.22)
3,046
562
42
23
No
Yes
0.46
0.75
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

42

Table 9
Regressions Relating Loan Contract Terms to Country Characteristics

(With Loan Ownership Variables Included as Regressors): Rated vs. Unrated Borrowers
Regressions contain year, ratings, 1-digit SIC industry, and loan purpose indicators. Loan observations are clustered by borrower
country. We also include an indicator for loans denominated in a major currency, and an indicator for multinational companies. The
source of data is LPC’s Dealscan database. The sample of loans includes those originated in 1994 through the middle of 2003.
Loans to firms in financial or regulated industries, as well a public sector loans, are dropped (SIC 4, 6, and 9). Regressions without
firm controls exclude ratings, industry, multinational indicators and log of loan commitment amount.

Explanatory Variable
One if loan is a line of credit
Log of loan commitment amount
Log of Number of Lenders
Share held by Government Banks
Share held by Domestic Banks
One if French legal origin
One if German legal origin
One if Scandinavian legal origin
One if Socialist legal origin
Economic Development
Financial Development
Percentage change in GDP
Creditors' rights
Legal formalism
Property rights
Corruption (higher means less corrupt)
Observations
Number of Countries
Rated?
R-squared (pseudo for probits)
Estimation Technique

Secured Indicator
(1)
(2)
-0.044
(1.77)*
-0.045
(3.06)**
0.067
(3.07)**
0.000
(0.63)
0.000
(0.10)
0.084
(0.92)
-0.316
(3.52)**
0.328
(2.05)*
-0.236
(3.82)**
0.100
(1.98)*
0.175
(1.77)*
0.001
(0.53)
0.072
(2.26)*
0.065
(2.20)*
-0.224
(4.55)**
-0.029
(0.90)
4,343
46
No
0.24
Probit

Log of maturity in
Months
(3)
(4)
-0.554
-0.356
(4.00)**
(2.32)*
0.010
-0.071
(0.45)
(1.90)*
0.018
-0.049
(1.68)*
(1.10)
0.002
-0.002
(1.85)*
(0.35)
0.001
-0.001
(1.73)*
(0.80)
0.003
-0.235
(0.03)
(1.38)
-0.224
-0.096
(1.88)*
(0.62)
-0.111
-0.476
(0.98)
(2.54)*
-0.191
-0.409
(1.47)
(1.38)
-0.049
-0.203
(1.05)
(1.41)
-0.123
0.015
(1.50)
(0.13)
0.002
0.005
(1.15)
(0.87)
0.102
-0.007
(2.98)**
(0.14)
0.128
-0.029
(4.14)**
(0.29)
0.023
0.146
(0.49)
(1.58)
0.090
0.001
(3.05)**
(0.06)
8,883
695
57
32
No
Yes
0.33
0.47
OLS
OLS

Log of Drawn All-in
Spread
(5)
(6)
-0.284
-0.378
(5.98)**
(3.69)**
-0.163
-0.144
(7.30)**
(6.86)**
-0.015
-0.017
(1.23)
(0.55)
-0.003
-0.006
(1.33)
(1.56)
-0.004
-0.003
(4.39)**
(2.74)*
-0.038
-0.349
(0.27)
(2.05)*
0.150
-0.453
(1.41)
(3.10)**
-0.160
-0.270
(0.93)
(1.21)
-0.415
-0.031
(1.64)
(0.09)
-0.167
-0.116
(1.22)
(0.66)
-0.025
0.048
(0.14)
(0.30)
0.004
-0.003
(1.11)
(0.54)
-0.014
-0.006
(0.27)
(0.16)
-0.040
0.289
(0.41)
(2.46)*
-0.013
-0.091
(0.10)
(1.03)
-0.047
0.064
(0.51)
(0.66)
3,046
562
42
23
No
Yes
0.47
0.75
OLS
OLS

* Significant at 10%; ** significant at 1%

43

