                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                THE IRONY OF REFORM:
                           DID LARGE EMPLOYERS SUBVERT
                        WORKPLACE SAFETY REFORM, 1869 TO 1930?

                                             Price Fishback

                                         Working Paper 11058
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11058


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




Paper for Volume on Corruption and Reform, edited by Ed Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. Please do not quote
without the author’s permission. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Price Fishback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Irony of Reform: Did Large Employers Subvert Workplace Safety Reform, 1869 to 1930?
Price Fishback
NBER Working Paper No. 11058
January 2005
JEL No. N3, N4, K2, H7

                                            ABSTRACT

Between 1869 and the early 1900s state governments regulated safety in mines and factories and

reformed the liability for accidents. Reformers sought to reduce workers’ risks and ensure that those

involved in accidents received reasonable medical care and compensation for lost earnings. Yet

large employers often wielded significant clout. This paper explores the extent to which large

employers, measured by average number of employees, subverted the safety reform process,

including the adoption of safety legislation, its scope, and the resources devoted to enforcement.

The findings vary by industry. In coal mining large employers followed a defensive strategy,

limiting the breadth of regulation, pressing for regulations that were enforced more against workers

than against employers, and weakening enforcement. In manufacturing, on the other hand, safety

regulations were introduced earlier in states with larger average establishment sizes. Reformers may

have succeeded in imposing regulations on large manufacturing employers. However, the finding

is also consistent with large firms working to raise rivals’ costs and the analytical narratives suggest

that manufacturing employers at times shaped the legislation to their benefit and that the regulations

were often poorly enforced.

Price Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu
                                                                                                     1


        Workplace safety was a centerpiece of Progressive Era reforms. Between 1869 and the

early 1900s state governments established a series of safety regulations for mines and factories

and reformed the liability for workplace accidents. In the 1910s nearly all state governments

adopted workers’ compensation laws that changed the employers’ liability for workplace

accidents from common law negligence liability to a form of strict liability. The safety

reformers’ stated aims were to reduce the risk faced by workers and ensure that the families of

workers injured or killed in accidents received reasonable medical care and compensation for

lost earnings. Yet large employers often wielded significant clout in state government during

this period and likely worked to shape the legislation to aid their own interests. This paper

explores the extent to which large employers, measured by average number of employees,

subverted the safety reform process, including the adoption of safety legislation, its scope, and

the resources devoted to enforcement of the laws.

        Defining subversion is a controversial issue and scholars have different opinions on the

scope of what should be considered subversion. In their discussion of the rise of the regulatory

state, Glaeser and Shleifer (2003, p. 402) suggest that “subversion” can be defined as a series of

legal or illegal strategies that powerful interests might follow to weaken the impact of regulations

or shape the rules to their benefit.

        The legal ones include acquiring favorable legislation and regulation (even after
        an accident), lobbying for an appointment of friendly law enforcers (including
        both judges and regulators), hiring top lawyers, or using delay tactics in case of a
        suit. Illegal subversion strategies include intimidating and bribing judges,
        regulators, or juries.

Their definition covers a broad range of activity, so it is useful to divide subversion into sub-

categories. The pressure for favorable legislation and regulation and lobbying for friendly

enforcers might well be considered lobbying or “rent seeking” behavior that would be followed
                                                                                                   2


by any interest group. Success in such lobbying has been described as “capture” of the

legislature or the regulator in various studies.1 Although unions and others might capture the

legislature or the regulator, most discussions of capture examine ironic situations where the

target of the regulation, the employer in this case, controls the process. The hiring of top lawyers

and the legal use of delay tactics in suits or administrative hearings could be more narrowly

defined as “gamesmanship,” while the illegal practices are pure “corruption.”

       The workplace safety laws were the result of the conflicts and compromises that arose

from the interest group struggles between reformers and employers, and large employers played

a central role in the process. Reformers sought to impose the workplace safety changes on large

employers because they saw the increased mechanization in their workplaces as a source of

increased risk and they feared that large firms were wielding too much power over the existing

system. Large employers might have followed two different strategies that would have

subverted the reformers’ goals: work to shape new laws in such a way to raise their rivals’ costs,

or follow a defensive strategy at every turn.

         I follow a two-pronged approach to examining how large employers influenced the

safety laws. First, I analyze the variation across states and time to establish the relationship

between the average number of employees per establishment and the extent of regulation. A

finding that large employers were associated with earlier adoption of regulation, more breadth of

regulation and more resources devoted to enforcement is consistent with reformers either

imposing regulations on large firms or large firms raising rivals’ costs. Had large employers

followed a defensive strategy, we would expect them to be associated with slower adoption,

limited breadth, and fewer resources devoted to enforcement. Second, I supplement the

quantitative analysis with analytical narratives that describe in more depth the extent to which
                                                                                                     3


employers shaped the legislation and the actual enforcement of the laws in various states. The

results show that there is no single coherent story that can be told about all industries. In coal

mining large employers followed a defensive strategy, limiting the breadth of regulation,

pressing for regulations that were enforced more against workers than against employers and

managers, and weakening the enforcement of the laws. In manufacturing, on the other hand,

safety regulations were introduced earlier in states with larger average establishment sizes. This

finding suggests that reformers may have succeeded in imposing regulations on large

manufacturing employers. However, the finding is also consistent with large firms working to

raise rivals’ costs and the analytical narratives suggest that manufacturing employers at times

shaped the legislation to their benefit and that the regulations were often poorly enforced.



       I. Large Firms and Regulation

       Progressive Era social reformers, workers, and unions called for safety regulations as a

means to resolve “market failures.” They perceived that expansions in the use of machinery and

increases in the pace of work, typically in large firms, increased the dangers that workers faced.

They argued that employers profited by skimping on safeguards, labor markets provided

inadequate wages to compensate workers for workplace dangers, and that insurance and the legal

system were designed, both in theory and even more so in practice, to limit payments to injured

workers. They anticipated that the reforms they proposed would contribute to better workplace

safety and increase the actual payments received by injured workers. These changes would leave

workers better off because wages would not fully adjust downward.2

       A number of Progressive leaders, including Woodrow Wilson, saw regulation as a means

of curbing the worst excesses from the expansion of large firms. Using the reformers’ claims as
                                                                                                   4


a guide, Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) built an elegant formal model that examines optimal

accident prevention in a situation where amoral firms are willing to subvert the existing

regulatory system when the benefits of subversion exceed the costs.3 A set of rules that might

be optimal in the absence of subversion could be suboptimal if firms have incentives to subvert

the system. The rules under negligence liability in the late 1900s called for full compensation of

the injured worker if the worker could show in court that the employer had not exercised due

care. As employers increased the number of workers, the potential for large-scale accidents and

thus the stakes for court decisions on liability rose accordingly. Even accidents with only a

single accident victim could lead to high stakes for a larger firm because a negligence decision

that went against the employer might set a precedent that raised the probability that the employer

would lose in later cases. The greater stakes for large employers increased the benefit to the

employer of subverting the process. By introducing safety regulations, which imposed smaller

penalties prior to accidents for failure to follow established procedures, and workers’

compensation, which called for workers to receive two-thirds or less of their lost earnings, the

stakes of regulatory decisions were lowered.4    Large employers had less incentive to subvert

the process than before, so that regulations and workers’ compensation might have worked better

than negligence liability with no regulation.

       The relationships described by these reform hypotheses suggest that reformers in states

with larger employers would have anticipated greater benefits from regulation and thus pressed

harder. If reformers imposed the regulations on larger employers, states with larger firms would

have adopted regulations earlier and been more likely to have had a broader set of regulations.

The impact of large firms on state decisions about enforcement resources is less clear.

Reformers intent on making sure that the regulations were followed by large firms typically
                                                                                                    5


demanded more resources per worker for enforcement. But there may have been countervailing

effects that would have weakened this demand. If the cost of inspection included a substantial

fixed cost for visiting an establishment plus a cost per worker in the establishment, states with

larger establishments could have reached the same level of enforcement as states with smaller

establishments with a smaller budget per worker. This potential lower enforcement cost per

worker might have offset the reformers’ greater demand for enforcement resources in states with

larger employers.

       Reformers, however, were not the only groups determining the outcome of workplace

safety legislation. The various laws were forged through the interplay of interest group

struggles, coalition formation, and compromise that took place in state governments between

1869 and 1930. Large employers, in particular, had significant political clout, and there is ample

evidence that they wielded it.5 Not only did they have greater financial resources with which to

lobby legislators and finance political campaigns, but large firms employed large proportions of

workforce. In 1909 establishments with over 500 workers employed up to 58 percent of

manufacturing workers in some states (24 to 28 percent nationwide) despite accounting for less

than 2 percent of all establishments. To the extent that employers could influence their workers’

votes, they could deliver a substantial part of the electorate. Thus government officials faced

lower political organizing costs in dealing with a few large firms than in negotiating with

groupings of small firms.

       As large employers sought to obtain legislation that was favorable to their own interests,

they would have followed one of two paths consistent with the broad definition of subversion: a

defensive strategy of obstructionism against the demands of reformers or attempts to adopt and

design regulations to raise rivals’ costs. In following the defensive strategy employers would
                                                                                                      6


have prevented or slowed the adoption of safety legislation by pressuring legislators to kill the

bills in committee or on the legislative floor. If that failed, they would have worked to limit the

scope of the legislation through amendments or compromise proposals, while removing the teeth

of the regulation by providing inadequate funds for enforcement. If legislation were enacted,

employers would have sought to weaken it further by controlling regulators and actively fighting

fines in court. If larger employers adopted a full-scale defensive strategy, states with larger

employers would have adopted the regulations later, chosen regulations with less breadth, and

provided fewer resources for enforcement.

        Large employers might have adopted an alternative strategy to press for regulations that

raised their rivals’ costs.6   By lobbying for regulations that codified their own practices they

could have raised rivals’ costs and not their own by forcing other employers to switch practices.

To the extent that there were economies of scale or high fixed costs to compliance, the average

costs of complying were larger for smaller firms. States with larger firms therefore would have

been more likely to press for earlier adoption, an expanded scope of regulations, and more

resources for enforcement to insure that the other firms were forced to comply. The attempt to

raise rivals’ costs might have benefited only large firms at the expense of other firms and

workers. On the other hand, large employers would have found the political sledding smoother

if their proposals had meant an improvement in the welfare of workers at the firms who had to

change to comply with the new regulations. Large employers were more likely to pay higher

wages, offer better benefits, provide model housing and towns, and provide safer workplaces

(Jacoby 1997, chapter 1; Fishback 1992, chapter 9; Brandes 1970). Regulations raising safety

standards with only limited loss in employment would have led reformers, workers in smaller
                                                                                                    7


firms, and unions to become willing members in a coalition with large firms to lobby for the new

legislation.



        II.      Workplace Safety Regulation and Liability Reform, 1869-1930

        Just after the Civil War the government’s role in workplace safety was largely confined

to adjudicating disputes over injury claims in the common law courts. Over the next several

decades, the structure of common law workplace accident compensation evolved through a series

of court decisions.7 Under the full-blown liability system in the late nineteenth century,

workplace accident compensation was based on common law rules of negligence combined with

the defenses of assumption of risk, fellow-servant, and contributory negligence. If a worker was

injured on the job, he bore the burden of proving that his employer had failed to exercise due

care in preventing the accident and that the employer’s negligence was the proximate cause of

the injury.    Judge Learned Hand once described due care as requiring the employer to prevent

accidents when his costs of accident prevention were lower than the expected costs of the

accident. If an injured worker was able to show his employer’s negligence, then he was

theoretically entitled to compensation up to the amount of his financial losses from the accident

(lost wages and medical expenses) plus remuneration for “pain and suffering.” Even if the

employer was found negligent he might not be liable if he could invoke any of three defenses:

that the employee had assumed the risks associated with the employment (assumption of risk);

that a co-worker (fellow servant) had caused the accident; or that the worker himself was

negligent or had not exercised due care (contributory negligence).8 The studies of accident

causes in the late 1890s and early 1900s often suggested that worker fault was the cause of a very
                                                                                                   8


large percentage of the accidents, so court rulings of no compensation were likely in a large

number of cases.

       Lawrence Friedman (1985, pp. 300-1) argues that the system developed to encourage

industrial enterprise. He suggests that the courts knew implicitly or even explicitly that to

impose strict liability on industrial enterprises would have stunted the growth of industry.9

Employers likely had a hand in the development of the system through their efforts to defend

themselves against negligence suits and lobbying through elected officials in the selection of

judges. In examining the actual operations of the system Shawn Kantor and I (2000) found little

or no documented evidence that bribery of judges and juries was a significant problem in

negligence liability cases.10

       On the other hand, the high costs of going to court might have contributed to significant

gamesmanship in settlement negotiations. Empirical studies suggest that under the de facto

system the legal rules provided a baseline guide as to what to expect when people went to court.

The compensation in settlements was loosely correlated with the de jure rules, but there was a

great deal of noise in the system. The fear of delay, of gamesmanship by the employer or the

insurer, and the workers’ own high costs of going to court (25 to 40 percent of the compensation

in contingency fees plus emotional costs) might have prevented some workers with legitimate

claims from receiving compensation. In the samples of settlements collected by various state

employer liability commissions, few families received payments that might match the present

value of a lifetime stream of earnings. On the other hand, some workers with more generous

employers, with employers seeking to avoid the nuisance of a suit, or better access to legal

advice might well have fared better than they would have been expected to under the highly

restrictive de jure rules (Fishback and Kantor 2000). The views of accident causation evolved
                                                                                                   9


away from blaming the worker in the early 1900s with the publication of Crystal Eastman’s

Work Accidents and the Law. Had workers’ compensation not been adopted, it is probable that

more workers would have received compensation after Eastman’s findings had become

widespread.

       If there was gamesmanship and subversion of the negligence liability system, it might

well have been practiced more by the middlemen than by the employer. In nearly every state

liability commission report, employers and workers complained of the large transactions costs in

the system. Lawrence Friedman (1985, p. 484) summarizes claims found in many employer

liability reports: the system “siphoned millions of dollars into the hands of lawyers, court

systems, administrators, insurers, claims adjusters. Companies spent and spent, yet not enough

of the dollars flowed to injured workmen.” We have no way of knowing how much of the

transactions costs were devoted to gamesmanship, but the primary beneficiaries of the

negligence system may well have been the trial attorneys, an interest group that opposed

workers’ compensation in some states.



       II.1 Coal Safety Regulations

       As the negligence system evolved, states began to supplement it with direct regulation

soon after the Civil War. The first industry to be widely regulated was coal mining, among the

most dangerous industries of the era. Pennsylvania led the way in adopting coal mining

regulations in 1869 for anthracite mines. The states with significant bituminous coal production

introduced regulations between 1872 and 1912 in the order presented in Table 1.11 Federal

involvement began with the formation of the Bureau of Mines in 1911, but the agency was

informational and did not obtain coercive powers until 1941 (Graebner 1976).
                                                                                                  10


        As a rough guide to some of the correlates of the adoption of the law, Table 1 includes

information on workers per mine, the number of coal workers, and the number of coal union

chapters as of 1880. Simple correlations suggest that states with larger mines were more likely

to adopt earlier. The correlation between average mine size in 1880 and the year of adoption is -

0.4. The simple correlation seems to be inconsistent with the defensive hypothesis, while

consistent with the reform and raising-rivals’-costs views of large firms. However, there were

other important factors influencing the timing of adoption. For example, unionization and the

overall size of industry in 1880 were also negatively correlated with the year of adoption; the

simple correlations are -0.55 and -0.49, respectively. The multivariate analysis below isolates

the impact of each, holding the other factors constant.

       The early regulations were rudimentary and were focused on mapping the mines,

providing appropriate ventilation, and preventing explosions. Often they were targeted at

smaller operations where the operators’ knowledge of customary safety practices was likely to be

more limited. As the technology of mining improved with the introduction of cutting machines,

electricity, and mechanical motors, the regulations expanded, particularly after 1900. To capture

the major changes after 1900, I develop a mine regulation index that counts the number of

regulations that the states had adopted from the following list: the mine must be sprinkled or

rock dusted, a fireboss must examine the mine for gas daily in gaseous mines, mine management

must provide adequate timbers to prop the roof, underground electric wires must be insulated,

miners cannot ride on coal cars underground, permissible explosives must be used, state

inspectors must pass a qualifying exam, inspectors can close the mine immediately for some

violations, inspectors have the power to make arrests for safety violations, mine foremen must be

licensed by a state board, all miners must be licensed by a state board, foremen must ensure that
                                                                                                     11


all men have training, and the foreman must make a minimum number of visits to the workplace

each day. As seen in Table 1, the number of clauses varied between 0 in some states without

mining laws to 8 in Pennsylvania. By 1930 most states had expanded coverage and the number

ranged from 3 in Texas to 10 in Pennsylvania.

        A key to effective laws is their enforcement. Table 1 contains the statutory inspection

budget in 1967 dollars per coal worker, which is based on the salaries and the number of

inspectors listed in the mining law or in appropriations bills for each state. Most inspection

budgets in 1902 were less than $2 per worker, although New Mexico and Utah were spending

over $4 per worker. Generally, the budgets had expanded along with the breadth of the laws by

1930.

        II.2 Manufacturing Safety Regulations

        The states’ interest in regulating safety in factories also developed soon after the Civil

War. Massachusetts led the way in 1869 in establishing a bureau to collect information on

wages and working conditions for factory workers and roughly half of the states had followed

suit by 1890 (see Table 2). Massachusetts was the first state to add teeth to the law by

establishing factory inspectors in 1879. As in Massachusetts, roughly 40 percent of the states

added a factory inspector within five to 15 years of having created a labor bureau or department

(see Table 2). Some states like West Virginia and Tennessee provided for an inspector without

actually appointing one. Table 2 also contains information on average establishment size, total

manufacturing workers, and the number of chapters of trade unions in 1880. As was the case for

the coal regulations, simple correlations show that all three were associated with earlier adoption

(-0.43, -0.51, -0.40 respectively with the initial laws and -0.51, -0.56, and -0.35 respectively with

the factory inspector laws). The factory safety laws were amended during the Progressive Era in
                                                                                                    12


response to new technologies as well as to the grisly lessons learned from horrible accidents like

the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in New York in 1910.

       Regulation was strongly intertwined with the court system. The typical factory inspector

was “merely a special policeman assigned to discover violations of these special laws and to see

that prosecutions were initiated. The court remained the fundamental agency for securing

compliance (Brandeis 1935, pp. 632-3).” Mine inspectors faced the same restrictions. In most

cases factory and mine inspectors disclosed their findings to a state or local government

prosecutor who would then decide whether or not to prosecute the case. The courts ultimately

determined whether there was a violation and set the size of the fine. In a handful of states the

coal mine inspector had the power to close a mine considered unsafe, but even here the inspector

had to secure an injunction through the proper court (Graebner 1976, pp. 97-100).

       State regulations also became a focal point in negligence cases for issues related to “due

care” and “assumption of risk.” Their presence cut both ways. Employer violation of

regulations eased the burden for workers in demonstrating employer negligence, while the

absence of a violation could prevent recovery. When workers violated regulations targeted at

their activities, employers were better able to invoke the contributory negligence defense.

       II.3 Liability Law Changes

       The increasing use of factory and mine inspectors coincided with the states’

experimentation with employer liability laws that limited one or more of the three defenses in the

1890s and 1910s.12 Unions and workers quickly became dissatisfied with the inadequacy of

employer liability laws. In addition, employers sought relief from increasing uncertainty about

the three defenses and a seeming increase in “jackpot” awards. Insurers, furthermore, sought
                                                                                                  13


ways to resolve problems with moral hazard and adverse selection in insuring workers. The

solution for all was worker’s compensation.

       The move to workers’ compensation in most states in the 1910s altered the liability rules

in mining and manufacturing from negligence liability to strict liability. The laws established

that all workers injured in the course of employment or in activities arising out of employment

were expected to receive compensation from employers. Unlike negligence liability, which was

supposed to fully compensate workers for their loss, workers’ compensation imposed limits so

that injured workers were to be paid a maximum of two-thirds or less of their income loss.

Maximums on weekly payments meant that many workers received substantially less than two-

thirds of their income while injured.

       Ultimately, large employers strongly influenced the adoption of workers’ compensation

legislation. Fishback and Kantor (2000) find that the majority of people in each of the major

interest groups—employers, workers, and insurers—gained from its passage. Employers saw a

reduction in uncertainty about large jury awards and managed to pass much of their increased

insurance premiums back to their workers in the form of higher wages. Workers on average

received higher accident payments than under negligence liability and were better insured even if

their wages adjusted downward. Insurers saw an expansion in their business, despite the

introduction of state insurance in a number of states.

       Most states developed some form of administrative body to replace the courts in

administering workers’ compensation. A handful of states, led by Wisconsin in 1911, carried the

process a step further and created industrial safety commissions that not only administered

workers’ compensation but expanded into a rule-making body that wrote an extensive safety

code for Wisconsin industry. As seen in Table 2, 18 states had established industrial
                                                                                                       14


commissions by 1930. However, only California, Massachusetts, New York, Ohio,

Pennsylvania, and Utah had made substantial use of their rule making ability.




         III. The Role of Average Employer Size in the Development of Safety Regulations

         The simple correlations between the year of adoption and average size from 1880 using

the data from Tables 1 and 2 suggest that safety legislation was adopted earlier in states with

larger employers. Yet, we also know that earlier adoption was related to more unionization and

the overall number of workers to be regulated, so a multivariate analysis is needed to isolate the

impact of larger employers. The adoption of legislation was a dynamic process that took place

over at least 30 years, so it is also important to not only capture the differences in key variables

in cross-section in 1880 but also to take into account the changes in the key variables over time.

Finally, the models of the relationship between large employers and regulation predict

relationships that extend beyond the adoption of the laws to their scope and the resources

devoted to enforcement. Therefore, I developed a state-level panel data set to examine the

relationship between the average size of employers and the timing of adoption of safety

legislation, the breadth of coverage of regulations, and the resources devoted to enforcing the

rules.

         Table 3 shows the predictions from the various models for the relationship between large

employers and changes in safety regulations. It is important to consider how well the measure of

employer size fits the theoretical concepts of employer size in the models. The measure of size

for each observation in the analysis is the average number of workers per establishment (or per

mine) because it is the only measure of size that is consistently available for the years 1870

through 1912, when the leading mining and manufacturing safety regulations were first
                                                                                                   15


adopted.13 Average establishment size might differ in two states because the entire distribution

of establishments in one state has shifted upward or because the distribution in one state is more

skewed toward larger establishments.

       In the hypothesis that reformers imposed regulation on large employers both general

increases in size and skewness toward very large firms might be considered important.

Reformers worried about general increases in size across the entire distribution because larger

establishment size was typically associated with increased mechanization that might have

contributed to greater accident risk. Meanwhile, Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) emphasize the

importance of very large firms in their descriptions of reform in the face of potential subversion.

In the employer defense hypothesis both a skewed distribution with a few very large firms or a

general increase in the size of all firms would have made it easier for employers to resist reform

efforts. In the skewed distribution a few large firms with many employees faced low costs of

organizing and would have greater resources with which to mount their defenses. This result

would hold even if larger average firm size represents larger size across the entire distribution of

firms. The increase in size meant that each firm might have more resources to devote to

lobbying, while successful employer lobbies would face lower costs of organizing because fewer

firms would be necessary to reach critical mass. The raising-rivals’-costs hypothesis depends

primarily on skewness toward large firms in the distribution because one set of employers is

seeking to impose regulations that would be costly to another set of employers. In that case one

might expect that large firms would have more success in raising rivals’ costs when the share of

very large establishments is higher either as a share of the number of establishments or the share

of employment in those firms.
                                                                                                     16


        When the data are available to make comparisons after 1900, it appears that the measure

of average establishment size used here likely captures some of the differences in skewness

toward large establishments. The correlation between average number of workers per

establishment and the percentage of establishments with more than 500 workers in

manufacturing in the states is 0.887 in 1904, 0.928 in 1909, and 0.928 in 1914. The correlation

between average workers per establishment and the share of workers in establishments

employing over 500 workers is 0.68 in 1909 and 0.65 in 1914.

        In estimating the impact of large employers, the analyses control for interest group

pressure from unions, who wielded influence in the states where they had a strong presence, as

well as the number of workers involved in the activity to be regulated. Mulligan and Shleifer

(2004) suggest that there may be substantial fixed costs to regulation; efficiency concerns imply

that regulations will not be established until the population to be regulated is large enough that

the benefits of regulation overcome these fixed costs. Larger firms might also be associated

with more regulation in the raising-rivals’-cost model. The returns to large firms from using

regulation to keep rivals out would rise significantly as the overall size of the industry increased.

In several empirical tests Mulligan and Shleifer (2004) find regulatory populations to be

associated with expanded regulations in a series of settings. In the analysis that follows, larger

regulatory populations also contributed to earlier adoption of the initial manufacturing and coal

regulations. Finally, regional differences in attitudes toward regulation are controlled with a

dummy for the Southern states in the adoption regressions and state fixed effects when

examining coal inspection budgets and the breadth of coal regulations. The analysis that follows

suggests that southern states were slower to adopt factory inspection regulation and coal mining

regulations. 14
                                                                                                   17


       III.1 Establishment Size and the Introduction of Manufacturing Regulations

       Analysis of the correlates related to the adoption of manufacturing regulations and

workers’ compensation show that states with more workers per establishment tended to adopt the

new policies earlier. Using the panel information in manufacturing, I estimated a proportional

hazard model with time-varying covariates for the introduction of the two types of

manufacturing regulations: first, the initial introductions of some form of labor administrative

body with or without coercive power; second, the introduction of factory inspectors to enforce

regulations. Since most states had their own mine inspection departments, most of the bureaus

and factory inspectors specialized in manufacturing; therefore, the correlates in the adoption

analysis are focused on measures of manufacturing activity. In the underlying panel of data,

states who have not yet adopted are observed at the end of each decade and matched with

information on average size and the number of manufacturing workers from the beginning of the

decade. The state’s final year in the panel is its year of adoption, which is matched with

information from the prior census. See the notes to Table 4 for a more detailed description.

       The results in Table 4 show that larger establishments were associated with earlier

adoption of both factory administrations and factory inspectors. Hazard ratios greater than one

imply increased probability of adoption in any year given no prior adoption (consistent with

earlier adoption) and ratios less than one imply decreased probability of adoption in any year

(consistent with later adoption). At the margin an increase of one worker per establishment was

associated with a 5.8 percent higher probability of adoption of some form of labor

administration, and 5.3 percent higher probability of adopting a factory inspector law.      Both are

statistically significant at the 10 percent level. It is relatively common to see differences in

correlates across states of one standard deviation in either direction. A one standard deviation
                                                                                                      18


increase in average firm size of 5.3 workers per establishment was associated with roughly a

one-third increase in the conditional probability of adopting some form of labor administration in

any year and a one-fourth increase in the probability of introducing a factor inspector.

       The findings are inconsistent with the view that large firms were successful at obstructing

the introduction of legislation. The adoption of the early labor administrations without

inspection might have been a situation where both large firms and unions anticipated benefits, or

where unions succeeded in imposing the legislation on larger employers. The union hazard

ratios are all greater than one, consistent with unions contributing to earlier adoption. Although

we cannot reject the hypothesis of no effect in the statistical model, extra qualitative evidence

from Elizabeth Brandeis (1935) suggests that these early labor bureaus were often created in

response to pressures from the National Labor Union and the Knights of Labor.

       The adoption of factory inspection is more consistent with the raising-rivals’ costs model

in a situation where reformers and reformers were not anticipating much gain. While large firms

were associated with earlier adoption, unions were not. The hazard ratios for the union measures

were both less than one, and one-standard-deviation increases in the union measures reduced the

probability of adoption in any one year by 9 to 15 percent. The effects are not statistically

significant, so it is too strong at this point to say that unions were categorically opposed to the

introduction of the factory inspectors. Yet there is evidence that union leaders circa 1900 were

skeptical of the benefits of regulation on the grounds that business interests wielded significant

clout in the legislatures and were likely to strongly influence the writing of the regulations.

Instead, they focused on organizing drives in which they argued that workers would benefit more

through the collective bargaining process than they would by relying on legislatures (Weinstein,

1967, p. 159; Skocpol 1992, pp. 205-47; Asher 1969, p. 457).
                                                                                                    19


       The adoption of workers’ compensation in the 1910s, on the other hand, was a win-win

situation for large firms, unions, and reform groups. In statistical work on the timing of

adoption of workers’ compensation Shawn Kantor and I (1998, 2000, pp. 106-11, 256-7) found

that large firms, unions, and reform groups all were associated with earlier adoption of the laws.

These relationships showed up in comparisons of means for groups of states who adopted earlier,

as well as in multivariate analysis with a wide range of controls. In addition, there was ample

qualitative evidence that all three groups after 1909 lobbied for the general concept of workers’

compensation although in some states there were intense struggles over the choice of benefit

levels and the state’s role in insuring workplace accident risk.

       III.2 Average Mine Size and Coal Regulations

       The results are quite different for the relationship between average mine size and the

adoption of coal mining regulations from 1869 to the mid1890s. I estimated a similar

proportional hazards model for a panel of data for the 24 states with more than a trace of

bituminous coal mining production. An additional cross-sectional observation has been added

for Pennsylvania anthracite coal because Pennsylvania adopted separate regulations and

inspection departments at different times for the two types of coal. More details on this panel are

found in the notes of Table 5. Larger coal mines were not associated with earlier adoption of the

coal safety legislation, whether large mines are measured in terms of workers per mine or output

per mine. The hazard ratios in Table 5 are not statistically significantly different from one and

the effects of one-standard-deviation changes are very small. The absence of a relationship

between adoption and mines size suggests that either large firms were indifferent to the coal

regulations or they were unsuccessful at staving off the efforts of reformers. The impact of

unionization suggests that it might have been the latter. A one-standard-deviation increase in the
                                                                                                   20


number of coal union chapters in the state raised the probability of adoption in a specific state by

40 to 47 percent.

       More insight into the role played by large firms can be gained by examining their impact

on the breadth of regulation and the resources devoted to enforcement. I created a panel data set

for the years 1902, 1910, 1920, and 1930 for the 23 leading bituminous coal mining states with

evidence on the breadth of coal mining regulations and the appropriations for coal mining

inspection per coal worker in the state measured in 1967 dollars (see Table 1).15 The

information on regulations and inspection budgets was then matched in the panel with evidence

on the average number of employees per mine in the state, the UMWA membership as a

percentage of the coal workforce in the state, and the number of miners in the state. Estimations

are also performed with firm size and industry scale measured as production per mine and total

production.

       The model is estimated both without and with state and year fixed effects. The fixed

effects estimation controls for some types of unmeasured heterogeneity across states and time.

The year effects are incorporated to control for shocks to the national economy and technological

shocks to mining technology common to the entire mining industry in each year that would have

influenced the choice of safety regulations and the level of inspection at particular points in time.

The state effects are included to capture geological differences in mining deposits that influenced

mining practices as well as long term attitudes toward political reform that were invariant across

time within the states.

       The panel regression results in Table 6 are consistent with the view that large coal

employers worked to limit breadth of the legislation, possibly offsetting efforts by coal unions to

expand the regulations. The law index displays a negative relationship with average mine size
                                                                                                    21


that is stronger with controls for state and time effects. The coefficients are statistically

significant at confidence levels of roughly 15 percent in two-tailed tests. One-standard-deviation

increases in average mine size led to reductions in the law index of close to half of a law. The

large employers’ efforts to restrict the breadth of laws appear to have been counteracting

lobbying by the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA). In the estimation without state and

year effects, one-standard-deviation increases in the percentage of miners in the UMWA was

associated with a more than half a law increase in the regulatory index. The UMWA’s efforts

appear to have been correlated with time-invariant features in the states, because the inclusion of

fixed effects in the model reduces the size and statistical significance of the UMWA coefficient.

       Even after limiting the breadth of legislation, larger mines were also associated with

reduced resources for enforcement. Average mine size displays a negative relationship with the

inspection budget per coal worker that increases in size and in statistical significance with the

inclusion of state and year effects. The fixed effects estimates in Panel A in Table 6 suggest that

a one-standard-deviation increase of 35.7 workers per mine is associated with a reduction in the

inspection budget of 64 cents per worker in 1967 dollars. Similarly, a one-standard-deviation

increase in tons produced per mine in Panel B in Table 6 was associated with 55 cents per

worker less in the inspection budget.    There may be other explanations for the negative

relationship between average mine size and inspection budgets. If there were substantial

economies of scale in inspecting each mine, a smaller inspection budget per mine worker might

have achieved the same results as the average mine increases in size. However, there was plenty

of evidence that reformers were pressing for large budgets per worker to enhance enforcement

and reduce accident rates. They were right to do so, as empirical studies show that increased
                                                                                                  22


inspection budgets inspection per worker (or per ton) were associated with lower accident rates

(see Aldrich 1997, pp. 337-8) and Fishback 1986 and 1992).

       Meanwhile, the UMWA share of employment had no positive relationship with the size

of mine inspection budgets. Problems with inadequate inspections and the emphasis on

prosecutions of miners in some of the states documented later in the paper might have led the

UMWA to shift their efforts away from pressing for stronger government enforcement of the

laws. Instead, they relied on their own negotiations with employers to press for compliance with

the aspects of the code that the union was interested in enforcing.


       IV. Narrative Evidence on Employer Influence in Coal Mining

       The quantitative analysis suggests that larger coal employers adopted a defensive strategy

against coal mining regulations rather than one of raising rivals’ costs. Large firms were not

associated with later adoption of the early coal regulations, but they were negatively related with

the breadth of coal regulations and the size of the inspection budget. The view that large

employers were following a defensive strategy receives ample support from narrative evidence

from various states at various times.

       The leading studies of coal mining legislation all suggest that employers significantly

influenced the writing of coal regulations.16 Mark Aldrich (1997, pp. 69-71), for example, finds

that most of the early laws were “incomplete, poorly written, and hard to enforce” and often bore

“the strong imprint of operator influence.” In Colorado mine inspectors considered the original

1883 law to be “very incomplete” and “wholly inadequate.” When the law was revised in 1913,

“the product of a committee dominated by large operators…and it largely codified their

practices.”
                                                                                                   23


       William Graebner’s (1976, pp. 72-87) description of the evolution of West Virginia

mining law suggests that through 1907 the law had little or no bite. Mine operators and even the

mine inspectors were opposed to new legislation. In cases where proposed laws limited their

mining methods, the workers themselves actively opposed change. In response to a series of

large mine explosions, the legislature passed a revision in 1907 in which mine operators played a

major role. Two additional explosions led the chief mine inspector to become more activist in

proposing legislation, yet an investigative committee studied many of the explosions and then

published a report that concluded that changes in the law would do no good. The legislature, in

response to the demands of mine operators, rejected all of the chief mine inspector’s

recommendations for new regulations.

       One sign that the mining laws were influenced by employers is that a number of them

restricted the behavior of miners in ways that employers had had trouble enforcing within their

mines. These restrictions often promoted safety but required extra effort for no obvious gain in

pay on the part of the miners. For example, both Illinois and West Virginia banned the practice

of “shooting off the solid” in which miners blasted without making an undercut at the base of the

seam. The practice required more explosives, produced smaller, less valuable chunks of coal,

and generally was considered more dangerous. It was popular with miners because it was much

less strenuous than laying on one’s side and hacking away at a wall of coal and rock for several

hours before blasting the coal. The miners’ response was to routinely disregard these and other

restrictions that they found onerous.17 When I (1986, 1992, pp. 115-120) estimated the impact of

coal mining laws on accident rates, there were only three regulations that passed statistical

significance tests in reducing accident rates: requirements that foreman visit workplaces more

often, that miners use permissible explosives, and that miners not ride on coal cars. All of these
                                                                                                     24


are devoted at least in part to monitoring and changing the behavior of miners, which is

consistent with a view that employers used regulations to help them enforce their own desired

limits on the miners’ behavior.

       Lobbyists who are trying to take the teeth out of legislation often seek to limit the funds

available for enforcement. In a number of states, there were not enough inspectors budgeted to

meet the minimum number of visits of mines required in the mining statutes.18 The problems

were compounded by low salaries, which led to high turnover of inspectors and limited the

department’s ability to attract talented inspectors. Inspectors earned only about 50 percent more

than the average salaried worker in manufacturing in 1910 and less than 10 percent more in

1920.19 During the World War I boom, the inspectors might have fared as well or better if they

had quit and gone back to mining. West Virginia Governor John Cornwell in 1919 described

their rate of pay as “less than that of men who drive mules (quoted in Graebner 1976, p. 90),”

and resignations were common. With larger budgets, the mine departments likely would have

had an impact on accident rates, as econometric studies by Fishback (1986, 1992) and Aldrich

(1997, pp. 337-8) find that expansions in resources for inspection were associated with lower

accident rates.20

       Although much of Graebner’s (1976) work on mine safety implies that many mine

inspectors were honest advocates for safer mines, there were still worries about a revolving door

between mine management and the inspection service.       There were few opportunities to move

up within the inspection bureaucracies, so some state mine inspectors accepted positions with

coal companies at 50 to 100 percent pay increases. Many state inspectors were already

sympathetic to the problems of mine owners faced in running mines because they had moved to

the job from posts as mining managers or superintendents. Union leaders were livid when the
                                                                                                   25


coal mine operators in 1908 “engineered” the appointment to West Virginia Chief Mine

Inspector of John Laing, himself the owner of several mining properties. After leaving office,

Laing became the head of the Kanawha County Coal Operators’ Association.21

       Miners, owners, and inspectors all considered the inspector positions to be political and

the owners were not shy about pressuring the inspectors. In 1908 a West Virginia inspector

stated “there are coal operators who will endeavor to have a district inspector removed from

office rather than obey the mining laws, or carry out the recommendations made by an

inspector.”   As a general rule, the mine owners appear to have had the advantage in the interest

group struggle over inspector appointments, even in highly unionized states. Even in Illinois

where the UMWA was strong and the inspection staff had a reputation for being somewhat

radical, a frustrated miner claimed: “There is not an inspector in the state who is not holding his

job through the influences of some coal operator” (Graebner 1977, p. 91).

       Most mining laws contained fines and potential jail sentences for offenders but successful

prosecutions in the courts were not that common. There was little evidence of prosecutions of

employers for mining violations in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia prior to 1904. The

number of prosecutions then rose to a peak at 395 in 1910 and 312 in 1911 (compared with

approximately 3200 mines and 250,000 employees) before trailing off to zero after 1912. Nearly

all of these prosecutions were targeted at miners and not supervisors or mine owners. Miners

accounted for 159 of the 163 prosecutions in West Virginia in 1910. Of 489 prosecutions

between 1908 and 1911 in Pennsylvania, 392 were directed at mine workers, only 27 at

superintendents and 70 at foreman and fire bosses (Graebner 1976, pp. 97-100.) Further, the

probability of paying penalties was even lower. In Ohio in 1911 the total amount collected in
                                                                                                      26


fines under a new mining law came to $400, and this was a law described as having strong

penalty provisions.

       One reason for the lack of prosecutions may have been the intransigence of the courts,

which set the fines. According to Graebner (1976, p. 99), when coal inspectors closed mines,

which they did infrequently, they “received as much opposition as aid from local courts.” “West

Virginia inspectors, moreover, evidently ceased prosecuting operators and managers when it

became clear that they could not be convicted … A district inspector reported that workers had

‘completely lost all confidence in the local courts … [and were] thoroughly convinced that

justice could not be obtained towards the enforcement of the mining laws.’”

       V. Employer Influence of Legislation and Enforcement in Manufacturing

       Earlier adoption of the initial manufacturing regulations in states with larger

establishments is consistent with both the reform and raising rivals’ costs hypotheses. A

completed data set on the factory inspection resources and the breadth of the specific

manufacturing safety regulations is not yet available, so I cannot do the same tests that I did for

coal mining. Qualitative evidence, however, suggests that at least in some states manufacturers

wielded the same types of influence as coal employers did over the type of laws adopted.

Problems with enforcement of regulations also carried over into manufacturing.

       The introduction of factory safety legislation in Washington State in 1903 offers an

example of how manufacturing employers influenced the writing of safety legislation.

Employers pressed for the legislation in reaction to a series of court decisions related to the

negligence liability system. One aspect of the assumption of risk defense had always been a

major irritant to workers and reformers. In a number of cases workers reported malfunctions or

lack of safeguards that increased their risk of injury, were told to return to work, and then were
                                                                                                   27


injured. Compensation had been denied on the basis that the workers had known the risk in the

now more dangerous setting and assumed it when they returned to work. In Green v. Western

American Company (1902) the Washington Supreme Court eliminated the assumption of risk

defense in these situations. Fearing the complete elimination of the assumption of risk defense,

employers played a significant role in the passage of Washington’s Factory Inspection Act in

1903. Under the new act employers were to be considered negligent for accidents in settings

where they violated the inspection acts. However, the law also provided for certifications that

the employers’ workplace was “safe.” A number of lower courts then invoked the assumption of

risk defense to prevent recovery by injured workers in several cases involving mines so certified.

The Washington State Supreme Court disagreed and reaffirmed that lack of safeguards on

machines was negligence whether the mine was certified or not. In 1905 the employers went

back to the legislature and succeeded in altering the language of the Inspection Act so that

employers had only to provide a “reasonable” safeguard (as opposed to a “proper” one). This

change in language may have worked for a while but ultimately proved to be of little help to the

employers, because the Supreme Court finally eliminated the assumption of risk defense by

arguing that a machine lacked necessary safeguards by virtue of being the cause an accident

(Tripp 1976, p. 535).

       Inadequacy of inspection resources might have been an even more severe problem for the

factory inspectors than for coal inspectors. There were far more factories than mines and

Brandeis (1935, pp. 632-3) notes that inspectors typically investigated only upon complaint.

Rarely were the factory inspectors in a position to routinely and randomly inspect a significant

share of the factories. Problems with enforcement likely contributed to the conditions that led to

the deaths of 146 garment workers in the horrendous Triangle Shirtwaist Fire in New York City
                                                                                                   28


in 1911.22 On the day of the fire, many workers reported that a key door to a stairway was

locked, a violation of the factory regulations.

       Just prior to the fire a State Labor Department inspector had reported an inadequate fire

escape (Stein 1962, pp. 181-9), but jurisdictions over fire escapes were not well established.

The factory inspection laws gave the inspector the power to demand a proper fire escape but the

factory inspectors claimed that the courts had ruled that fire escapes were outside the labor

department’s jurisdiction. Building safety therefore came under the jurisdiction of the New York

City Superintendent of Buildings, to whom a report had been forwarded by the labor inspector.

When the Asch building, where the fire broke out, was planned in 1900, the building inspector

had agreed to allow the architects to forego a required staircase because they promised that the

fire escape they planned would act as a third staircase all the way to the ground. When the

building was erected, the agreement was violated and the fire escape only reached the second

floor. When this was pointed out in 1911, Building Department officials defended themselves by

saying that their resources were inadequate. The department had only 47 inspectors to inspect

50,000 buildings. They claimed: “We do not hear of violations of the law in the old buildings

unless they are particularly called to our attention.” In that year the Fire Department had

designated over 13,000 buildings as dangerous, but the department could only inspect 2,051.

Once they found a violation, the building inspectors argued that they still faced significant

obstacles in punishing the violators. “We must enforce all our rulings through the civil courts.

When we bring an action, there is invariably a long fight. The record will show the owner is

usually the victor.” In other cases they hesitated to call for changes because “It would work a

great hardship on the owners of buildings to require changes. This is especially true of fire

escapes.”23
                                                                                                  29


         In the aftermath of the Triangle Fire the State Labor Department was overhauled and

New York State adopted a series of new fire-related regulations. Appropriations for labor issues

in New York quadrupled between 1911 and 1915 to over a million dollars but this coincided with

expansions of duties in other areas and the development of workers’ compensation. Although

this is described as the golden era of labor regulations in New York, the amount of funds

available for enforcement were still quite limited. The new million dollar budget still came to

only about 69 cents per manufacturing worker. Probably no more than half of the budget was

devoted to inspections. Thus, 35 cents per worker in 1914, which translates into $1.16 in 1967

dollars, put New York factory inspection budgets below the bituminous coal mining inspection

budgets for most states listed in Table 1 as of 1902. The increase in budgets still did not resolve

the enforcement issue. A February 1916 editorial in the New York Times claimed that of 3,711

violations by factories of the new stairway regulations, “only 246 owners complied with the law,

and two prosecutions were begun!” (The Industrial Commission,” New York Times 2/23/16, p.

12).24




         VI. Summary

         Did large employers subvert workplace safety reform? I found few examples of

documented bribery or other illegal corruption but there was considerable evidence that a

number of actions by large employers met the broader definition of subversion in the

introduction. Large employers sought to strike down unfavorable legislation and actively

lobbied for laws and enforcement favorable to their interests. In some states employers may have

captured the reforms. The reforms were ironic in the following way. Employers may have been

the targets of the reformers who proposed legislation, but those same employers often played
                                                                                                    30


significant roles in shaping the reforms that resulted, either by limiting the full extent of the

reforms or by shaping the reforms to benefit themselves.

       I proposed three broad views of the development of workplace safety reform: reformers

imposed reforms on larger employers, larger employers pressed for and shaped the laws to raise

their smaller rivals’ costs, or larger employers practiced a defensive strategy designed to obstruct

the regulations at every turn. The quantitative analysis of the relationship between average

establishment size and regulations in the states and the analytical narratives suggest that we

cannot tell one coherent story about the influence of large employers. Rather, we must tell one

story for coal mining and another for manufacturing. In the coal industry, large employers

practiced a defensive strategy. The breadth of mining regulation and inspection resources per

miner were both negatively related to average mine size. Narrative evidence from several states

shows that coal employers heavily influenced the content and enforcement of the mining

legislation. The laws that had the most impact on mine accidents were ones that were generally

targeted at the behavior of miners as opposed to imposing limits on employers. Compliance

with the laws largely relied on the goodwill of the mine owners. The enforcement budgets were

limited, inspectors were poorly paid, and the courts in some states imposed few fines. The fines

that were imposed were most commonly imposed on mine workers rather than mine owners and

managers.

       On the other hand, large manufacturing employers did not follow a defensive strategy.

The timing analysis shows that large firms were associated with earlier establishment of

commissioners of labor and earlier introduction of factory inspectors, consistent with both the

reform and raising-rivals’-costs hypotheses. I did not have the evidence to perform a

quantitative analysis of the breadth of manufacturing regulations and enforcement resources, but
                                                                                                    31


there is evidence in states like Washington that employers strongly influenced the writing of the

early factory legislation laws. The enforcement process for factory regulations may have been as

problematic as in coal mining. Even after New York totally revamped its Department of Labor

in the aftermath of the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire, it soon became clear that the tasks set for the

Department overwhelmed its inspection resources.

       By the early 1900s a significant amount of the attention toward workplace safety shifted

from direct regulation to reforms of the negligence liability system. The dominant change in

workplace accident liability was the introduction of workers’ compensation during the 1910s.

In earlier work, Shawn Kantor and I (2000) showed that large employers in manufacturing

profoundly influenced the adoption of workers’ compensation. The introduction of workers’

compensation was a win-win situation where reformers, unions, and insurance companies joined

many large employers in experiencing gains and pressing for adoption. The mining industry had

little influence on the adoption of workers’ compensation in part because mining accounted for

less than 2 percent of workers in the vast majority of states. Even though workers’ compensation

was a highly popular law, there were extensive interest group struggles over the details of the

laws, as unions and reformers pressed for higher benefits and state insurance over the opposition

of employers and insurance companies. Variations in political strength of these groups across

states determined the outcomes of these struggles.

       A question remains as to why large employers adopted a defensive strategy in coal

mining and not in manufacturing. My sense is that there were two key factors, the focus on one

industry in the coal regulations and the lack of women working in the mines. Coal regulations

were targeted narrowly at a specific industry, while manufacturing regulations and workers’

compensation often covered a broad range of industries. Labor relations in mining were more
                                                                                                    32


fractious than in most industries, and the reform proposals that employers objected to were often

made by unions. The organization of opposition to objectionable laws was made easier by the

narrowly defined interests of the large coal employers, who were already organized into coal

associations to deal with labor relations and other issues specific to the industry. Since mines

were often in isolated areas, coal employers wielded much greater political clout locally and thus

likely had more influence over the enforcement of the laws in the courts (Fishback 1992, 1995).

Manufacturing safety regulations, on the other hand, covered a broader range of industries and

the regulations might have left many industries only mildly constrained. Large employers

interested in fighting the laws therefore found it more difficult than in coal mining to organize

the fight across a set of employers in different industries.

       Another key factor explaining the difference in strategies was the gender of the workers

involved. Coal mines employed no women. Reformers found protective labor legislation of all

kinds easier to sell for women and children, while employers found such legislation harder to

obstruct. A number of the manufacturing safety regulations were designed to improve safety and

workplace conditions for women and children in textiles and other industries. Thus, large

employers who had moved away from employing women and children found it fruitful to join

with reformers in pressing for regulations that raised the costs to employers who still relied on

them. The protection of women and children likely played an important role in the introduction

of workers’ compensation, as well. Workers’ compensation received so much support in part

because it insured that the share of women and children receiving compensation when their

breadwinners were injured or killed rose to 100 percent from less than 50 percent under

negligence liability. This move dovetailed with Progressive Era mothers’ pension programs that

provided benefits to widows and children.
                                                                                                33




                                         REFERENCES

Aldrich, Mark. 1997. Safety First: Technology, Labor, and Business in the Building of American
        Work Safety, 1870-1939. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Asher, Robert. 1969. “Business and Workers’ Welfare in the Progressive Era: Workmen’s
        Compensation Reform in Massachusetts, 1880-1911.” Business History Review 43
        (Winter): 452-75.
Bartel, Ann P., and Lacy Glenn Thomas. 1985. “Direct and Indirect Effects of Regulation: A
        New Look at OSHA’s Impact.” Journal of Law and Economics 28 (April ): 1-25.
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (August): 371-400.
Brandeis, Elizabeth. 1935. “Labor Legislation.” in History of Labor in the United States. vol. III.
        Edited by Commons, John R. and Associates. Reprint of 1935 material published in 1966.
        New York: Augustus Kelley Publishers.
Brandes, Stuart D. 1970. American Welfare Capitalism, 1880-1940. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Buchanan, James, Robert Tollison, and Gordon Tullock. 1980. Toward a Theory of the Rent
        Seeking Society. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.
Clark, Frederick C. 1891. “State Railroad Commission and How They May Be Made Effective.”
        Publications of the American Economic Association 6(6): 11-110.
Corbin, David Alan. 1981. Life, Work, and Rebellion in the Coal Fields: The Southern West
        Virginia Miners, 1880-1922. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.
Fishback, Price V. 1986. “Workplace Safety during the Progressive Era: Fatal Accidents in
        Bituminous Coal Mining, 1912-1923.” Explorations in Economic History 23 (July): 269-
        298.
           . 1992. Soft Coal, Hard Choices: The Economic Welfare of Bituminous Coal Miners,
        1890 to 1930. New York: Oxford University Press.
           . 1995. “An Alternative View of Violence in Labor Disputes in the Early 1900s: The
        Bituminous Coal Industry, 1900-1930.” Labor History 36 (Summer): 426-456.
Fishback, Price V. and Kantor, Shawn Everett. 1992. “' Square Deal'or Raw Deal? Market
        Compensation for Workplace Disamenities, 1884-1903.” Journal of Economic History52
        (December): 826-848.
Fishback, Price V. and Kantor, Shawn Everett. 2000. A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins
        of Workers’ Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, Lawrence. 1985. A History of American Law. Second edition. New York: Simon
        and Schuster, Inc.
Friedman, Lawrence and Jack Ladinsky. 1967. “Social Change and the Law of Industrial
        Accidents.” Columbia Law Review 67 (January): 50-82.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The Rise of the Regulatory State.” Journal of
        Economic Literature 41 (June 2003): 401-25.
Graebner, William. 1976. Coal-Mining Safety in the Progressive Era. Lexington, KY: University
        of Kentucky Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1963. The Progressive Movement, 1900-1915. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
        Prentice-Hall Inc.
                                                                                          34


Holmes, Rebecca. 2003. “The Impact Of State Labor Regulations On Manufacturing Input
         Demand During The Progressive Era.” Unpublished PhD. Dissertation, University of
         Arizona.
Holmes, Rebecca and Price Fishback. 2003. “The Impact of State Labor Regulations on Input
         Demands in Manufacturing.” Unpublished working paper be presented at the NBER-DAE
         Summer Institute.
Jacoby, Sanford. 1997. Modern Manors: Welfare Capitalism Since the New Deal. Princeton, NJ:
         Princeton University Press.
Kim, Seung-Wook and Fishback, Price V. 1993. “Institutional Change, Compensating
         Differentials and Accident Risk in American Railroading, 1892-1945.” Journal of
         Economic History 53 (December): 796-823.
Kolko, Gabriel. 1963. The Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of American History,
         1900-1916. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Kolko, Gabriel. 1965. Railroads and Regulation, 1877-1916. New York: W.W. Norton.
Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner. 1987. The Economic Structure of Tort Law.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lubove, Roy. 1967. “Workmen’s Compensation and the Prerogatives of Voluntarism.” Labor
         History 8 (Fall): 254-27.
McEvoy, Arthur. 1995. “The Triangle Shirtwaist Fire of 1911: Social Change, Industrial
         Accidents, and the Evolution of Common-Sense Causality.” Law and Social Inquiry 20
         (Spring): 621-51.
Moss, David. 1996. Socializing Security: Progressive-Era Economists and the Origins of
         American Social Policy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pelzman, Samuel. 1976. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and
         Economics 19 (August): 211-48.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Steven Shavell. 2000. “The Economic Theory of Public Enforcement
         of Law.” Journal of Economic Literature 38 (March): 45-76.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1993. “The Enduring Battle for Economic Regulation:
         The Interstate Commerce Act Revisited.” Journal of Law and Economics 36 (October):
         837-60.
Posner, Richard A. 1972. “A Theory of Negligence.” Journal of Legal Studies 1 (January): 29-
         96.
Schwartz, Gary T. 1981. “Tort Law and the Economy in Nineteenth Century America: A
         Reinterpretation.” Yale Law Journal 90 (July): 1717-75.
Shavell, Steven. 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
         Press.
Stein, Leon. 1962. The Triangle Fire. New York: J.B. Lippincott Company.
Stigler, George. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
         Management Science 2 (Spring ): 3-21.
Tomlins, Christopher. 1988. “A Mysterious Power: Industrial Accidents and the Legal
         Construction of Employment Relations in Massachusetts, 1800-1850.” Law and History
         Review 6 (Fall): 375-438.
Tomlins, Christopher. 1993. Law, Labor and Ideology in the Early American Republic. New
         York: Cambridge University Press.
Tripp, Joseph. 1976. “An Instance of Labor and Business Cooperation: Workmen’s
         Compensation in Washington State, 1911.” Labor History 17 (Fall): 530-550.
                                                                                             35


U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1865. Manufactures of The United States in 1860; Compiled from the
       Original Returns of the Eighth Census Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
__________. 1872. Ninth Census-Volume III, The Statistics of The Wealth and Industry of the
       United States. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
__________. 1886. Report of the Mining Industries of the United States. Washington, D.C.:
       Government Printing Office.
__________. 1892. Report on Mineral Industries in the United States at the Eleventh Census:
       1890. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
__________. 1895. Report on Manufacturing Industries in the United States at the Eleventh
       Census: 1890, Part I. Totals for States and Industries. Washington, D.C.: Government
       Printing Office.
__________. 1902. Twelfth Census of the United States: 1900, Manufactures, Volume 7.
       Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
             . 1905. Special Reports: Mines and Quarries, 1902. Washington, DC: Government
       Printing Office,.
             . 1913. Thirteenth Census of the United States: 1910, Population, volume 1;
       Occupations, volume 4, Manufactures, volumes 8 and 9. Washington, DC: Government
       Printing Office.
            . 1933. Fifteenth Census of the United States: 1930, Manufactures, volumes 1 and 3.
       Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
__________. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, 1790-1970. Washington, D.C.:
       Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1914. “Labor Laws of the United States, with Decisions of
       Courts Relating Thereto.” Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics No.
       148. 2 parts. Washington: Government Printing Office.
            . 1925. “Labor Laws of the United States, with Decisions of Courts Relating
       Thereto.” Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics No. 370. Washington:
       Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of Mines. Various years, 1923-1930. Mineral Resources of the United States:
       Nonmetals. Washington, Government Printing Office.
U.S. Coal Commission. 1925. Report, Part III. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
       Office.
U.S. Commissioner of Labor. 1892. Labor Laws of the Various States and Territories and the
       District of Columbia, Second Special Report of the U.S. Commissioner of Labor. House of
       Representatives Report No. 1960, 52d Congress, 1st session. Washington, DC:
       Government Printing Office.
          . 1908. Twenty-Second Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor: Labor Laws of the
       United States, 1907. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
        . 1896. “Labor Laws of the United States.” Second Special Report of the
       Commissioner of Labor . Washington: Government Printing Office.
        . 1904. “Labor Laws of the United States with Decisions of Courts Relating Thereto.”
       Tenth Special Report of the Commissioner of Labor. Washington: Government Printing
       Office.
         . 1908. “Labor Laws of the United States with Decisions of Courts Relating Thereto,
       1907.” Twenty-Second Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor. Washington:
       Government Printing Office.
                                                                                             36


U.S. Geological Survey. Various years from 1890 to 1922. Mineral Resources of the United
       States: Nonmetals. Washington, Government Printing Office.
Von Drehle, David. 2003. Triangle: The Fire that Changed America. New York: Atlantic
       Monthly Press.
Weeks, Jos. D. 1886. “Report on Trade Societies in the United States.” Report on the Statistics
       of Wages in Manufacturing Industries with Supplementary Reports on The Average Retails
       Prices of Necessaries of Life and on Trades Societies, and Strikes and Lockouts.
       Washington, Government Printing Office.
Weinstein, James. 1967. “Big Business and the Origins of Workmens’ Compensation.” Labor
       History 8 (Spring): 156-74.
Wiebe, Robert. 1962. Businessmen and Reform: A Study of the Progressive Movement.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                                Table 1
         Year of Adoption of State Coal Mining Law, Early Coal Production and Inspection Budgets per Coal Worker in Early 1900s


                                                                                      Inspection Budget
                                                                                      per Worker,
                                 1880 Information              Coal Law Index         1967$
                                                  Coal                                                     UMWA
                Year of    Coal      Workers      Union                                                     Share,
State          Adoption   Workers    per Mine    Chapters       1902       1930         1902      1930     1902-23

Pennsylvania    1869         70069        255        33.5          n.a.       n.a.        n.a.      n.a.       0.90
Anthracite
Illinois        1872         16301         28         15               6         9       $1.02    $0.81        0.94
Iowa            1873          5024         22           9              4         6       $1.39    $2.28        0.87
Ohio            1874         16331         26         32               1         8       $1.03    $3.07        0.80
Maryland        1876          3677        115           0              2         9       $0.99    $6.06        0.13
Pennsylvania    1877         33248         50        33.5              8        10       $1.39    $2.27        0.37
Bituminous
Indiana         1879          4496         21           0              6          9      $1.05    $2.23        0.82
Missouri        1881          2599         18           4              3          4      $0.59    $2.04        0.74
Tennessee       1881          1092         55           0              0          6      $0.63    $2.17        0.19
Kansas          1883          3617         19           2              4          5      $1.95    $4.08        0.69
West            1883          4497         35           0              3          8      $0.85    $1.93        0.13
Virginia
Colorado        1883          1434         57           0              4          9      $1.50    $4.04        0.10
Washington      1883           261         65           0              2          9      $1.31    $8.14        0.61
Kentucky        1884          2826         43           0              1          6      $0.67    $0.55        0.19
Wyoming         1886          1009        168           0              4          8      $1.47    $4.37        0.66
Michigan        1887           412         69           1              4          5      $1.80    $2.78        0.79
Arkansas        1889           130          9           0              1          4      $1.60    $1.30        0.72
Montana         1889             3          3           0              3          8      $3.97    $2.40        0.97
                                                                                                                                                38


 Alabama           1891          1513           80           0             3          8        $0.91      $2.54        0.13
 Oklahoma          1891             0            0           0             2          9        $1.38      $3.10        0.72
 New Mexico        1891             0            0           0             2          4        $4.16      $1.65        0.10
 Utah              1896            91           15           0             5          5        $4.21        n.a.       0.65
 North             1905             0            0           0             0          8        $0.00      $3.97         n.a.
 Dakota
 Texas             1907             0            0           0             0          3        $0.00      $3.07        0.72
 Virginia          1912          4497           35           0             0          7        $0.00      $1.32        0.19




Sources: Information that was not available is marked as n.a. Year of law adoption is from Aldrich (1997, p. 70). Information on production,
number of mines, and employees in 1880 is from the U.S. Census Bureau (1886, pp. 681-7). The number of coal union chapters is the number of
local unions and chapters of national unions associated with coal mining from the Weeks Report (Weeks, 1886, pp. 14-19). The regulation index
is the number of coal safety regulations enacted in the state by that date from the following list: the mine must be sprinkled or rock dusted, a
fireboss must examine the mine for gas daily in gaseous mines, mine management must provide adequate timbers to prop the roof, underground
electric wires must be insulated, miners cannot ride on coal cars underground, permissible explosives must be used, state inspectors must pass a
qualifying exam, inspectors can close the mine immediately for some violations, inspectors have the power to make arrests for safety violations,
mine foremen must be licensed by a state board, all miners must be licensed by a state board, foremen must ensure that all men have training, and
the foreman must make a minimum number of visits to the workplace each day. A table showing the dates of enactment of each regulation for
each state can be found in Fishback (1986, pp. 284-5 and 1992, pp. 114-5). The inspection budget per miner divides the appropriations for coal
mining inspection by the number of miners in the state and adjusts for inflation using the Consumer Price Index (1967=1) from U.S. Bureau of
Census (1975, series E-135, p. 211). Information on the laws and inspection budgets came from various issues produced by the Department of
Labor with titles similar to “Labor Laws in the United States” and the legislative statute volumes for each state. See Fishback (1992, pp. 238-40)
for a lengthy description of the sources and methods used. Membership in the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) as a share of
employment is from the U.S. Coal Commission (1925, pp. 1052).
                                                                                                                                 39


                                                                   Table 2
                Year of Introduction of Labor Commission, Factory Inspectors, Department of Labors, and Industrial Commissions

                                                  1880 Information for
                                                     Manufacturing
                                                                                              Extent of
                                              Mean                                             Code-       Permanent
                                  Factory    Workers                             Industrial   Writing       Workers'
                  First Labor   Inspection     per    Total        Union       Commission      by Ind.    Compensation
    State           Bureau       Adopted      Estab. Workers      Chapters      Introduced     Comm.          Law

Alabama             1907 a        1907 a          4.8     10019           22                                 1919
Arizona             1925 b          b
                                                  3.3       220            0      1925          Few          1913
                                    c
Arkansas             1913                         3.8      4557            1                                 1939
California           1883         1885            7.4     43693           18      1913        extensive      1911
Colorado             1887         1911            8.5      5074           24      1915        no codes       1915
Connecticut          1887         1887           25.2    112915           44                                 1913
Delaware             1893         1893           16.9     12638            9                                 1917
Florida             1893 d          e
                                                 12.9      5504            0                                 1935
Georgia              1911         1916            6.9     24875            5                                 1920
Idaho               1890 f          g
                                                  2.4       388            0      1917        no codes       1917
Illinois             1879         1893            9.9    144727          179                                 1911
Indiana              1879         1899            6.2     69508           61                                 1915
Iowa                 1884         1897            4.1     28372           21                                 1913
Kansas               1885         1901            4.3     12062           20                                 1911
Kentucky            1892 h        1903            7.0     37391           53                                 1914
Louisiana            1900         1908            7.8     12167           11                                 1914
Maine                1887         1887           11.8     52954           14                                 1915
Maryland            1888 i        1898           11.0     74945           40      1928        no codes       1912
Massachusetts        1869         1879           24.5    352255          105      1913        extensive      1911
Michigan             1883         1893            8.7     77591           45                                 1912
Minnesota           1887 j        1891            6.1     21247           12                                 1913
                                                                                              40


Mississippi       1914       1914       3.9    5827      3                             1948
Missouri          1879      1891 k      7.4   63995    127                             1926
Montana          1893 l      l m
                                        2.9     578      0      1915       no codes    1915
Nebraska         1887 n     1895   n
                                        3.4    4793      5      1929       no codes    1913
Nevada            1915       1915       3.1     577      4      1919         Few       1913
New
Hampshire         1893      1917       15.4    48831     2      1917       no codes    1911
New Jersey        1877      1878       17.7   126038     2                             1911
                    o         o
New Mexico                              3.9      557   112                             1917
New York          1882      1883       12.4   531533   187      1913       extensive   1913
North
                              e
Carolina          1887                  4.8   18109       1     1931                   1929
North Dakota      1899      1905                        0.5     1919       no codes    1919
Ohio              1877      1884        8.9   183609   199      1913       extensive   1911
Oklahoma          1907      1910                          0                            1915
Oregon            1903      1907        3.2    3473     12      1920         few       1913
                                                               1913 for
Pennsylvania      1872      1889       12.4   387072   530    mines only   extensive   1915
Rhode Island      1887      1894       28.5    62878     8                             1912
South
Carolina          1912      1912        7.6   15828      2                             1935
                              p
South Dakota      1890                                 0.5                             1917
Tennessee       1881-84 q   1897 r      5.2   22445      9      1923         few       1919
Texas             1911      1911        4.1   12159      5                             1913
Utah             1892 s     1917        3.9    2495      1      1917       extensive   1917
Vermont           1912      1912        6.1   17540      2                             1915
Virginia          1897      1919        7.0   40184      9                             1918
Washington        1903      1910        4.4    1147      8      1919         few       1911
West Virginia    1890 t     1899 r      6.0   14311    81                              1913
Wisconsin         1883      1883        7.4   57109    14       1911       extensive   1911
Wyoming           1917      1917        6.9     391      0                             1915
                                                                                                                                                    41




Sources: First Labor Bureau refers to the introduction of either a commissioner of labor, a bureau of labor statistics, or a factory inspector.
Factory inspection adopted refers to the first statutory provision for a factory inspector. For dates of adoption of inspectors and departments of
labor I started with evidence from Brandeis (1935, pp. 628-645) and the U.S. Commissioner of Labor (1896). When the precise date of
introduction was unknown, the microfiche for the State Session Laws of American States and Territories was searched until the original act was
found. The earliest commissioner of labor was in Massachusetts in 1869 and the earliest factory inspector was in Massachusetts in 1879.
Information on workers and establishments for 1880 is from the Report on Manufacturing for the Eleventh Census (U.S. Census Bureau, 1895, pp.
67-69). Information on Industrial Commissions is from Brandeis (1935, p. 654), who was citing work of John Andrews of the American
Association of Labor Legislation. The information on the adoption of workers’ compensation is from Fishback and Kantor (2000, pp. 103-4).
        a
           Alabama had a mine inspector and later a board of arbitration but no official department of labor.
        b
           Arizona had a mine inspector as of 1908.
         c
           Arkansas had an inspector of mines in 1894 or earlier.
         d
           The Florida Agriculture department was given the responsibility to collect statistics on manufactures.
         e
           No law as of 1924.
         f
           Idaho established commission in Constitution. No record of laws passed between 1879 and 1890.
         g
           Idaho had an inspector of mines in 1893 or earlier.
         h
           The Kentucky commissioner was to devote efforts to collect statistics on agriculture, manufacturing and mining.
         i
          The initial Maryland law in 1868 was for agriculture and industry with most of the focus on agriculture. The code of 1888 with
amendments in 1892 is more specific to industry.
         j
          The Minnesota law included language about enforcing laws and prosecuting violations by the commissioner but only funds for the
commissioner were provided.
         k
           Missouri statute for inspector in 1891. Not found in earlier years.
         l
           The Montana act established a bureau of agriculture, labor, and industry.
         m
            Montana had a mine inspector in 1895 or earlier.
         n
           Nebraska gave the commissioner the power to inspect workplaces.
         o
           New Mexico had a mine inspector as of 1908.
         p
           South Dakota had a mine inspector as of 1903.
         q
           The Tennessee Law called for the Bureau of Agriculture, Mining, and Statistics to collect information on labor. The original Bureau of
Agriculture was established in 1871, became the Bureau of Agriculture, Mining, and Statistics in 1875, but appears to have obtained the role of
collecting labor statistics sometime between 1881 and 1884. We have had trouble pinning down the date.
         r
           In Tennessee and West Virginia there were no regular inspectors. Commissioner merely had the power to inspect.
         s
           The Utah legislature had authorized a bureau of labor statistics or labor department earlier.
         t
          West Virginia gave the commissioner the power to inspect workplaces but only to report on findings there.
                                                                                            42


                                           Table 3
 Predicted Signs of the Relationship between Average Workers per Establishment (Mine) and
                                      Safety Regulations



                        Probability of       Enforcement      Breadth of
Motives                 Adoption             Budget           Laws

Reform                  Positive             Uncertain        Positive


Large Employers’        Negative             Negative         Negative
Defensive Strategy


Large Employers Raise   Positive             Positive         Positive
Rivals Costs
                                                                                                      43


                                               Table 4

          Hazard Ratios for Factors Influencing the Introduction of State Labor Administrations and
                                   Factory Inspectors, 1869-1930


Panel A: Introduction of Some Form of Labor Administration
                                                   (1)                          (2)
                                                       1 Std.                 1 Std.
                               Std.       Hazard Deviation            Hazard Deviation
Variable                Mean Dev.            Ratio     Effect1          Ratio Effect
Mfg. workers per          7.57   5.34       1.058          0.31        1.056      0.30
establishment                               (3.24)                     (2.83)
Manufacturing            33.82 63.92        1.005          0.32        1.006      0.38
workers (000)                               (2.48)                     (4.03)
Manufacturing union      30.91 68.86        1.003          0.21
chapters, 1880                              (0.71)
Union Index               6.11   3.05                                  1.019          0.06
                                                                       (0.55)
Southern state            0.29                0.734                    0.725
                                             (-1.06)                  (-1.14)
P                                             2.811                    2.736
Wald Chi-square                               47.30                    45.82

Panel B: Introduction of Factory Inspector
                                                     (3)                      (4)
                                                       1 Std.                   1 Std.
                              Std.           Hazard Deviation         Hazard Deviation
Variable                Mean Dev.              Ratio Effect             Ratio Effect
Mfg. workers per         7.90   5.26          1.053          0.28      1.054         0.28
Establishment                                 (1.74)                   (1.65)
Manufacturing           41.66    68.32        1.009          0.61      1.008         0.55
workers (000)                                 (5.91)                   (7.51)
Manufacturing union     32.36    73.18        0.998         -0.15
chapters, 1880                               (-1.49)
Union index               6.67    3.35                                 0.973          -0.09
                                                                      (-0.62)
Southern state            0.29                0.419                    0.429
                                             (-2.06)                  (-1.99)
p                                             3.254                    3.420
Wald Chi-square                              110.63                   110.29
                                                                                                              44


        1
          The 1 Std. Deviation Effect is the change in the probability of adoption in a specific year given
that the state had not yet adopted associated with a one standard deviation increase in the variable.
Notes and Sources: The values are hazard ratios from a Weibull hazard estimation with time-varying
covariates. The z-scores in parentheses below the hazard ratios are based on robust standard errors and
the null hypothesis that the hazard ratios are equal to one.
If h(t) = h0(t) e X(t) , then each hazard ratio reported above equals eb, where b is an element of . Time
zero (t=0) is 1860 in the model. The Weibull model assumes that the hazard takes the form
h(t)=p tp-1eX(t) . Time zero (t=0) is 1860 in the model. Estimates for p in all of the models are statistically
different from one in Wald Chi-Square tests with four degrees of freedom, implying that the probability
of adoption rose substantially over time.
         Information on the timing of adoption is in Table 2. Observations in the data set were constructed
the following way. States were observed in the last year of the decade with information on workers and
workers per establishment from the beginning of the decade. In the year the state adopted the year for
that observation is the year of adoption. For example, Maine adopted its first labor administrative law in
1887. The first Maine observation is for the end of the 1860s, the year is recorded as 1869, the adoption
indicator is zero, and values for average workers per establishment and total workers are from 1860. The
second Maine observation records the year as 1879, the adoption indicator is zero, and the census values
are from the 1870 census. Since Maine adopted in 1887, the final Maine observation shows the year as
1887, the adoption indicator as one, and the values for workers per establishment and total workers are
from the 1880 census. For Massachusetts, which adopted in 1869, I included a value for 1865 with
census information from 1860 attached; the 1869 observation uses 1870 census information. There were
179 observations for the analysis of the introduction of any labor administration, with 3 of the 48 states
not adopting by 1930. In the factory inspector analysis there were 229 observations with 8 of the 48
states not adopting by 1930. Information on workers and establishments from the Censuses for 1860,
1870, 1880, and 1890 is from U.S. Census Bureau (1895, pp. 67-69). Data on workers and
establishments from the 1900, 1910, and 1920 censuses are from U.S. Census Bureau (1933, pp. 43-600)
and U.S. Census Bureau (1902, pp. 58-61). In the 1904 Manufacturing Census, the Census Bureau
focused the survey on factories and eliminated the hand trades. I spliced the data for total workers and
workers per establishment after 1900 with the earlier series by multiplying by the ratio in 1900 of workers
in factories and hand trades to workers in factories. The same procedure was followed for workers per
establishment. Information on unionization at the state level is sparse, and two measures of unionization
were tried. Neither fully covers the period. The union index is described by Kantor and Fishback (2000,
p. 263), who developed it for 1899, 1909, 1919 and 1929 for their workers’ compensation study. High
values of the index imply that the state has a higher share of workers in industries that at the national level
were more unionized. For observations prior to 1899, the 1899 values of the index were used to
approximate the union index for observations. In the other version of the estimation, the number of
manufacturing union chapters is the number of local unions and chapters of national unions associated
with manufacturing in the state as of 1880 from the Weeks Report (Weeks, 1886, pp. 14-19). States were
given the same value in each year observed. Southern states included Maryland, Virginia, Kentucky,
Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas and all states South and East of those states.
                                                                                                          45


                                                      Table 5
                    Factors Influencing the Introduction of Coal Mine Safety Laws, 1869-1912
                                                                 (1)                        (2)
                                           Std.         Hazard          OSD       Hazard       OSD
                                  Mean     Dev.         Ratio          Effect 1   Ratio       Effect 1
       Coal workers per mine      42.41    51.34          1.001           0.05
                                                          (0.38)
       Coal workers in state       2.28      6.85         1.047           0.32
       (000)                                              (2.11)
       Tons per mine (000)        18.67    27.41                                   0.999          -0.03
                                                                                  (-0.08)
       Total tons in state         0.89      2.29                                  1.164          0.38
       (millions)                                                                  (2.09)
       Coal union chapters         3.38      8.99         1.052           0.47     1.044          0.40
                                                          (2.50)                   (1.72)
       Southern state              0.28                   0.400                    0.398
                                                         (-1.74)                  (-1.80)
       P                                                  3.417                    3.271
       Wald Chi-square (4)                                86.19                    62.24

        1
          A one standard deviation (OSD) effect is the change in the probability of adoption in a specific
year, given that the state had not yet adopted, associated with a one standard deviation increase in the
variable.
Notes and Sources: The values are hazard ratios from a Weibull hazard estimation with time-varying
covariates. The z-scores in parentheses below the hazard ratios are based on robust standard errors and
the null hypothesis that the hazard ratios are equal to one. For notes on the Weibull hazard model see
Table 4. Time zero is 1860. Estimates for p in all of the models are statistically different from one in
Wald Chi-square tests with four degrees of freedom, implying that the probability of adoption rose
substantially over time. Observations in the data set were constructed the following way. States were
observed in the last year of the decade and were matched with information on miners, miners per mine,
tons produced, and tons per mine from the beginning of the decade. In the decade where the state
adopted, the year of the observation was the year of adoption. For example, West Virginia adopted its
mine safety law in 1883. The first West Virginia observation is for the end of the 1860s, the year is
recorded as 1869, the adoption indicator is zero, and values for miners et. al are from 1860. The second
West Virginia observation records the year as 1879, the adoption indicator is zero, and the census values
are from the 1870 census. Since West Virginia adopted in 1883, the final West Virginia observation
shows the year as 1883, the adoption indicator as one, and the values for workers per establishment and
total workers are from the 1880 census. For Pennsylvania anthracite, which adopted in 1869, I included
a value for 1865 with census information from 1860 attached; the 1869 observation uses 1870 census
information. States were not included in the sample unless they consistently produced more than 100,000
tons of coal by the 1920s. Anthracite and bituminous coal in Pennsylvania are treated as two separate
state observations because Pennsylvania had separate regulatory codes and inspection staffs for the
different types of coal. Southern states were Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Oklahoma,
Tennesses, Texas, and Virginia. The 25 states led to 79 observations and all states adopted the law
during the period under study. Information on production, number of mines, and employees is from the
following U.S. mining censuses: U.S. Census Bureau (1865, pp. clxxiii-clxxiv) for 1860; (1872, pp. 760-
                                                                                                    46


767) for 1870; (1886, pp. 681-7) for 1880; (1892, pp. 347-8) for 1890; and (1905, 709-717) for 1902.
Information for 1910 came from U.S. Geological Survey, various years. The coal union chapters is the
number of local unions and chapters of national unions associated with coal mining from the Weeks
Report (Weeks, 1886, pp. 14-19). The number of chapters in Pennsylvania were split evenly between the
anthracite and bituminous observation. The number of chapters was the same for each state for all years
that they were observed.
                                                                                                                47



                                                 Table 6
             OLS and Fixed Effects Estimates for Inspection Budgets per Coal Worker (1967$)
                          and Coal Regulation Index, 1902, 1910, 1920, 1930

Panel A:
                                   Inspection Budget per Coal Worker
                                                in 1967$                              Coal Mining Law Index

                                         (1)                  (2)                      (1)                 (2)
                      Std.           OSD                        OSD                      OSD                 OSD
                 Mean Dev.     Coef. Effect1              Coef. Effect1            Coef. Effect1       Coef. Effect1
Constant                      2.408                       2.574                    3.938               3.984
                              (4.62)                     (4.46)                   (4.96)              (4.18)
Workers per       70.9 35.7 -0.005     -0.18             -0.018  -0.64            -0.005  -0.17       -0.010  -0.37
mine                         (-1.49)                    (-2.98)                  (-0.69)             (-1.42)
Number of         20.5 33.96 -0.006    -0.20              0.005   0.16             0.036   1.23        0.013   0.45
Workers                      (-2.12)                     (0.73)                   (7.05)              (0.99)
(000s)
Percent           49.5     32.3     -0.004     -0.14      -0.003         -0.11   0.016       0.53      0.004          0.14
UMWA                               (-0.95)               (-0.48)                 (2.11)                (0.41)
Year 1910                                                  0.518                                       1.373
                                                          (1.56)                                       (2.62)
Year 1920                                                 -0.383                                       3.373
                                                         (-1.30)                                       (7.40)
Year 1930                                                  1.594                                       3.938
                                                          (4.26)                                       (8.60)
State Effects                                          Included                                     Included
R-squared                           0.134                  0.658                  0.239                0.796
Observations                           90                     90                     92                    92

Panel B:
                                     Inspection Budget per Coal Worker
                                                  in 1967$                                Coal Mining Law Index

                                             (1)                   (2)                    (1)                   (2)
                           Std.              OSD                   OSD                     OSD                  OSD
                 Mean      Dev.        Coef. Effect1         Coef. Effect1           Coef. Effect1        Coef. Effect1
Constant                               2.243                 2.030                  3.505                 3.839
                                      (4.77)                (4.90)                  (4.86)               (4.79)
Tons per            56.6    36.1      -0.004  -0.15         -0.015  -0.55           0.002    0.06        -0.012  -0.42
Mine (000)                           (-1.09)               (-2.66)                  (0.23)              (-1.50)
Tons                17.8    32.5      -0.005  -0.16          0.003   0.11           0.037    1.21         0.014   0.44
produced                             (-1.80)                (0.47)                  (7.63)               (1.03)
(millions)
                                                                                                          48


 Percent            49.5    32.3     -0.005    -0.15      -0.004    -0.13       0.018      0.58      0.005     0.15
 UMWA                               (-1.05)              (-0.52)                (2.25)               (0.41)
 Year 1910                                                 0.178                                     1.244
                                                          -0.690                                     (2.70)
 Year 1920                                                -0.353                                     3.404
                                                         (-1.25)                                     (7.70)
 Year 1930                                                 1.553                                     4.007
                                                          (3.96)                                     (8.59)
 State Effects                                         Included                                   Included
 R-squared                           0.043                 0.635                0.243                0.800
 Observations                           89                    89                   91                    91

        1
          A one standard deviation (OSD) effect is the change in the probability of adoption in a specific
year given that the state had not yet adopted associated with a one standard deviation increase in the
variable.

Notes and Source: The t-statistics in parentheses below the coefficients are based on robust standard
errors and on the null hypothesis that the coefficients are equal to zero. The dataset is a panel for the 23
leading bituminous coal mining states for the years 1902, 1910, 1920, 1930. North Dakota appeared in
the adoption regressions in Table 5, but is absent here due to missing data. The regulation index is the
number of coal safety regulations enacted in the state by that date from the list described in the notes to
Table 1. A table showing the dates of enactment of each regulation for each state can be found in
Fishback (1986, pp. 284-5 and 1992, pp. 114-5). The inspection budget per miner divides the
appropriations for coal mining inspection by the number of miners in the state and adjusts for inflation
using the Consumer Price Index (1967=1) from U.S. Bureau of Census (1975, series E-135, p. 211).
Information on the laws and inspection budgets came from various issues produced by the Department of
Labor with titles similar to “Labor Laws in the United States” and the legislative statute volumes for each
state. See Fishback (1992, pp. 238-40) for a lengthy description of the sources and methods used. The
number of mines in 1902 is from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1905, pp. 709-717). Information on total
employment and tons produced for all years and on the number of mines for 1910, 1920, and 1930 come
from various issues of the annual report Mineral Resources of the United States, Nonmetals, issued by the
U.S. Geological Survey through 1922 and by the U.S. Bureau of Mines after 1922. Specific page
numbers for each year are reported in Fishback (1992, pp. 234-6). Information on membership in the
United Mine Workers of America is from the U.S. Coal Commission (1925, p. 1052). The source did not
provide information for 1930, so the 1923 values, the latest available, were assumed for that year.
                                                                                                    49


                                               ENDNOTES

         1
             Becker (1983), Stigler (1971), Pelzman (1976), and Buchanan, Tollison, and Tullock

(1980) discuss how interest groups might capture the legislative process. Once the rules are in

place we might also see both capture and corruption of the regulatory process (Kolko 1963,

1965).
         2
             Fishback and Kantor (1995, 2000) find that when workers’ compensation was

introduced union members actually did not experience wage cuts that offset improvements in

post-accident payments, while nonunion workers experienced reductions to varying degrees.

Even nonunion workers who experienced reductions saw improvements in their welfare because

they were better insured against accidents.
         3
             For discussions optimal design of regulation and liability, see Landes and Posner (1987),

Shavell (1987), Polinsky and Shavell (2000), and Glaeser and Shleifer (2003). In the optimal

setting workers and employers prevent all accidents where the costs of prevention are below the

expected loss from the accident, (where the expected loss is the accident probability multiplied

by the damage). In settings with heterogeneous firms, the optimal system should not force firms

to prevent accidents for which prevention costs exceed the expected damage. Further, the system

should insure that the lower-cost “preventer,” employer or worker, prevents the accident.
         4
             The stakes involved in many decisions were lower under workers’ compensation than

under negligence liability. Under negligence liability the stakes in each decision were high

because each involved an all-or-nothing decision about fault. In contrast, most workers’

compensation disputes arose over the extent of the injury and measures of the workers’ wage in

determining the appropriate values to plug into the state’s formula for compensation. The

remaining decisions, however, were all-or-nothing decisions with far-reaching consequences for
                                                                                                       50



workers’ compensation policy. Decisions on what constituted a work-related injury and opinions

on whether the employer was willfully negligent (which removed the restrictions on

compensation) established the boundaries of workers’ compensation and were similar in scope to

the stakes in a major negligence case. Given the large number of settlements under negligence

liability, the annual number of these boundary decisions may have been similar to the number of

negligence cases that were actually decided by the courts.

          5
              For studies of the roles played by major employers during the Progressive Era, see for

example, Robert Wiebe (1962), James Weinstein (1967), Roy Lubove (1967), David Moss

(1996), William Graebner (1976), Mark Aldrich (1997), Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor

(2000).
          6
              Ann Bartel and Lacy Glenn Thomas (1985) claim that the Occupational Safety and

Health Administration’s (OSHA) persistence despite relatively little measured impact on

accident rates since 1971 is the result of lobbying by large and unionized employers. This anti-

competitive explanation might have less force for state legislation in the early 1900s to the extent

that the producers’ prime competitors were located in other states where the regulations would

have no influence.
          7
              For discussions of the early evolution of the common law of workplace accident

compensation cases, see Tomlins (1988 and 1993, chapter 10). The basic principles for liability

would continue to evolve into the early 1900s. See Friedman (1985), Ladinsky and Friedman

(1967), and Fishback and Kantor (2000, chapter 2).
          8
              See Posner (1972, p. 32), Landes and Posner (1985), Fishback and Kantor (2000, pp. 30-

33).
                                                                                                        51



       9
           Gary Schwartz (1981) challenges this “industry subsidy” view with an ample number of

exceptions from his analysis of cases in California and New Hampshire. Numerous economic

analyses have suggested that negligence liability combined with the three defenses can be an

optimal accident prevention system in theory under specific conditions. See Posner and Landes

(1987), Glaeser and Shleifer (2003), Shavell (1987).
       10
            To develop a sense of the publicity of judicial bribery just prior to the introduction of

workers’ compensation I created a sample of corrupt events using the ProQuest search engine on

the New York Times index for the period 1900 to 1910 using the word combination “judge” and

“bribe.” The search unearthed five episodes where judges had reported to the press on attempts

to bribe them but there was no evidence that they had accepted the bribe. In seven cases the

judges were charged with and sometimes convicted of bribery or corruption, but only two could

be related to workplaces.
       11
            Although this paper focuses on industry, railroad regulation and liability also went

through a series of transformations. The dangers in the railroad industry were a driving force in

the development of the common law liability regime (Tomlins, 1993, chapter 10). State railroad

commission between 1840 and 1890 imposed some rudimentary safety regulations. Federal

safety regulations began in 1892 with the Railroad Safety Appliance Act. The safety laws for

railroads were targeted specifically at railroading at the state and federal levels. Accidents for

interstate railroad workers are still handled under a negligence liability system although the

fellow-servant defense and assumption of risk defenses have been eliminated and contributory

negligence has been replaced with comparative negligence. See Clark (1891), Aldrich (1997),

and Kim and Fishback 1993.
       12
            See Fishback and Kantor (2000, Appendix G) for categorizations of the state laws.
                                                                                                      52



        13
             Information was not available on the size of multi-establishment firms. The average

establishment size understates the average size of firms because it does not take into account

firms that had multiple establishments. My impression is that multi-establishment firms more

commonly ran large establishments so that the measurement error might not be a serious

problem. Further, multi-establishment firms tended to own establishments in multiple states.

Their political influence in those states was likely to be influenced by the size of their

establishments in those states.
        14
             In the regressions, I have experimented with other control variables but none were

found to be statistically significant in the analysis. I tried several measures of political activity in

all of the adoption and coal regulation equations, including shares of votes for populist

presidential candidates in the 1890s, voting for Republicans and Socialists for president in the

1900s, and Poole and Rosenthal’s (1993) spatial coordinates for the location of U.S. Senators

along conservative/liberal spectrums and rural/urban spectrums at various times. The measures

generally had small and statistically insignificant effects. Since Mark Aldrich (1997) and

William Graebner (1977) suggest that large explosions contributed to expanded regulations, I

developed a measure of large-scale accidents for the study in Table 6, but its impact was always

small and statistically insignificant.

        15
             North Dakota was in the adoption sample but missing data forced its elimination from

the study of inspection budgets and coverage of the laws.
        16
             See Aldrich (1997), Fishback (1992), and Graebner (1977).
        17
             See Aldrich (1997, pp. 58-73) and Graebner (1977, pp. 94-5).
        18
             See Fishback (1992, 113) and Graebner (1977).
                                                                                                53



       19
            Comparisons are based on mine inspector salaries in state mining laws and average

annual earnings of coal miners (Fishback 1992, pp. 80-81) and average annual earnings for

salaried workers in manufacturing from the manufacturing census (U.S. Bureau of Census,

Manufacturing, volume 3, 1933, pp. 43-600).
       20
            Spending on factory inspection may have been less effective than spending on mine

inspection. Estimates of the impact of state inspection budgets by David Buffum (1992) and

James Chelius (1977) on measures of fatal accidents in industry do not find statistically

significant reductions in accident risk.

       21
            See Graebner (1977, pp. 90-91) and Corbin (1981, p. 17).

       22
            These accounts are largely based on Stein (1962) and McEvoy (1995).
       23
            Quoted in Stein (1962, p. 116).
       24
            Problems with inadequate inspections remain today, but the sanctions when caught are

much greater. See Arthur McEvoy (1995, pp. 648-650).
