                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               COLONIALISM, INEQUALITY,
                          AND LONG-RUN PATHS OF DEVELOPMENT

                                           Stanley L. Engerman
                                           Kenneth L. Sokoloff

                                          Working Paper 11057
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11057


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Colonialism, Inequality, and Long-Run Paths of Development
Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 11057
January 2005
JEL No. N10

                                           ABSTRACT

Over the last few years, colonialism, especially as pursued by Europeans, has enjoyed a revival in

interest among both scholars and the general public. Although a number of new accounts cast

colonial empires in a more favorable light than has generally been customary, others contend that

colonial powers often leveraged their imbalance in power to impose institutional arrangements on

the colonies that were adverse to long-term development. We argue here, however, that one of the

most fundamental impacts of European colonization may have been in altering the composition of

the populations in the areas colonized. The efforts of the Europeans often involved implanting

ongoing communities who were greatly advantaged over natives in terms of human capital and legal

status. Because the paths of institutional development were sensitive to the incidence of extreme

inequality which resulted, their activity had long lingering effects. More study is needed to identify

all of the mechanisms at work, but the evidence from the colonies in the Americas suggests that it

was those that began with extreme inequality and population heterogeneity that came to exhibit

persistence over time in evolving institutions that restricted access to economic opportunities and

generated lower rates of public investment in schools and other infrastructure considered conducive

to growth. These patterns may help to explain why a great many societies with legacies as colonies

with extreme inequality have suffered from poor development experiences.

Stanley L. Engerman                                   Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Rochester                               University of California, Los Angeles
Rochester, NY 14627                                   Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                              and NBER
enge@troi.cc.rochester.edu                            sokoloff@ucla.edu
        The study, if not the practice, of colonialism is again in fashion. Over the last few years, the

institution, especially as pursued by Europeans, has enjoyed a revival in interest among both scholars

and the general public. One reason for this reexamination may be sentimentality for a simpler ordered

world, as a number of these new accounts cast colonial empires in a more favorable light than has

generally been customary. Deepak Lal, for example, argues that those nations that established empires

merit praise, as their creations normally brought about lower levels of conflict and costs of carrying out

long-distance trade, as well as promoted greater prosperity in the affected societies.1 Niall Ferguson

highlights progressive sides to Britain’s oversight of her colonies, such as the introduction of efficient

civil services and rule of law, as well as the abolition of slavery. 2 The image of kinder and gentler

imperial powers also has some foundation in the work of Lance Davis and Robert Huttenback, who in

their meticulous and detailed estimates found that Britain was not nearly so aggressive or successful in

extracting returns from its colonies as she could have been, and indeed that her Empire generated little in

the way of returns for the home country overall.3

        Quite a different motivation, however, has been behind the recent proliferation of studies by

economists of the European effort to colonize most of the rest of the world.4 Inspired by the goal of

improving understanding of the processes and institutions of economic growth, these scholars have been

attracted by the quasi-natural experiment generated by a small number of European countries

establishing many colonies across a wide range of environments. The logic is that the historical record

of these different societies can be analyzed to determine whether there were systematic patterns in how

their institutions or economies evolved with respect to initial conditions. For example, have colonies

with a British heritage, or those in a particular sort of physical environment, realized more economic

progress over time than their counterparts have? In other words, the history of European colonization


1
  Lal 2004.
2
  Ferguson 2003.
3
  Davis and Huttenback 1986.
4
  For examples of what has become a substantial literature, see Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997 and 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson,
                                                                                                               2


provides scholars with a rich supply of evidence, or a laboratory, that can be used to study economic

performance and the evolution of institutions over the long run. Because some of the characteristics of

the colonies were in place at or near the time of settlement, and thus can reasonably be treated as

exogenous, many economists have been hopeful that the data generated by their later development can

be used to get at causal relationships or mechanisms.

        Inequality is one of the key variables that emerge from these studies as of great consequence to

long-run paths of development. Moreover, not only does extreme inequality seem to have had a

profound influence on societies so afflicted, but the dynamics of European settlement meant that it

generated many colonies in that condition. Several research teams have arrived at similar conclusions,

but perhaps the most direct examination of the impact of inequality has been the work we have done on

the economies of the Americas. Our investigation began with a question. Why was it that for at least

two hundred and fifty years after the Europeans arrived to colonize the so-called New World, most

observers regarded the English, French, Dutch, and Spanish settlements on the northern part of the North

American continent as relative backwaters with limited economic prospects, and that the flows of

resources to the Americas mirrored that view? The simple answer is that per capita incomes, especially

for those of European descent, were higher in at least parts of the Caribbean and South America than

they were in the colonies that were to become the United States and Canada well into the late-18th and

early 19th centuries. Looking back from the vantage point of the early twenty-first century, however, it is

clear that the real puzzle is why the colonies that were the choices of the first Europeans to settle in the

Americas, were those that fell behind -- and conversely, why the societies populated by those who came

later and had to settle for areas considered less favorable have proved more successful economically

over the long run.

        A traditional and popular explanation for these intriguing patterns credits the success of the



and Robinson 2001 and 2002; and Easterly and Levine 2003.
                                                                                                                           3


North American economies to the superiority of English institutional heritage, or to the better fit of

Protestant beliefs with market institutions.5 However, proponents of this interpretation generally neglect

the implications of the fact that various British colonies in the New World evolved quite distinct

societies and sets of economic institutions, despite beginning with roughly the same legal and cultural

background and drawing immigrants from similar places and economic classes. British Guiana (now

Guyana), Jamaica, and British Honduras (now Belize) are among the many whose records of

development stand in stark contrast with those of the United States and Canada, but resemble those of

neighboring societies of different national heritages. Impressed with how the evidence seemed

inconsistent with the notions that British heritage or Protestantism was the key factor, we instead offered

an alternative explanation of the divergent paths of development among the societies of the Americas.

We highlighted how the great majority of European colonies in the New World came to be characterized

early in their histories, primarily because of their factor endowments, by extreme inequality in the

distributions of wealth, human capital, and political influence. We argued, moreover, that these initial

differences in inequality were of major import, because societies that began with great inequality tended,

as compared to the small number -- including those that came to make up the U.S. and Canada -- that

began with relative equality and homogeneity of the population, to evolve institutions that contributed to

the persistence of substantial inequality and generally poor records of development over the long run.6

        What led to such substantial differences in inequality across colonies? Briefly put, extreme

inequality arose in the colonies of the Caribbean and in Brazil, because their soils and climates gave

them a comparative advantage in growing sugar and other lucrative crops that were produced at lowest

cost during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries on very large slave plantations. These colonies soon

specialized heavily in their comparative advantage, and with the consequent importation of enormous


5. For example, see North 1988 and Coatsworth 1993 for discussions of why the English institutional heritage helped Canada
and the United States in realizing economic growth. For general discussions of the role of institutions in worldwide economic
growth, see North 1981.
                                                                                                                      4


numbers of slaves, their populations came to be composed of a small elite of European descent with the

dominant share of the population (generally 85 percent or more) consisting of black slaves, or (later)

non-white freedmen and their descendants. Extreme inequality in wealth and human capital came to

characterize much of Spanish America as well. The inequality arose here from the endowment of large

populations of Native Americans surviving the initial impact with the diseases the Europeans brought

with them, and from the Spanish practices (which were influenced by pre-existing Native-American

organizations in Mexico and Peru) of awarding claims on land, native labor, and rich mineral resources

to members of the elite (whose number were limited by restrictive immigration policies). A few areas

that had relatively small native populations, such as Argentina, Uruguay, and Costa Rica, were less

affected however. In contrast, the societies of the northern part of North America developed with

relative equality and population homogeneity, as there were relatively few Native Americans on the east

coast where the colonies were established, and the climates and soils favored a regime of mixed farming

centered on grains and livestock which exhibited quite limited economies of scale in production.

        Although the great diversity of settlement patterns and economic structures across the

Americas provide a particularly well suited context for the study of the impact of inequality on

institutional and economic development, the patterns in that part of the world may well have important

implications for the experience of societies established as European colonies elsewhere. With the

exceptions of Australia and New Zealand, European settlements in other parts of the world were not

based upon large numbers of European settlers who became the key productive laborers, but upon small

numbers who remained on the perimeter of the country and exercised control through military power or

political arrangements with the local rulers. For example, the Portuguese, Dutch, British, and French

sailed around the Cape of Good Hope at roughly the same time as they went to the Americas, to acquire

territories and control of large native populations in Asia. The numbers of European settlers were few


6. Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002. It is notable that the Latin American and Caribbean region continues to have the
                                                                                                                             5


and they were generally involved in either political administration or in operating very large agricultural

units. As in the Caribbean, these settler populations were rarely directly employed in producing

commodities for sale in European markets, and their primary concern was more with control than with

the production of economic surpluses. As for Africa, the early European settlements on the coast,

mainly trading forts, were not able to exercise control over the native population. Even when Europeans

were able to move inland during the 19th century, after the introduction of quinine, European domination

was achieved with relatively few settlers through arrangements with local powers or via military

prowess.7 The last to be settled of the European colonies were the Pacific Ocean islands, including Fiji

and Hawaii. There too, and particularly where sugar could be grown, Europeans accounted for only

small proportions of the population. In virtually all of these colonies, suffrage was restricted and

expenditures on education and other public services tended to be miniscule, reflecting (and contributing

to) the magnitude of the inequality that existed between those of European descent and others.

         Almost everywhere Europeans settled during their grand epoch of expansion across the globe,

they did so with far higher levels of wealth, human capital (including literacy and familiarity with

technology and markets), and political influence or power than most of the residents native to the area

enjoyed. Thus, where the Europeans encountered large native populations who survived contact with

western diseases but were colonized, as in Mexico, Peru, Indonesia, or India, their advantages in human

capital and other assets generally meant that Europeans did extremely well relative to the bulk of the

natives, and that there was great inequality. Where they moved into fairly empty or depopulated

territories, however (as in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, or the United States), relative equality

tended to prevail. 8 The more heavily populated colonies, or those in tropical areas that could quickly


highest level of inequality in the world. See Deininger and Squire 1996.
7
   The main exception to this generalization is South Africa, but even here those of European descent accounted for about 20
percent of the population.
8
  In those cases where the endowments were well suited to large-scale labor-intensive production of staples, slaves or contract
labor were often brought in to provide a labor force. The importation of slaves to the Caribbean basin to grow sugar is the
outstanding example of this, but the extensive use of contract labor from South Asia to augment the labor force, especially
                                                                                                                           6


increase population by drawing on imported slave labor, often had quite different comparative

advantages than Europe (due to different climates, valuable natural resources, and large native

populations). As free populations were primarily motivated by the prospects of economic returns, these

areas generally attracted the greater number of Europeans until the 18th century, when the greater

opportunities associated with commercial grain agriculture and industrialization shifted attention to

mainland North America.9 Overall, the phenomenon of European colonization generating many

societies with extremely high degrees of inequality, and rather few with low inequality, seems unlikely

to have been confined to the Americas.



                                                              II

           The stark contrasts in the degree of initial inequality across the European colonies in the

Americas, if not elsewhere, present scholars with a wonderful opportunity to study whether and how

inequality affects the processes and path of development. Whereas previous treatments of the impact of

inequality on growth have often been concerned with how savings or investment rates might be affected,

we and other scholars who have sought to use the natural experiment provided by colonization focus on

the hypothesis that extreme differences across colonies in the extent of inequality gave rise to systematic

differences in the ways institutions evolved, and in turn on paths of development.10 The argument is that

greater equality or homogeneity among the population led, over time, to more democratic political

institutions, more investment in public goods and infrastructure, and to institutions that offered relatively

broad access to property rights and economic opportunities.11 In contrast, where there was extreme



where land was relatively abundant, after the emancipation of slaves provides another. See Engerman 1982, 1983, and 1986.
9
 Engerman and Sokoloff 2002.
10
   For examples of the approach that highlight variation in savings rates with relative income or with rates of taxation, see
Alesina and Rodrik 1994 and Persson and Tabellini 19994. For those investigating the impact of inequality on institutions
more broadly, see Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997 and 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001 and 2002; and Easterly
and Levine 2003.

11
     There are of course some classic expositions of these and similar ideas. See, for example Tocqueville 1835 and Turner
                                                                                                                7


inequality, political institutions were less democratic, investments in public goods and infrastructure

were far more limited, and the institutions that evolved tended to provide highly unbalanced (favoring

elites) access to property rights and economic opportunities. The resulting differences in access to

opportunities may be important in accounting for the disparate records at long-term growth, because

where processes of early industrialization have been sustained (such as in Britain and the United States

during the 19th century, and even East Asia in the 20th), they have generally involved broad participation

in the commercial economy. Economies that only provided narrow access to opportunities might have

been, and be, less capable of realizing sustained economic growth.

        There are a variety of mechanisms through which the extent of inequality in a society might

affect the character of institutions that develop. The avenue that typically receives the most attention

works through political inequality. When political power or influence is concentrated among a small

segment of the population, that group is able to shape policies or institutions to its advantage. We

expect members of such elites to act in their interest, for example, by inducing the government to make

investments and provide services they favor while being assessed for a less than proportionate share of

the costs, or to define and enforce property and other sorts of rights in ways that treat them in a

preferential manner. Some activity of this sort is present in all societies, as the distribution of political

influence is never entirely equal, and those with more resources generally fare better in the competition

over influencing the government. But the extent and ultimate impact of such activity can vary even

across nominal democracies, especially when the right to vote depends on literacy or wealth (or other

attributes), or where ballots are not secret. The absence of democracy, or a situation when one class of

the population has the capability to impose its will by force if need be, is an extreme case of how

political inequality can lead to institutions that favor a narrow range of the population.

        The importance of political inequality (or military might) often figures prominently in



1947.
                                                                                                              8


discussions of how institutions are established in colonies. The presumption that those with a monopoly

of force or a dominant share of the votes get their way does not seem an unreasonable presumption.

Nevertheless, it is worth reflecting on the relevance of the well accepted modern adage: you can’t

always get what you want.12 No matter how much inequality there is in political influence or in any

other dimension, there are frequently constraints that inconveniently narrow the range of feasible

possibilities for the fortunate individual or class. The initial objects of the colonies established in the

Americas, and indeed elsewhere in the world, were generally the same -- to generate economic returns

for the respective European country. Although the goals may have been similar, the diverse

environments in which the colonies were located led to a variety of economic structures and institutions

as the colonizers sought to take best advantage of the different opportunities and challenges they faced

in the respective places. Miscalculations of the effects of various institutional designs, with resulting

unintended consequences, were, of course, not uncommon. The colonists came with similar

backgrounds and institutional heritages, but heterogeneity developed as they applied and adapted the

technologies and institutional heritages they brought with them to conditions quite unlike those in the

Old World. Moreover, the extent to which the metropolis, or any political authority, could effectively

specify the institutions prevailing in any colony varied with the local circumstances.

           It is well known that in many of the Spanish colonies in Latin America, especially where

aboriginal populations were concentrated, a relatively small number of individuals were favored with

large grants of land and claims on labor and tribute from natives that long endured. Less fully

appreciated, however, is that there were also efforts to implant a European-style organization of

agriculture based on concentrated ownership of land combined with labor provided by tenant farmers or

indentured servants in many of the colonies of North America, as when Pennsylvania, New York,

Maryland, and Canada (the same could be said for Australia) were established. But these attempts


12
     Rolling Stones 1969.
                                                                                                                      9


invariably failed; large landholdings unraveled because even men of ordinary means were able to set up

and flourish as independent farmers where land was abundant and cheap, labor was scarce, and scale

economies were absent. Despite William Penn having received the royal charter for Pennsylvania, and

accordingly having initial control of the territory, such conditions frustrated the attempts of this

fabulously wealthy member of the elite to replicate an English-style organization of agriculture in the

New World. As much as wealthy men such as Penn might have liked in an ideal world to institute

hierarchical institutions that greatly advantaged those of their class, their ability to attain that goal was

tempered by the need to attract more labor and more productive labor to their respective colonies; that is,

even landowners were desirous of taking steps that would attract more migrants from Europe and

elsewhere. Similarly, the Puritans who settled in the Massachusetts Bay Colony might have liked to do

as their brethren who chose to site their early 17th century colony on Providence Island (an island off the

coast of Nicaragua), and rely on Native American, indentured servants, or slaves to perform their

manual labor, but the cold harsh climate in New England would not support such a commercial

strategy.13 Indeed, a century later New Englanders despaired at being able to afford the high prices

slaves commanded in the international market.14

        These cases suggest that political inequality alone was not sufficient for elites to obtain

institutions that greatly advantaged them with respect to government policies or access to property rights

and other kinds of economic opportunities. In some environments, even when political or military

power was highly concentrated in their hands, elites might have voluntarily, and without threat of

violent upheaval, found it in their interest to provide better conditions and treatment to the humble.

Although there are a variety of factors that might lead to such an evidently anomalous outcome, and

ways of characterizing them, the relative scarcity of labor seems in the context of the European colonies



13
  Kupperman 1993.
14
  As McManus 1973 (p. 23) makes clear, those in the northern U.S. were priced out of the market for slaves by the 1760s:
“By 1764 Thomas Rich, one of Philadelphia’s leading traders noted that ‘the time is over for the sale of Negroes here.’”
                                                                                                            10


to be a crucial one. Where labor was relatively scarce, as compared to land and other resources, political

inequality was not accompanied by economic inequality. In such circumstances, the lack of economic

inequality (or relative equality) circumscribed how far political elites could go in designing institutions

to advantage their members. In a situation where there was relative political equality, however,

economic inequality -- as reflected in the relative scarcity of factor in somewhat elastic supply – might

lead to institutions that greatly advantaged that scarce factor. Hence, economic inequality can

sometimes, in the sorts of conditions that are not uncommon in colonies or less-developed countries

(with an abundance of unskilled labor but a scarcity of capital and skilled labor), exert more of an

influence on the way institutions evolve than political inequality per se.



                                                       III

       Comparative study of the record of the long-term development of the societies of the Americas

supports our hypothesis that there were empirical regularities in the ways strategic institutions evolved,

such that those that began as colonies with relatively extreme inequality were more restrictive in

providing access to economic opportunities and less oriented toward investing in public goods and

infrastructure than were those that began with relative equality or homogeneity among the population.

This pattern contributed to the long-term persistence of extreme inequality among the former group, and

may also help to explain why their long-term records of economic growth have been mediocre at best,

relative to those of the latter and especially relative to expectations during the era of European

colonization. The specific mechanisms that worked to produce the divergence in institutional and other

development are complex and difficult to discern, but it seems clear that they often involved factors

other than differences in the political power of the elite.

       It has long been recognized that the conduct of elections, including who holds the right to vote, is

one of the most crucial of institutions. Varying the rules or organization of how votes are cast and of
                                                                                                           11


who casts them can have a fundamental impact on the policy choices that the elected representatives –

who in some sense constitute the collective government of the electors – make. As governments

generally have a monopoly of power over certain important activities, there are often major implications

for how a society’s resources or wealth is distributed across the population, as well as for the pace of

economic growth. Given what is at stake, it should not be surprising that throughout history many have

fought and died over both the design of the rules and the outcomes of elections. Most of the societies of

the Americas had achieved independence from their colonial masters and were at least nominal

democracies by the early 19th century, and thus our estimates (see Table 1) of how broadly the franchise

was extended over time and of what fractions of respective populations actually voted in elections have

a direct bearing on the extent to which elites based largely on wealth, human capital, race, and gender

held disproportionate political power in their respective countries, and on whether and how initial

differences in such power or influence persisted.

       The estimates reveal that until the 20th century it was common in all countries to reserve the right

to vote to adult males (white adult males until after the Civil War), but the United States and Canada

were the clear leaders in doing away with restrictions based on wealth and literacy, and much higher

fractions of the populations voted in these countries than anywhere else in the Americas. Not only did

the United States and Canada attain the secret ballot and extend the franchise to even the poor and

illiterate much earlier (restrictions that were reintroduced in the United States at the expense of blacks

and immigrants late in the 19th century), but the evolution of the proportion of the population that voted

was at least a half-century ahead of even the most democratic countries of South America (namely,

Uruguay, Argentina, and Costa Rica, which have generally been regarded as among the most egalitarian

of Latin American societies and whose initial factor endowments most closely resembled those of the

United States and Canada).

       It is remarkable that as late as 1900, none of the countries in Latin America had the secret ballot
                                                                                                                            12


or more than a miniscule fraction of the population casting votes.15 The great majority of European

nations, as well as the United States and Canada, achieved secrecy in balloting and universal adult male

suffrage long before other countries in the western hemisphere, and the proportions of the populations

voting in the former were always higher, often four to five times higher, than those in the latter.

Although many factors may have contributed to the low levels of participation in South America and the

Caribbean, wealth and literacy requirements were serious binding constraints. Some societies, such as

Barbados, maintained wealth-based suffrage restrictions until the mid-20th century, while most joined

the United States and Canada in moving away from economic requirements in the 19th century.

However, whereas the states in the United States frequently adopted explicit racial limitations when they

abandoned economic requirements, Latin American countries typically chose to screen by literacy.

         The contrast between the United States and Canada, on the one hand, and the Latin American

countries, on the other, was not so evident at the outset. Despite the sentiments popularly attributed to

the Founding Fathers, voting in the United States was largely a privilege reserved for white men with

significant amounts of property until early in the 19th century. By 1815, only four states had adopted

universal white male suffrage, but as the movement to do away with political inequality gained strength,

the rest of the country followed suit: virtually all new entrants to the Union extended voting rights to all

white men (with explicit racial restrictions and very favorable definitions for white immigrants of

residence generally introduced in the same state constitutions that did away with economic

requirements), and older states revised their laws in the wake of protracted political debates. The rapid

extension of access to the franchise in the frontier states, which were distinguished both by more equal

distributions of wealth and labor scarcity, not coincidentally paralleled liberal policies toward public


15
  There is some controversy about whether Argentina had wealth and literacy requirements for suffrage. Whatever the case,
the proportions of the population voting were very low in that country (1.8 percent in 1896) until the electoral reform law of
1912. Those who point to the absence of such electoral restrictions at the level of the national government suggest that the
low voter participation was due to a failure of immigrants to change their citizenship and vote, as well as to the lack of a
secret ballot. Others believe that restrictions on the franchise had, in fact, been enacted and were enforced at the provincial
level until 1912. See the discussion in Engerman and Sokoloff 2005.
                                                                                                                     13


schools and access to land, as well as other policies that were expected to be attractive to potential

migrants.16 It is hard to avoid the conclusion that political equality was the result of economic equality,

rooted in labor scarcity, rather than the reverse. It is striking that pioneers in extending suffrage, such as

new states to the United States, Argentina, and Uruguay, did so during periods in which they hoped to

attract migrants, such that the rights to suffrage formed part of a package of policies thought to be

potentially attractive to those contemplating relocation.17 When elites—such as land or other asset

holders—desire common men to locate in the polity, they thus may choose to extend access to privileges

and opportunities even in the absence of threats of civil disorder; indeed, a polity (or one set of elites)

may find itself competing with another to attract the labor or other resources.18 Alternative explanations,

such as the importance of national heritage, are not very useful in identifying why Argentina, Uruguay,

and Costa Rica pulled so far ahead of their Latin American neighbors, or why other British colonies in

the New World lagged behind Canada.

           Schooling institutions provide yet another appropriate and important test of whether societies

that began with extreme inequality exhibited different patterns of investment in public goods and of

access to economic opportunities. Increases in a society’s levels of schooling and literacy have been

related both theoretically and empirically to many socioeconomic changes conducive to growth,

including higher labor productivity, more rapid technological change, and higher rates of commercial

and political participation.19 Although many New World societies arising out of European colonization

were so prosperous that they clearly had the material resources to attain high rates of literacy by

establishing a widespread network of primary schools, only a few made such investments on a scale

sufficient to serve the general population before the 20th century. The exceptional societies, in terms of


16
     See the extended treatment of these and related issue in Engeman and Sokoloff 2005.
17
  For the concern with attracting migrants in the U.S. and Argentina for example, see Engerman and Sokoloff 2005; Castro
1971; Solberg 1970; and Adelman 1994.
18. See Acemoglu and Robinson 2000 for the argument that in many western European countries, the franchise was extended
under threat.
                                                                                                                          14


leadership in investing in institutions of primary education, were the United States and Canada (see

Table 2). Virtually from the time of settlement, the populations of these countries seem generally to have

been convinced of the value of providing their children (females as well as males) with a basic

education, including the ability to read and write. It was common for schools to be organized and funded

at the village or town level, especially in New England. The United States probably had the most literate

population in the world by the beginning of the 19th century, but the common school movement, which

got under way in the 1820s (following closely after the movement to extend the franchise), put the

country on an accelerated path of investment in educational institutions. Between 1825 and 1850, nearly

every northern state that had not already done so enacted a law strongly encouraging or requiring

localities to establish free schools open to all children and supported by general taxes.20 Schools were

also widespread in early 19th century Canada, and although this northern-most English colony lagged

behind the U.S. by several decades in establishing tax-supported schools with universal access, its

literacy rates were nearly as high.21

       The rest of the hemisphere trailed far behind the United States and Canada in primary schooling

and in literacy. Despite enormous wealth, the other societies of British colonial origin were very slow to

organize schooling institutions that would serve broad segments of the population.22 Similarly, even the

most progressive Latin American countries, such as Argentina and Uruguay, were more than seventy-

five years behind the United States and Canada in this regard. These societies began to boost their

investments in public schooling at roughly the same time that they intensified their efforts to attract

migrants from Europe, well before they implemented a general liberalization of the franchise. While this

association might be interpreted as providing for the socialization of foreign immigrants, it also suggests


19. See the discussion in Easterlin 1981.
20. Cubberley 1920.
21. See, for example, Phillips 1957; and Wilson, Stamp, and Audet 1970.
22. Indeed, significant steps were not taken in this direction until the British Colonial Office began promoting schooling in
the 1870s.The increased concern for promoting education in the colonies may have been related to developments in Great
Britain itself. Several important expansions of the public provision of elementary education occurred during the 1870s,
                                                                                                                          15


that the elites may have been inclined to extend access to opportunities as part of an effort to attract the

scarce labor for which they were directly or indirectly competing. The latter perspective is supported by

the observation that major investments in primary schooling did not generally occur in any Latin

American country until the national governments provided the funds; in contrast to the pattern in North

America, local and state governments in Latin America were not willing or able to take on this

responsibility on their own. Most of these societies did not achieve high levels of literacy until well into

the 20th century. Fairly generous support was made available, however, for universities and other

institutions of higher learning that were more geared toward children of the elite.

        Two mechanisms help explain why extreme levels of inequality depressed investments in

schooling. First, in settings where private schooling predominated or where parents paid user fees for

their children, greater wealth or income inequality would generally reduce the fraction of the school-age

population enrolled, holding per capita income constant. Second, greater inequality likely exacerbated

the collective-action problems associated with the establishment and funding of universal public

schools, either because the distribution of benefits across the population was quite different from the

incidence of taxes and other costs or simply because population heterogeneity made it more difficult for

communities to reach consensus on public projects. Where the wealthy enjoyed disproportionate

political power, they were able to procure schooling services for their own children and to resist being

taxed to underwrite or subsidize services to others.

        Indeed, this sort of interpretation is supported by examination of the structures of public finance

employed across the Americas over time. At the national government level, taxes on international trade

were the principal source of tax revenue throughout the hemisphere after the wave of independence

movements of the late-18th and early 19th centuries. In the United States, a 1789 law establishing the

tariff was one of the first laws enacted by the federal government. Although the federal government had


including the 1870 Education Act and the 1876 passage of a law calling for compulsory schooling through the age of ten.
                                                                                                                16


other sources of revenues, customs duties provided by far the dominant share of national government

revenue up through the Civil War. In rough terms, these revenues amounted to 1 to 2 percent of GNP

(except for spurts during wartime), and were primarily (over 80 percent) directed to defense, interest on

debt, general government expenses, and other miscellaneous expenditures. The patterns were roughly

the same in Latin America. In Mexico, for example, port taxes, income from the tobacco monopoly, and

excise taxes yielded 75 to 85 percent of national government revenue over the latter half of the 19th

century. In Colombia, customs duties and income from state monopolies on commodities such as

tobacco and salt brought in nearly 80 percent of national revenues by the 1840s. Overall, although wars

and other threats to the social order (such as the War of 1812, the U.S. Civil War, the war between

Mexico and the U.S., and various internal uprisings) sometimes stimulated the imposition of direct taxes

that extended the reach of national governments in progressive directions (the income tax in the US

during the Civil War, and the property tax in Mexico that was introduced because of the war between

that country and the U.S.), the general pattern throughout the hemisphere well into the 20th century was

reliance by national governments on tax structures that targeted commodities or trade rather than income

or wealth.23

        Stark differences existed across the societies of the Americas, however, in the size and revenue

sources of state/provincial and local governments. Local governments were much smaller in Latin

American nations than in the United States and Canada (see Table 3). They accounted for only about 10

percent of total government revenue in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico throughout the 19th century (and

in Chile, between 10 and 20 percent during the second decade of the 20th century, despite the absence of

state/provincial governments).        The contrast with the neighboring societies in North America is

dramatic. In both the U.S. and Canada, the local governments collected more than half of overall



23
  The income tax introduced during the Civil War was ultimately ruled unconstitutional, and thus it was not until a
constitutional amendment that such a tax could be reinstituted.
                                                                                                                            17


government revenue from the middle of the 19th century onward. Even as late as the 1930s, the share of

local government revenue was nearly 40 percent in both the US and Canada.

         This predisposition of the North American populations to organize and support local

governments was evident as early as the 17th century, despite the absence during that era of distinctively

(as compared to other societies in the Americas) high per capita incomes. It is not entirely clear how

substantial local governments were at the establishment of the United States, but local governments

certainly grew very rapidly during the early decades of the 19th century as the common school

movement progressed, and as local governments were increasingly engaged in helping to organize new

investments in roads and other infrastructure required as the economy was beginning to industrialize.

What is apparent is that, with a few brief exceptions during and after major wars, local governments

were the largest component of the overall government sector throughout the 19th century. This is

especially striking in that the aggregate pattern of expenditures by local governments was quite

progressive in that the main priorities of local governments were (well into the 19th century) schools,

roads, and other infrastructure that generate broadly distributed social returns.24 Moreover, their heavy

reliance on the property tax, together with their large share of the government sector, made for a rather

progressive tax structure at both the local and national (all levels of government together) levels.25 This

pattern, characterized by the predominance of property and inheritance taxes accounting for the bulk of

the revenue collected by governments at all levels, endured into the early decades of the 20th century (a

similar pattern holds in Canada).26 In contrast, although the local governments in Latin America raised


24
   At 1900, local governments seem to have obtained well over 90 percent of revenue from property taxes. For further
discussion of how the importance of the property tax as a source of state revenue varied over the 19th century, see Wallis
2001.
25
   Any conclusions about just how progressive or regressive any particular tax structures are must, of course, take into
account the ultimate incidence of the taxes assessed. An analysis of incidence is beyond the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, we feel rather confident, especially for the 19th century, of following the convention of presuming that property
taxes are more progressive in incidence than levies consisting of tariffs on imported goods and the revenues obtained from
state monopolies on consumer commodities such as liquors and tobacco.
26
   At 1902, property, death, and gift taxes accounted for more than 60 percent of total tax revenue to all levels of government
in the U.S. combined. See Table 7.1 in Sokoloff and Zolt 2004.
                                                                                                          18


relatively more of their revenue from taxes on property and income than did the respective national or

state/provincial governments, they relied much less on these sources than did their North American

counterparts. This, together with the markedly smaller size of local governments in Latin American

nations resulted in radically different, and much less progressive, aggregate tax structures overall than in

the U.S. or Canada.

       Although there may be other explanations for these patterns in the evolution of tax institutions,

the evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that initial differences in the extent of inequality across

these societies contributed to the different decisions they made regarding how much revenue to raise, the

relative use of different tax instruments, the nature and size of state and local governments, and the types

and size of government expenditure programs. In general, the countries that began with more inequality

developed structures of public finance that relied relatively more on indirect taxes and placed less of a

tax burden on those with higher levels of wealth. This alone should have encouraged the persistence of

extreme inequality, but the stunted local governments, which are the same authorities most concerned

with public schooling, transportation, water/sewer projects, and other types of investment projects that

generate benefits for a broad spectrum of the population, also worked in the same direction. An

explanation for this pattern is readily available. With a radically unequal distribution of resources, elites

would bear most of any tax burden, especially one levied on wealth or income, and realize a smaller than

proportionate benefit, especially since they could procure for themselves and their families many of the

same services privately. It was only in the 20th century, when returns to schooling grew, when suffrage

came to be extended, and when import-substitution policies sharply reduced the revenues that could be

captured from imports, that the structures of public finance in Latin America began to change in more

progressive directions.

       Land policy comprises a final example of the ways in which institutions may have contributed to

the persistence of inequality over the long run. Virtually all the economies in the Americas had ample
                                                                                                                           19


supplies of public lands well into the 19th century and beyond. Since the respective governments of each

colony, province, or nation were regarded as the owners of this resource, they were able to influence the

distribution of wealth, as well as the pace of settlement for effective production, by implementing

policies to control the availability of land, set prices, establish minimum or maximum acreages, provide

credit for such purposes, and design tax systems. Because agriculture was the dominant sector

throughout the Americas, questions of how best to employ this public resource for the national interest,

and how to make the land available for private use, were widely recognized as highly important and

often became the subject of protracted political debates and struggles. Land policy was also used as a

policy instrument to influence the labor force, either by encouraging immigration through making land

readily available or by influencing the regional distribution of labor (or supply of wage labor) through

limiting access and raising land prices.

        The United States never experienced major obstacles in this regard, and the terms of land

acquisition became easier over the course of the 19th century.27 The well-known Homestead Act of

1862, which essentially made land free in plots suitable for family farms to all those who settled and

worked the land for a specified period, was perhaps the culmination of this policy of promoting broad

access to land. Canada pursued similar policies: the Dominion Lands Act of 1872 closely resembled the

Homestead Act in both spirit and substance. Argentina and Brazil instituted similar changes in the

second half of the 19th century as a means to encourage immigration, but these efforts were much less

directed and thus less successful at getting land to smallholders than the programs in the United States

and Canada.28 In Argentina, for example, a number of factors explain the contrast in outcomes. First, the

elites of Buenos Aires, whose interests favored keeping scarce labor in the province if not the capital

city, were much more effective at weakening or blocking programs than were their urban counterparts in


27. See Gates 1968 for a comprehensive overview of U.S. land policy. Discussions of Canadian land policy include Solberg
1987; Pomfret 1981, pp. 111–19; and Adelman 1994, chap. 2.
28. See Viotti da Costa 1985, chap. 4; Solberg 1987; Solberg’s essay in Platt and di Tella 1985; and the excellent discussions
                                                                                                                             20


North America. Second, even those policies nominally intended to broaden access tended to involve

large grants to land developers (with the logic that allocative efficiency could best be achieved through

exchanges between private agents) or transfers to occupants who were already using the land (including

those who were grazing livestock). They thus generally conveyed public lands to private owners in

much larger and concentrated holdings than did the policies in the United States and Canada. Third, the

processes by which large landholdings might have broken up in the absence of scale economies may

have operated very slowly in Argentina: once the land was in private hands, the potential value of land

in raising or harvesting livestock may have set too high a floor on land prices for immigrants and other

ordinary would-be farmers to manage. Such constraints were exacerbated by the underdevelopment of

mortgage and financial institutions more generally.29

         Argentina, Canada, and the United States all had an extraordinary abundance of virtually

uninhabited public lands to transfer to private hands in the interest of bringing this public resource into

production and serving other general interests. In societies such as Mexico, however, the issues at stake

in land policy were very different. Good land was relatively scarce, and labor was relatively abundant.

Here the lands in question had long been controlled by Native Americans, but without individual private

property rights. Mexico was not unique in pursuing policies, especially near the end of the 19th and the

first decade of the 20th centuries, that had the effect of conferring ownership of much of this land to

large non-Native American landholders.30 The 1856 Ley Lerdo and the 1857 Constitution had set down

methods of privatizing these public lands in a manner that could originally have been intended to help

Native American farmers enter a national land market and commercial economy. Under the regime of


in Adelman 1994.
29. It is generally thought that the introduction of livestock to Argentina, when the Spanish first arrived in the 16th century,
was the basis for widespread herds of feral cattle that were present during the 19th century and could virtually be harvested.
Such production of animal products (hides and beef) was associated with scale economies and did not require much in the
way of labor. These conditions may have increased the economic viability of large estates where labor was scarce and land
abundant. In contrast, because the major crops produced in the expansion of the northern United States and Canada were
grains, whose production was relatively labor intensive and characterized by quite limited scale economies, the policy of
encouraging smallholding was effective. See Adelman 1994 and Engerman and Sokoloff 2002 for more discussion.
                                                                                                        21


Porfirio Díaz, however, these laws became the basis for a series of new statutes and policies that

effected a massive transfer of such lands (over 10.7 percent of the national territory) between 1878 and

1908 to large holders such as survey and land development companies, either in the form of outright

grants for services rendered by the companies or for prices set by decree.

        In Table 4, we present estimates for these four countries of the fractions of household heads, or a

near equivalent, that owned land in agricultural areas in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The

figures indicate enormous differences across the countries in the prevalence of land ownership among

the adult male population in rural areas. On the eve of the Mexican Revolution, the figures from the

1910 census suggest that only 2.4 percent of household heads in rural Mexico owned land. The number

is astoundingly low. The dramatic land policy measures in Mexico at the end of the 19th century may

have succeeded in privatizing most of the public lands, but they left the vast majority of the rural

population without any land at all. The evidence obviously conforms well with the idea that in societies

that began with extreme inequality, such as Mexico, institutions evolved so as to greatly advantage the

elite in access to economic opportunities, and they thus contributed to the persistence of that extreme

inequality.

        In contrast, the proportion of adult males that owned land in rural areas was quite high in the

United States, at just below 75 percent in 1900. Although the prevalence of land ownership was

markedly lower in the South, where blacks were disproportionately concentrated, the overall picture is

one of a series of liberal land policies, leading up to the Homestead Act of 1862, providing broad access

to this fundamental type of economic opportunity. Canada had an even better record, with nearly 90

percent of household heads owning the agricultural lands they occupied in 1901. The estimates of

landholding in these two countries support the notion that land policies made a difference, especially

when compared to Argentina. The rural regions of Argentina constitute a set of frontier provinces, where



30. For further discussion of Mexico, see McBride 1923; Tannebaum 1929; and Holden 1994.
                                                                                                                            22


one would expect higher rates of ownership than in Buenos Aires. The numbers, however, suggest a

much lower prevalence of land ownership than in the two North American economies.31 Nevertheless,

all of these countries were far more effective than Mexico in making land ownership available to the

general population. The contrast between the United States and Canada, with their practices of offering

easy access to small units of land, and the rest of the Americas (as well as the contrast between

Argentina and Mexico) is consistent with the hypothesis that the initial extent of inequality influenced

the way in which institutions evolved and in so doing helped foster persistence in the degree of

inequality over time.



                                                               IV

         There has long been debate over the impact of the European establishment of colonies around the

world that took place over centuries, beginning in the 1400s. Much of the controversy has been

concerned with issues such as how the long-term performance of the colonized areas and the colonizing

economies were affected by the exchange of resources and terms of trade between them and the

imbalance of military power.              As we have argued here, however, one of the most fundamental

consequences of European colonization may have been in altering the composition of the populations in

the societies colonized. Because the efforts of the Europeans generally meant implanting communities

who were greatly advantaged over natives in terms of human capital and legal status, and because the

trajectories of institutional development were sensitive to the incidence of extreme inequality that often

followed, their activity had long lingering effects. Although more study is needed to identify all of the

mechanisms at work, it seems clear that colonies in the Americas with extreme inequality, as compared

to those with relative equality, were systematically more likely to evolve institutions that restricted



31. Our work with the data from the 1914 census yields the same qualitative results. It is worth noting that the proportions of
families that owned land are exaggerated by the 1895 census figures. A close examination of the manuscripts indicates that
double counting, in which both the husband and wife were listed as landowners, was prevalent in many parts of Argentina.
                                                                                                   23


access to economic opportunities and to generate lower rates of public investment in schools and other

infrastructure considered conducive to growth. These patterns of institutional development, which tend

to yield persistence over time, may help to explain why a great many former European colonies that

began with extreme inequality have suffered poor economic outcomes.
                                                                                                    24


                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did Western Europe Extend the Franchise?
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (Nov.): 1167-1199.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (Dec.): 1369-
1401.

________________. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the
Modern World Income Distribution, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (Nov.): 1231-1294.

Adelman, Jeremy. 1994. Frontier Development: Land. Labor, and Capital on Wheatlands of Argentina
and Canada. 1890-1914. Oxford.

Alesina, Alberto F. and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109 (May): 465-490.

Castro, Donald. 1971. The Development of Argentine Immigration Policy, 1852-1914. Ann Arbor.

Coatsworth, John H. 1993. “Notes on the Comparative Economic History of Latin America and the
United States.” In Walter L. Bernecker and Hans Werner Tobler, eds., Development and
Underdevelopment in America: Contrasts of Economic Growth in North and Latin America in Historical
Perspective. New York.

Cubberley Ellwood P. 1920. The History of Education. Boston.

Davis, Lance E. and Robert A. Huttenback. 1986. Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political
Economy of British Imperialism, 1860-1912. New York.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire. 1996. “A New Data Set and Measure of Income Inequality.” World
Bank Economic Review. 10 (September): 565-591.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1981. “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed?” Journal of Economic History 41
(March):1-19.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: The Role of Endowments in
Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (Jan): 3-39.

Engerman, Stanley L. 1982. “Economic Adjustments to Emancipation in the United States and the
British West Indies.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 12 (Autumn): 191-220.

_______., 1983. “Contract Labor, Sugar and Technology in the Nineteenth Century.” Journal of
Economic History 43 (September): 635-659.

_______., 1986. “Servants to Slaves to Servants: Contract Labour and European Expansion.” In P.C.
Emmer, ed., Colonialism and Migration: Indentured Labor Before and After Slavery. Dordrecht.

Engerman, Stanley L., Stephen Haber, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2000. “Inequality, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies.” In Claude Menard, ed., Institutions,
                                                                                                    25


Contracts, and Organizations. Cheltenham.

Engerman, Stanley L., Elisa V. Mariscal, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “The Evolution of Schooling
Institutions in the Americas, 1800-1925.” Unpublished working paper.

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the
United States.” In Stephen Haber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind. Stanford.

___________. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequality and Paths of Development Among New World
Economies.” Economia 3 (Fall): 41-109.

_______. 2005. “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the Americas,” Journal of Economic
History 65 (September): forthcoming.

Ferguson, Niall. 2003. Empire: The Rise and the Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for
Global Power. New York.

Gates, Paul W. 1968. History of Public Land Law Development. Washington, D.C.

Holden, Robert. 1994. Mexico and the Survey of Public Lands. The Management of Modernization,
1876-1911. Dekalb.

Kupperman, Karen Ordahl. 1993. Providence Island. 1630-1641: The Other Puritan Colony. Cambridge.

Lal, Deepak. 2004. In Praise of Empires: Globalization and Order. New York.

Mc Bride, George McCutchen. 1923. The Land Systems of Mexico. New York.

McManus, Edgar J. 1973. Black Bondage in the North. Syracuse.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York.

______________. 1988. “Institutions, Economic Growth and Freedom: An Historical Introduction.” In
Michael Walker, ed., Freedom, Democracy, and Economic Welfare. Vancouver.

Perrson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 1994. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth? Theory and Evidence.”
American Economic Review 84 (June): 600-621.

Phillips, Charles E. 1957. The Development of Education in Canada. Toronto.

Platt, D.C.M. and Guido di Tella, eds. 1985. Argentina, Australia, and Canada: Studies in Comparative
Development. 1870-1965. London.

Pomfret, Richard. 1981. The Economic Development of Canada. Toronto.

Rolling Stones. 1969. “You Can’t Always Get What You Want,” in Let It Bleed. London.
                                                                                                       26


Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Eric M. Zolt. 2004. “Inequality and Taxation: Evidence from the Americas”.
Unpublished working paper.

Solberg, Carl E. 1970. Immigration and Nationalism: Argentina and Chile, 1890-1914. Austin.

______. 1987. The Prairies and the Pampas: Agrarian Policy in Canada and Argentina 1880-1913.
Stanford.

Tannebaum, Frank. 1929. The Mexican Agrarian Revolution. New York.

Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1835. Democracy in America. Translated by George Lawrence and Edited by
J.P. Mayer. Reprinted in 1969. Garden City.

Turner, Frederick J. 1947. The Frontier in American History. New York.

Viotti da Costa, Emilia. 1985. The Brazilian Empire: Myths and Histories. Chicago.

Wallis, John Joseph. 2001. “A History of the Property Tax in America.” In Wallace E. Oates, ed.,
Property Taxation and Local Government Finance: Essays in Honor of C. Lowell Harriss. Cambridge.

Wilson, J. Donald, Stamp, Robert M., and Audet, Louis-Philippe. 1970. Canadian Education: A History.
Scarborough.
                                                                                                                                                       27



                                                                        TABLE 1
        LAWS GOVERNING THE FRANCHISE AND THE EXTENT OF VOTING IN SELECTED
                                                           COUNTRIES, 1840-1940


                                                 Lack of Secrecy                 Wealth             Literacy           Proportion of
                                                                           Requirement           Requirement                  the
                                                    In Balloting                                                         Population
                                                                                                                           Voting


                                1840-80
                                                                                                                               --
Chile                             1869                     N                       Y                    Y                    1.6%
                                  1878                     N                       N                   N32                     --
Costa Rica                        1890                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
Ecuador                           1848                     Y                       Y                    Y                     0.0
                                  1856                     Y                       Y                    Y                     0.1
Mexico                            1840                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
Peru                              1875                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
Uruguay                           1840                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
                                  1880                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
Venezuela                         1840                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
                                  1880                     Y                       Y                    Y                      --
Canada                            1867                     Y                       Y                    N                     7.7
                                  1878                     N                       Y                    N                    12.9


United States                     185033                   N                       N                    N                    12.9
                                  1880                     N                       N                    N                    18.3




32 After eliminating wealth and education requirements in 1878, Chile instituted a literacy requirement in 1885, which seems to have been responsible for a

sharp decline in the proportion of the population who were registered to vote.

33 Three states, Connecticut, Louisiana, and New Jersey, still maintained wealth requirements at 1840, but eliminated them soon afterwards. All states

except for Illinois and Virginia had implemented the secret ballot by the end of the 1840s.
                                                                                                                                                      28


                               1881-1920
                                                                                                                                   34
Argentina                          1896                     Y                       Y                        Y             1.8%
                                   1916                     N                       N                        N               9.0
Brazil                             1894                     Y                       Y                        Y               2.2
                                   1914                     Y                       Y                        Y               2.4
Chile                              1881                     N                       N                        N               3.1
                                   1920                     N                       N                        Y               4.4
                                          35
Colombia                           1918                     N                       N                        N               6.9
Costa Rica                         1912                     Y                       Y                        Y                --
                                   1919                     Y                       N                        N              10.6
Ecuador                            1888                     N                       Y                        Y               2.8
                                   1894                     N                       N                        Y               3.3
Mexico                             1920                     N                       N                        N               8.6
Peru                               1920                     Y                       Y                        Y                --
Uruguay                            1900                     Y                       Y                        Y                --
                                   1920                     N                       N                        N              13.8
Venezuela                          1920                     Y                       Y                        Y                --
Canada                             1911                     N                       N                        N              18.1
                                   1917                     N                       N                        N              20.5
                                                                                                              36
United States                      1900                     N                       N                       Y               18.4
                                   1920                     N                       N                        Y              25.1




34 This figure is for the city of Buenos Aires, and likely overstates the proportion who voted at the national level.

35 The information on restrictions refers to national laws. The 1863 Constitution empowered provincial state governments to regulate electoral affairs.

Afterwards, elections became restricted (in terms of the franchise for adult males) and indirect in some states. It was not until 1948 that a national law

established universal adult male suffrage throughout the country. This pattern was followed in other Latin American countries, as it was in the U.S. and

Canada to a lesser extent.

36 Eighteen states, 7 southern and 11 non-southern, introduced literacy requirements between 1890 and 1926. These restrictions were directed primarily at

Blacks and immigrants.
                                                                     29


                   1921-40
Argentina            1928          N              N      N   12.8%
                     1937          N              N      N   15.0
Bolivia              1951           ?             Y      Y    4.1
Brazil               1930          Y              Y      Y    5.7
Colombia             1930          N              N      N   11.1
                     1936          N              N      N    5.9
Chile                1920          N              N      Y    4.4
                     1931          N              N      Y    6.5
                     1938          N              N      Y    9.4
Costa Rica           1940          N              N      N   17.6
Ecuador              1940          N              N      Y    3.3
Mexico               1940          N              N      N   11.8
Peru                 1940          N              N      Y    --
Uruguay              1940          N              N      N   19.7
Venezuela            1940          N              Y      Y    --
Canada               1940          N              N      N   41.1
United States        1940          N              N      Y   37.8


Notes and Sources: Engerman, Haber, and Sokoloff 2000.
                                                                   30


                                    TABLE 2
                   LITERACY RATES IN THE AMERICAS, 1850-1950
                             Year       Ages            Rate


Argentina                    1869        +6            23.8%
                             1895        +6             45.6
                             1900       +10             52.0
                             1925       +10             73.0


Bolivia                      1900       +10             17.0


Brazil                       1872        +7             15.8
                             1890        +7             14.8
                             1900        +7             25.6
                             1920       +10             30.0


British Honduras             1911       +10             59.6
(Belize)                     1931       +10             71.8


Chile                        1865        +7             18.0
                             1875        +7             25.7
                             1885        +7             30.3
                             1900       +10             43.0
                             1925       +10             66.0


Colombia                     1918       +15             32.0


Costa Rica                   1892        +7             23.6
                             1900       +10             33.0
                             1925       +10             64.0


Cuba                         1861        +7             23.8
                                                     (38.5,5.3)*
                             1899       +10             40.5
                             1925       +10             67.0
                                                    31


Guatemala               1893   +7       11.3
                        1925   +10      15.0


Honduras                1887   +7       15.2
                        1925   +10      29.0


Jamaica                 1871   +5       16.3
                        1891   +5       32.0
                        1911   +5       47.2


Mexico                  1900   +10      22.2
                        1925   +10      36.0


Paraguay                1886   +7       19.3
                        1900   +10      30.0


Peru                    1925   +10      38.0


Uruguay                 1900   +10      54.0
                        1925   +10      70.0


Venezuela               1925   +10      34.0


Canada                  1861   All      82.5
Eng-majority counties   1861   All      93.0
Fr- majority counties   1861   All      81.2


United States
North Whites            1850   +10      96.9
South Whites            1850   +10      91.5
All                     1870   +10      80.0
                                     (88.5,21.1)*
                        1890   +10      86.7
                                     (92.3,43.2)*
                        1910   +10      92.3
                                                                                                      32


                                                                                       (95.0,69.5)*


*The figures for Whites and Non-Whites are reported respectively within parentheses.




Sources: Engerman, Haber, and Sokoloff 2000.
                                                                                 33


                                              TABLE 3

DISTRIBUTION OF TAX REVENUES ACROSS LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT DURING
THE 19th AND 20th CENTURIES: BRAZIL, CHILE COLOMBIA, MEXICO, CANADA,
                       AND THE UNITED STATES

                                  National        Provincial    Municipalities
                                  Government      Governments   or other Local
                                  (%)             (%)           (%)
     Brazil
     1826                         30.8            69.2          0
     1856                         79.5            17.1          3.3
     1860                         78.2            18.2          3.5
     1885/86                      76.3            18.5          5.2
     Chile
     1913                         85.8            --            14.2
     1915                         82.7            --            17.3
     1920                         85.3            --            14.7
     Colombia
     1839                         88.4            2.9           8.7
     1842                         91.8            1.6           6.7
     1850                         85.4            8.7           5.8
     1870                         46.6            30.8          22.6
     1894                         60              32            8
     1898                         66.7            28.6          4.8
     Mexico
     1882                         69.1            19.5          11.5
     1890                         74.7            16.3          9
     1900                         67.3            19.8          12.9
     1908                         70.6            17.1          12.3
     Canada
     1933                         42.5            17.9          39.6
     1950                         68.7            18.7          12.6
     1960                         62.8            20.7          16.4
     United States
     1855                         25.5            17.4          57.1
     1875                         39.6            16.4          44.0
     1895                         36              14            50
     1913                         29.1            13.2          57.6
     1927                         35.5            18            46.5
     1950                         68.3            17.3          14.4

 Sources and Notes: Sokoloff and Zolt 2004.
                                                                                                                                                      34


                                                                      TABLE 4

          LANDHOLDING IN RURAL REGIONS OF MEXICO, THE UNITED STATES, CANADA, AND
                            ARGENTINA DURING THE EARLY 1900s

                  Country, year, and region                                   Proportion of household heads who own
                                                                              landa
                  Mexico, 1910
                  North Pacific                                               5.6
                  North                                                       3.4
                  Central                                                     2.0
                  Gulf                                                        2.1
                  South Pacific                                               1.5
                  Total rural Mexico                                          2.4

                  United States, 1900
                  North Atlantic                                              79.2
                  South Atlantic                                              55.8
                  North Central                                               72.1
                  South Central                                               51.4
                  Western                                                     83.4
                  Alaska/Hawaii                                               42.1
                  Total United States                                         74.5

                  Canada, 1901
                  British Columbia                                            87.1
                  Alberta                                                     95.8
                  Saskatchewan                                                96.2
                  Manitoba                                                    88.9
                  Ontario                                                     80.2
                  Quebec                                                      90.1
                  Maritimeb                                                   95.0
                  Total Canada                                                87.1

                  Argentina, 1895
                  Chaco                                                       27.8
                  Formosa                                                     18.5
                  Missiones                                                   26.7
                  La Pampa                                                    9.7
                  Neuquén                                                     12.3
                  Río Negro                                                   15.4
                  Chubut                                                      35.2
                  Santa Cruz                                                  20.2
                  Tierra del Fuego                                            6.6
Notes and Sources: Engerman and Sokoloff 2002.
a.         Landownership is defined as follows: in Mexico, household heads who own land; in the US, farms that are owner operated; in Canada, total
     occupiers of farm lands who are owners; and in Argentina, the ratio of landowners to the number of males between the ages of 18 and 50.
