                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FINANCIAL MARKETS AND WAGES

                                         Claudio Michelacci
                                         Vincenzo Quadrini

                                        Working Paper 11050
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11050


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2005




We would like to thank Pietro Garibaldi, Richard Rogerson and Jan Zabojnik for detailed comments and
suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at Concordia University, Dynamic Macroeconomic
Workshop at Milan University, EEA meeting in Madrid, NBER Summer Institute, SED meeting in Florence,
Stanford University, Universidad del Pais Vasco in Bilbao, UC Berkeley, UCLA, UC Davis, University of
Iowa and University of Southern California. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Claudio Michelacci and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Financial Markets and Wages
Claudio Michelacci and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 11050
January 2005
JEL No. G31, J31, E24

                                           ABSTRACT

We study a labor market equilibrium model in which firms sign optimal long-term contracts with

workers. Firms that are financially constrained offer an increasing wage profile: They pay lower

wages today in exchange of higher wages once they become unconstrained and operate at a larger

scale. In equilibrium, constrained firms are on average smaller and pay lower wages. In this way the

model generates a positive relation between firm size and wages. Using data from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) we show that the key dynamic properties of the model are

supported by the data.

Claudio Michelacci
CEMFI
c.michelacci@cemfi.es

Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu
1   Introduction

The fact that large firms pay higher wages is a well-known stylized fact.
Brown and Medoff (1989) and Oi and Idson (1999) provide a review of the
empirical studies. In this paper we ask whether financial factors—in addition
to other considerations proposed in the theoretical literature—can contribute
to explaining the dependence of wages on the size of the employer.
    Our interest in understanding the importance of financial factors for the
firm size-wage relation is motivated by a set of regularities about the link
between the financial characteristics of firms and their size. In general, the
view that emerges from the financial literature is that smaller and younger
firms face tighter financial constraints, either in the form of lower ability to
raise funds or in the form of higher cost of funds. In spite of these regularities,
the role played by financial market imperfections in generating the firm size-
wage relation has not been studied in the theoretical literature.
    We develop a model in which firms sign optimal long-term (implicit)
contracts with workers as in Harris and Holmstrom (1982) and Holmstrom
(1983). Due to limited enforceability, external investors are willing to finance
the firm only in exchange of collateralized capital. If the funds supplied by ex-
ternal investors are limited—that is, the firm is financially constrained—the
optimal wage contracts offered by the firm to the workers will be charac-
terized by increasing wage profiles. By paying lower wages today, the firm
generates higher cash flows in the current period, implicitly borrowing from
workers. Because firms with binding constraints operate at a sub-optimal
scale—which then expand until they become unconstrained—small firms pay
on average lower wages than large firms. Therefore, the model generates a
positive relation between the size of the firm and the average wages paid to
workers (the firm size-wage relation). At the same time, because constrained
firms grow in size, the model also captures the empirical regularity that fast
growing firms pay lower wages.
    There are two features in the model that explain why firms are able to
implicitly borrow from workers beyond what they can borrow from external
investors. First, if a worker quits, the firm looses part of the accumulated
capital. This could derive from recruiting costs, training expenses and/or
enhanced worker’s productivity through learning. The firm’s loss of valuable
capital endows the worker with a punishment tool which is not available to
external investors. Second, a worker provides effort in the working place
only if he or she believes that the effort will be rewarded by the firm. But

                                        1
when the firm reneges its wage promises, the worker looses its confidence and
prefers to quit, since he or she expects the firm to renege the wage promises
also in future periods. The treat of quitting guarantees that the firm does
not renege the long-term wage contract.
    We use data from the 1979-2002 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY) to evaluate some of the properties of the model that are key to
generate the firm size-wage relation. In particular, we test whether fast
growing firms pay lower wages initially on the promise of higher future wages.
We find that firm’s growth rates have a negative effect on wages but positive
effects on the return to tenure and labor market experience. This is what
our model predicts.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section we review the main
empirical and theoretical contributions to the study of the firm size-wage re-
lation. Section 3 describes the basic theoretical framework and characterizes
the firm’s dynamics. Section 4 extends the model to allow for firms’ and work-
ers’ turnover, derives the labor market equilibrium and studies its properties
numerically. Section 5 shows that the results are robust to the assumptions
of job-to-job mobility and transferability of worker-specific capital. Section
6 describes how the long-term contract can be sustained as a sub-game per-
fect equilibrium of the strategic interaction between the firm and its worker.
Section 7 conducts the empirical analysis and Section 8 concludes.

2     Empirical regularities and existing theories

Before describing our theoretical framework, we briefly review the main em-
pirical regularities and theoretical contributions to the study of the firm
size-wage relation. The review of the theoretical literature shows that the
effect of firm size on wages is still an unresolved puzzle while some of the
empirical findings suggest that financial factors could play an important role.

2.1    Empirical regularities
Figure 1 plots the payroll per-worker for different size classes of firms, which
is increasing in the size of firms. This is the typical pattern in almost all
industries and is robust to the introduction of several controls for worker’s
and firm’s characteristics. See Brown and Medoff (1989) and Oi and Idson
(1999).


                                       2
                                           Figure 1: Firm size and wages in 2001.

                           45,000




                           40,000
      Payroll per-worker




                           35,000




                           30,000




                           25,000




                           20,000
                                    1-19     20-49    50-99    100-499   500-999   1000-1499   1500-2499   2500+

                                                              Employment size
                           Source : U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy




    There are many factors that could generate the positive relation between
firm size and wages. For instance, the fact that larger firms employ more
skilled workers. However, using matched employer-employee data, recent
studies have reached the conclusion that the effect of firm size on wages is
mostly explained by variation in firms’ characteristics rather than workers’
characteristics. In particular Abowd and Kramarz (2000) report that both
in France and in the US, variation in firms’ characteristics explains about 70
per cent of the firm size-wage differential. In addition to this result, there
are other important findings in the empirical literature that are relevant for
our paper. We summarize them below.

1. Fast growing firms pay lower wages. Bronars and Famulari (2001) and
Hanka (1998) report that firm’s growth (in terms of employment and sales)
has a negative effect on wages in a regression that controls for several workers’
and firms’ characteristics.
2. Firms that are in financial distress have lower employment and pay lower
wages. Nickell and Wadhwani (1991) document the negative relation between
debt and employment. Other studies provide some evidence that indicators of
financial pressure are associated with lower wages. See Nickell and Nicolitsas
(1999), Hanka (1998), Blanchflower, Oswald, and Garrett (1990).

                                                                     3
3. The link between firm age and wages is not clear-cut. Doms, Dunne,
and Troske (1997) find that the effect of firm age on wages is positive if we
do not control for worker’s characteristics but it becomes negative (albeit
not significant) if we control for worker’s experience. The same pattern is
documented by Troske (1999) and Brown and Medoff (2003).
4. Indirect indicators point out that small firms tend to be more financially
constrained. Small firms pay fewer dividends and have higher value of Tobin’s
q. They rely more on bank financing and their growth is sensitive to cash
flows. See for example Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Gilchrist and
Himmelberg (1996), Ross, Westerfield, and Jordan (1993) and Smith (1977).

    These empirical findings are important to evaluate our theoretical contri-
bution in generating a firm size-wage relation. Before presenting the theo-
retical model, however, we summarize the existing theoretical contributions
and how they relate to the above empirical findings.

2.2   Existing theories
There are several contributions in the theoretical literature that try to ex-
plain the firm size-wage relation. These contributions, however, are not fully
successful in solving the puzzle. This view is clearly stated in Troske (1999)
who concludes: “After testing several possible explanations we are still left
with the question: why do large firms pay higher wages? ”. Following is a
brief description of the main theoretical contributions.
1. Sorting of high skilled workers in large firms. This tends to occur if
large firms either employ workers of higher quality or provide workers with
higher incentives to accumulate general human capital, as in Zabojnik and
Bernhardt (2001). If sorting was the only mechanism, then the firm size-wage
relation should become insignificant after controlling for workers’ skills. How-
ever, after controlling for several workers’ characteristics, the effect of firm’s
characteristics remains large, see for example Brown and Medoff (1989) and
Abowd and Kramarz (2000). The model studied in Kremer and Maskin
(1996) emphasizes the complementarity that arises from matching high skilled
workers in the same firm. In this way, the effect of sorting on wages could
possibly translate into a firm’s fixed effect that any single worker’s charac-
teristic fails to capture. Yet, the inclusion of measures of average workers’
skill into a standard wage regression does not reduce significantly the size of
the firm size-wage effect. See Bayard and Troske (1999).

                                        4
2. Efficiency wages. In an efficiency wage model a la Shapiro and Stiglitz
(1984), large firms may pay higher wages because detecting shirking is more
difficult. Some empirical evidence is not fully consistent with this explana-
tion. For example, there are no differences in the magnitude of the firm
size-wage effect between production and non-production workers (see Brown
and Medoff (1989)) or supervisory and non supervisory workers (see Troske
(1999)). Moreover, the magnitude of the effect does not change after condi-
tioning on the number of workers receiving incentive pay (again, see Brown
and Medoff (1989)).
3. Wage bargaining. In bargaining models, wages increase with the net
surplus generated by the job and with the bargaining power of workers. This
theory can explain why wages are positively related to the size of the firm
only if either the bargaining power of workers or the value of the job increases
with the firm’s size. However, the inclusion of variables that proxy for the
bargaining power of workers, such as union-density or union-coverage, or the
inclusion of variables that proxy for the value of the job such as firm’s profit,
firm’s capital or severance payments, do not eliminate the significance of the
firm size-wage effect. See Brown and Medoff (1989).
4. Burdett and Mortensen’s model. In Burdett and Mortensen (1998) firms
face a trade-off between paying high wages to attract and retain a large
number of workers or paying low wages but with fewer workers hired and
retained. In equilibrium there are firms that pay low wages and remain
small and firms that pay high wages and become large. This model does not
seem to capture the fact that fast growing firms tend to pay lower wages. In
fact, firms that grow faster are the ones that pay higher wages. It should be
pointed out, however, that this is only a conjecture since the firm dynamics
generated by this model has not been fully explored. Similar considerations
apply to the model studied in Burdett and Coles (2003).
    The goal of our paper is to provide an additional explanation for the firm
size-wage relation in which financial markets frictions play a central role. The
importance of financial factors for the firm size-wage relation has not been
previously studied in the theoretical literature.1
   1
    Brown and Medoff (1989) and Oi and Idson (1999) hint a potential link. They con-
jecture that financial market imperfections increase the cost of capital for small firms and
induce them to choose lower capital intensity. In a model with wage bargaining, the lower
capital intensity implies that these firms pay lower wages. However, in empirical studies,



                                             5
3   The basic model

We start describing a simple version of the model to illustrate the basic firm
and wage dynamics that are key to generate the firm size-wage relation. In
this model firms face a deterministic problem and they live forever. The
analysis of the simple model will facilitate the understanding of the general
model studied in Section 4.
    Consider a risk-neutral infinitely lived entrepreneur with initial wealth a0
and with lifetime utility
                                                ∞
                                                        β t ct
                                                X
                                           E0
                                                t=0

where β is the intertemporal discount factor and ct is consumption.
    The entrepreneur has the managerial skills to run an investment project
that generates revenues y = A · N . The variable N denotes the number of
hired workers and A is a constant. The project is subject to the capacity
constraint N ≤ N . In the general model studied in Section 4, the capacity
constraint N is allowed to differ across entrepreneurs or firms.
    The employment of each worker requires two types of fixed investment:
fungible investment κf and worker-specific investment κw . The first type of
investment, κf , has an external value and can be resold at no cost. The
second type, κw , represents the cost incurred by the firm for recruiting and
training a new worker. This is lost if the worker quits or is fired. We will
denote by κ = κf + κw the sum of the two components. The total capital
accumulated at the end of time t by a firm created at time zero is κ tτ =0 nτ ,
                                                                     P

where nτ is the number of workers hired at time τ (who start producing at
time τ + 1). The output produced by the firm at t + 1 is A tτ =0 nτ .
                                                              P

    Workers are infinitely lived with lifetime utility
                         ∞       h              i                       c1−σ − 1
                               β t U (ct ) + `t ,
                         X
                    E0                                      U (ct ) =
                         t=0                                              1−σ

where β is the discount factor, σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ct
                              ¯ denotes the utility of leisure which is forgone
is consumption, and `t ∈ {0, `}
when the worker provides working effort. The assumption that there is some
forgone utility is relevant only for the analysis of renegotiation studied in
the firm size effect remains significant even if we control for the capital intensity and the
productivity of the firm. As we will show in the next sections, the financial mechanism
proposed in our paper does not rely on the capital intensity of the firm.


                                                    6
Section 6. In equilibrium workers provide effort and in the analysis that
precedes Section 6 we impose `t = 0.
     Workers do not have any assets and can not borrow by pledging their
future labor income. We also assume that workers cannot save, and therefore,
consumption is simply equal to their wages.2
     Funds are provided by investors who are risk-neutral and discount future
payments at rate r. The individual supply is infinitesimal, but the aggregate
number of investors is large enough to guarantee that the aggregate supply
of funds is perfectly elastic at rate r. This implies that financial markets are
perfectly competitive and the equilibrium interest rate is r. We assume that
β ≤ 1/(1+r) so that internal financing does not dominate external financing.
     The investment κ = κf + κw necessary to employ a worker is what creates
the financial need. Using the renegotiation idea of Hart and Moore (1994) and
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), the entrepreneur can borrow only the amount
that can be collateralized, that is, the fungible capital κf . Since the collateral
must also guarantee the interests on the loan, the firm can borrow at most
κ̄f = κf /(1 + r), per each worker. The borrowing limit, then, can be written
as bt ≤ κ̄f tτ =0 nτ , where bt denotes the debt contracted at time t. We will
             P

show in Section 6 that this is the only feasible contract with investors.
     When a worker is hired, the firm signs a long-term contract that specifies
the whole sequence of wages. By assuming that the labor market is compet-
itive, the lifetime utility provided by the contract to the worker is equal to
the utility earned by re-entering the labor market. This utility, denoted by
qres , is exogenous in the simple version of the model.

3.1    The firm’s problem
We start analyzing the optimization problem assuming that firms and work-
ers commit to the long-term contracts. In Section 6 we will describe the
conditions under which the parties (firms and workers) never renege on their
promises and the contract can be supported as a sub-game perfect equilib-
rium of the repeated game played by the firm with each individual worker.
    Let {wt,t+j }∞
                 j=1 be the sequence of wages that the firm promises to the
workers hired at time t. Here wt,t+j denotes the wage paid at time t + j to
   2
     This is without loss of generality. Because we assume that the return from savings is
smaller than 1/β − 1 and wages do not decrease over time, the worker would not save even
if he or she were allowed to. For the general model of Section 4, it is further required that
β is sufficiently small. This condition is satisfied for the chosen parametrization.


                                             7
workers hired at time t. Then the total wage payments at time t + 1 are
Pt
  τ =0 nτ wτ,t+1 . Let at denote the net worth at the end of period t—that is,
after production and after the payment of wages and interests. The sum
of the firm’s net worth, at , and debt financing, bt , equals the sum of firm’s
capital, κ tτ =0 nτ , and dividend payments, dt . Thus, dt = at +bt −κ tτ =0 nτ .
           P                                                          P

    Given the initial assets a0 , the firm maximizes the discounted value of
the entrepreneur’s consumption, which always equals dividends since the
entrepreneur is at least as impatient as the market, β ≤ 1/(1 + r). Thus,
at timenzero, the firm chooseso∞ the whole sequence of debt, employment and
                          ∞
wages, bt , nt , {wt,t+j }j=1   , to solve the problem:
                              t=0

                            ∞                              t
                                                                       !
                                      t
                            X                              X
         V (a0 ) = max            β        at + b t − κ           nτ                            (1)
                            t=0                            τ =0

                     subject to

                                          t
                                          X
                     at + b t − κ                nτ ≥ 0,                                        (2)
                                          τ =0
                                  t
                                  X
                     bt ≤ κ̄f             nτ ,                                                  (3)
                                  τ =0
                     ∞
                           β j U (wt,t+j ) ≥ qres ,
                     X
                                                                                                (4)
                     j=1
                                                 t
                                                 X             t
                                                               X
                     at+1 = (κ + A)                     nτ −          nτ wτ,t+1 − (1 + r)bt ,   (5)
                                                 τ =0          τ =0

which all have to hold for any t ≥ 0. Constraint (2) imposes the non-
negativity of dividends. This results from the limited liability of the en-
trepreneur together with the non-negativity of consumption. Constraint (3)
imposes the borrowing limit and (4) is the worker’s participation constraint.
This imposes that the sequence of wages offered to each cohort of new recruits
cannot be smaller than the reservation value qres . This constraint should be
imposed not only when the worker is hired, but also in all future periods.
However, as we will show below, wages never decrease. Therefore, if the
participation constraint is satisfied when the worker is hired, it will also be
satisfied at any future date. Finally, constraint (5) defines the law of motion
for the end-of-period net worth.

                                                   8
    Let γt and λt nt be the lagrange multipliers associated with the constraints
(2) and (4), respectively. Then Appendix A shows that the first order con-
ditions imply that
                               λτ Uc (wτ,t ) = 1 + γt ,                      (6)
where Uc denotes the marginal utility of consumption. The variable λτ is the
marginal cost to the firm of providing one unit of utility to a worker hired at
time τ . Thus, the term λτ Uc (wτ,t ) represents the marginal cost of reducing
wages. The term 1 + γt is the value of one additional unit of internal funds.
Therefore, equation (6) says that the optimal wage policy of the firm is such
that the marginal cost of reducing wages is equal to the marginal value of
internal funds. In other words, the firm ‘borrows’ from a worker until the
cost of borrowing is equal to the marginal value of internal funds.
    The multiplier γt captures the tightness of financial constraints and de-
pends on the firm’s net worth at . If at is small, the financial needs of the
firm are high which imply that the value of an extra unit of internal funds
is high. As the firm retains earnings, its assets increase over time and the
variable γt converges to zero. Then, equation (6) implies that:

Property 1 The wage received by each worker grows over time until the firm
becomes unconstrained, that is, γt = 0.

    Equation (6) also implies that the ratio of marginal utilities between
workers of different cohorts remains constant over time. If we consider (6)
for two different cohorts indexed by τ1 and τ2 , and we divide side by side we
obtain that
                               Uc (wτ1 ,t )  λτ
                                            = 2.
                               Uc (wτ2 ,t )  λτ1
Since the right-hand-side does not depend on t, this condition implies that:

Property 2 The ratios of marginal utilities between workers of different co-
horts remain constant over time.

   In the next section we take advantage of this property to rewrite the
problem recursively with a limited number of state variables. The recursive
formulation will be convenient in the next section when we study the general
model with entry and exit.

                                       9
3.2    Recursive formulation of the firm’s problem
Let qτ,t = ∞       j
             P
              j=1 β U (wτ,t+j ) be the lifetime utility promised at the end of
time t to a worker hired at time τ , with τ ≤ t. Notice that qτ,t follows the
recursive form                     h                    i
                          qτ,t = β U (wτ,t+1 ) + qτ,t+1                    (7)
with qτ,τ = qres .
    With the utility function U (c) = (c1−σ − 1) /(1 − σ), Property 2 implies
that the ratios of wages paid to workers of different cohorts remain constant
over time.3 This property also implies that the ratios of lifetime utilities
promised to different cohorts of workers remain constant over time. Thus,
if we consider the last and the first cohort of workers, we have that, at any
given point in time, their relative lifetime utilities and wages are linked by
                                                 !1−σ
                              qt,t      wt,t+1                 qres
                                   =                       =        ,
                              q0,t      w0,t+1                 q0,t

where the last equality uses the fact that qt,t = qres . Inverting the second
equality provides an expression for the wage ratio between the cohort hired
at time t and the cohort hired at time zero, which reads as
                                                !    1
                            wt,t+1       qres       1−σ
                                   =                      = ψ(q0,t ).
                            w0,t+1       q0,t

From now on we omit the zero subscript to identify the first cohort of workers.
Therefore, wt and qt denote the time-t wage and promised utility of the first
cohort of workers. The total wage payments paid by the firm at time t can
be written as Ht wt , where
                                          t−1
                                          X
                                   Ht =          ψ(qτ )nτ ,
                                          τ =0

which evolves recursively as

                                 Ht+1 = Ht + ψ(qt )nt .                                  (8)
   3
    This implies that cohort of workers who earn more on entry maintain their advantage
over time. The existence of these cohort effects in the wage policy of the firm is documented
by Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994)


                                             10
      Once we know Ht and the utility promised to the first cohort of workers,
qt , the determination of the whole wage structure paid by the firm at time t+1
only requires the determination of the wage for the first cohort of workers,
that is wt+1 . This allows us to write the firm’s problem recursively with a
limited number of state variables as follows:
                                                                                 
                                                           0      0   0   0   0
      V (a, q, N, H) =        max             a + b − κN + βV (a , q , N , H )         (9)
                          b,w0 ,q 0 ,N 0 ≤N


                          subject to

                          a + b − κN 0 ≥ 0,                                           (10)
                          b ≤ κ̄f N 0 ,                                               (11)
                                   h                   i
                          q = β U (w0 ) + q 0 ,                                       (12)
                          a0 = κN 0 + AN 0 − H 0 w0 − (1 + r)b,                       (13)
                          H 0 = H + ψ(q)(N 0 − N ).                                   (14)

The variable N denotes the current employment of the firm and the prime
denotes the next period value. Thus N 0 −N is the change in employment, that
is, the number of workers hired in the current period (who start producing
in the next period). Constraints (10) and (11) impose the non-negativity
of dividends and the borrowing limit, respectively. Equation (12) is the
promise-keeping constraint for the first cohort of workers. Finally, equations
(13) and (14) are the law of motion for the states a and H, respectively.
    Let γ and λH 0 denote the lagrange multipliers associated with constraints
(10) and (12), respectively. Appendix B shows that the first order conditions
of the above problem imply that

                                 λUw0 = 1 + γ 0 ,                                     (15)
                                   λ = λ0 .                                           (16)

The first condition is analogous to (6) while the second says that the lagrange
multiplier for the worker’s participation constraint is constant over time.
   These two conditions characterize the wage dynamics of the firm. As
observed in the previous section, the lagrange multiplier γ decreases over
time until it becomes zero. From equation (15) we can see that the wage
paid to the first cohort of workers increases over time until γ 0 = 0. Because
the wages paid to all other cohorts of workers are proportional to the wage

                                                  11
paid to the first cohort, we also have that the average wages increase over
time until γ 0 = 0. Wages differ across workers of different cohorts. In fact,
because all workers start with q = qres , after which the promised utility grows
over time, older workers receive higher wages than younger workers. One of
the predictions of the model is that the wage profile of constrained (young)
firms is steeper than the wage profile of mature (old) firms.
    Once the firm becomes unconstrained, that is, γ = 0, the firm would like
to increase employment beyond N , but the capacity constraint binds.

3.3   A numerical example
Figure 2 shows some of the properties of the model using a parameterized
version of the model. The parameter values are as follows: r = 0.03, β =
0.934, σ = 1, qres = U (0.6)/(1 − β), N = 1, 000, A = 1, κ = 2.8, κf /κ = 0.3
and a0 is such that the initial size of the firm is 10 percent the maximum scale.
This is obtained by setting a0 = 196. The numerical example considered here
is provided only for illustrative purposes. A formal calibration exercise will
be conducted in Section 4.2, after the specification of the general model.
    The first panel of Figure 2 plots the employment dynamics. The firm
starts with an initial employment of 100 workers and then gradually grows
over time until it reaches the optimal size N = 1, 000. The transition takes
place in 11 periods. The second panel plots the wage profile of the first cohort
of workers (those hired at time 0) and the initial wage paid to newly hired
workers. The wage profile of the first cohort (continuous line) is increasing
until the firm reaches the unconstrained status. The dashed line shows the
wage earned in the first period of employment by workers of different cohorts.
As the firm gets closer to the optimal scale, it offers higher initial wages, and
therefore, the wage profile of newer workers is less steep overall.
    The third panel plots the average wage paid by the firm as a function
of its age and the fourth panel the average wage as a function of its size
(measured by the number of employees). The average wage increases with
the size and age of the firm. This is a direct consequence of the fact that,
when the firm is young and constrained, it operates at a suboptimal scale
and offers an increasing profile of wages.




                                       12
    Figure 2: Employment dynamics and wage patterns over age and size.




4    General model and simulated regressions

In the simple model described in the previous section, the profile of wages
paid by the firm is fully captured by its age. Therefore, once we control for
the age of the firm, its size becomes irrelevant because there is a one-to-one
mapping between size and age. However, in a cross section of firms, size
could have an independent effect. This is because firms may have different
capacities N and they can start with different initial assets a0 . In order
to capture the relation between firm size and wages in a cross-section of
firms, we need to extend the model and specify the whole industry structure,
including entrance and exit.
    We extend the model by allowing: (i) firm heterogeneity in technology N
and initial wealth a0 ; (ii) firm entry and exit; and (iii) turnover of workers
within the firm. The first extension allows us to generate a size distribution
of firms close to the data. The second guarantees that at each point in time
there is a fraction of firms that are financially constrained. The third is

                                      13
introduced for robustness.
    We assume that there is a probability 1 − p that an investment project
becomes obsolete and the firm exits. Exiting firms are replaced by new
entrant firms managed by new entrepreneurs. New entrepreneurs draw the
project capacity N from the distribution Γ(N ). The mass of workers is L
while the mass of firms (entrepreneurs) is normalized to 1.
    The initial wealth of new entrepreneurs could be correlated with the
project capacity. For instance, entrepreneurs with more promising projects
may be able to raise more funds initially by pooling a larger number of
founders. Alternatively, we can think that the probability of drawing large
capacity projects increases with the ability of the entrepreneur, which in turn
may be related to his initial wealth. To formalize this idea in a simple man-
ner, we assume that there is a unique relation between the project capacity
                                                                        ρ
N and the initial wealth of the entrepreneur, given by a0 = α · N . The
parameters α and ρ determine the degree of financial tightness for new firms,
as a function of projects capacity. Given the linearity of the production func-
tion and the borrowing limit, the financial tightness of a new firm is captured
by the ratio
                                                            1−ρ
                            (κ − κ̄f ) · N   (κ − κ̄f ) · N
                    FTI ≡                  =                    ,
                                 a0                  α
where F T I stands for Financial Tightness Index. The numerator is the
total capital that must be financed internally when the firm operates at the
optimal scale N . The denominator is the initial net worth. When this ratio is
greater than 1 the firm is financially constrained. Lower values of α increases
the financial tightness for all new firms while the parameter ρ differentiates
the tightness across different types of firms. When ρ = 1, the tightness is
independent of the firm’s capacity. When ρ < 1, firms with larger capacity
face tighter constraints.
    The last assumption is that workers may die with some probability 1 − η.
This feature implies that firms loose some workers at any point in time and
there will be workers’ turnover within the firm. To keep the model tractable
we assume that 1 − η is also the fraction of workers that the firm looses in
every period, as if the firm employs a continuum of workers. Of course, this
is a simplification but it is convenient to keep the firm’s problem tractable.
With this assumption, the only source of uncertainty for the firm is the
technology obsolescence leading to the exit of the firm.



                                      14
4.1    Optimization problem for the general model
Given the initial assets a0 and the project capacity N , the problem solved
by an active entrepreneur is similar to the problem studied in the previous
section, although now we have to specify what happens to the wage contracts
when the project becomes obsolete.
    When the investment project becomes obsolete, all workers lose their jobs
and any claim toward the current employer. By re-entering the labor market,
they will get the reservation utility qres . This is the only equilibrium outcome
of the strategic interaction between the worker and the firm as described in
Section 6.4 The promise-keeping constraint can then be written as:
                       h                                                 i
              qτ,t = β U (wτ,t+1 ) + η · p · qτ,t+1 + η · (1 − p) · qres .

Here the assumption is that the survival of the worker and the viability of
the project is observed after paying the current wage (but before the new
investment). Consequently, the current wage is not renegotiated.
    For the analysis that follows it will be convenient to rescale the promised
utility qτ,t by the constant term ηβ(1 − p)qres /(1 − ηpβ). We then have

                                             ηβ(1 − p)qres
                             zτ,t = qτ,t −                 .
                                               1 − ηpβ
Using this rescaled variable, the promise-keeping constraint becomes:
                                    h                            i
                           zτ,t = β U (wτ,t+1 ) + p zτ,t+1 .                         (17)

    Since the ratios of marginal utilities between different cohorts of workers
is constant over time (i.e. Property 2 remains valid), the wage ratio between
a new worker and the first cohort of workers satisfies:
                                                !    1
                             wt,t+1      zt,t       1−σ
                                    =                     = ψ(zt )
                             w0,t+1      z0,t

which identifies the constant relative wage earned by the workers hired at
time t. Notice that we maintain the convention of omitting the zero subscript
to identify the first cohort of workers.
   4
    The entrepreneur could promise extra payments to the worker if the firm is liquidated.
However, these payments are not credible. Indeed, when the technology becomes obsolete,
there is no cost for the firm from renegotiating because the sunk investment is lost.

                                             15
      The law of motion for the state variable H becomes

                           H 0 = ηH + ψ(z)(N 0 − ηN ),                      (18)

where N 0 − ηN is the number of workers hired in the current period.
   Since only a fraction η of workers remain in the firm from one period to
the next, the law of motion for the next period value of the firm’s asset is:

               a0 = κN 0 + AN 0 − H 0 w0 − (1 + r)b − κw (1 − η)N 0 ,       (19)

where the last term accounts for the fact that a fraction (1 − η) of workers
exit the firm with consequent loss of worker’s specific human capital.
    The recursive representation is similar to that of section 3.2, once we
use z as a state variable in place of q, and we use the laws of motion (17),
(18) and (19) to characterize the evolution of z, H and a, respectively. The
full description of the firm’s problem and the derivation of the first order
conditions are in Appendix C. We are now able to define a steady state
labor market equilibrium.

Definition 1 A steady state labor market equilibrium is defined by: (i) A
distribution (measure) of firms M (a, z, N, H, N ); (ii) A reservation utility
qres ; (iii) A transition function for the distribution of firms. Such that: (a)
The transition function is consistent with the firm policies, the probability
distribution of initial capacities, Γ(NR), and the initial distribution of wealth
            ρ
a0 = αN ; (b) The demand of labor N · dM (a, z, N, H, N ) equals the fixed
supply of workers L; (c) The next period distribution generated by the tran-
sition function is equal to the current distribution.

    Notice that, although the reservation value qres is endogenously derived
as the price which clears the labor market, the interest rate r is exogenous
in the model (and equal to the subjective discount rate of investors).

4.2     Quantitative analysis
In this section we show that the model generates a positive firm size-wage
relation by estimating wage regressions similar to those considered in the
empirical literature but on model-generated data. We first describe the
parametrization of the model and then we report the regression results.

                                        16
Parametrization The interest rate on secured debt is set to r = 0.03 and
the intertemporal discount factor to β = 0.934. This implies a discount rate
for entrepreneurs equal to 1/β − 1 ≈ 0.07, which is close to the post-war
stock market return in the U.S. economy. The risk-aversion parameter is set
to σ = 1 (log-utility). We will conduct a sensitivity analysis with respect
to this parameter. The per-worker investment κ is chosen to have a capital-
output ratio of 2.8. With the normalization A = 1, this requires κ = 2.8. The
non-sunk fraction of capital κf /κ determines the leverage of the firm. We
set κf /κ = 0.3 which is consistent with the average leverage of Compustat
companies. The probability of firms’ death is set to 1−p = 0.0286. This is the
aggregate employment losses due to the death of firms observed in the 2001
data for the U.S. economy (see the footnote to Table 1 for the data source).
The survival probability of workers is set to η = 0.9778. This corresponds
to a working life duration of about 45 years, which is consistent with the
calibration of explicit life-cycle models such as Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987)
and Rios-Rull (1996).5

          Table 1: Size distribution of firms in the U.S. economy, 2001.

                        Firm size                                Employees
                       (Employees)        Firms     Employees
                                                                  Firms


                      New firms
                       1-19              95.37%      53.28%            3.3
                       20-499             4.58%      37.66%           48.0
                       500+               0.05%       9.06%        1,022.7
                       Total            100.00%     100.00%            5.8

                      All firms
                       1-19              87.46%      17.90%            4.7
                       20-49              7.94%      10.27%           30.0
                       50-99              2.53%       7.43%           68.4
                       100-499            1.72%      14.26%          192.4
                       500-999            0.17%       5.13%          689.0
                       1,000-1,499        0.06%       3.02%        1,217.4
                       1,500-2,499        0.05%       3.84%        1,915.8
                       2,500+             0.07%      38.13%       12,074.1
                       Total            100.00%     100.00%           23.2

                      Source: Small Business Administration, Office of Advo-
                      cacy, data from U.S. Census Bureau, Statistics of U.S.
                      Businesses. http://www.sba.gov/advo/stats/data.html.


      The employment capacity N can take eight values. These values and the
  5
      The typical assumption is that agents start working at age 20 and retire at 65.

                                               17
corresponding probabilities Γ(N ) are determined jointly with the parameters
                                                                ρ
α and ρ. These are the parameters of the function a0 = α · N determining
the initial assets of new firms. We use a simulated method of moments to
pin down these parameters. More specifically, we minimize the square errors
between specific moments generated by the model and the ones observed
in the data. The moments are the size distribution of new and incumbent
firms as reported in Table 1, plus a capital income share of 40 percent.6
Table 2 reports the estimated distribution of new projects and their initial
financial tightness. The estimated parameters imply that firms with larger
projects face higher initial tightness. This is a consequence of the fact that
the distribution of new firms shown in Table 1 is much more concentrated
toward small firms than the distribution of incumbent firms. The values of
the other two parameters are α = 1.860 and ρ = 0.716.

        Table 2: Distribution of new projects and financial tightness.

                                 N         Γ(N )      FTI


                                  5.9     0.81887     1.74
                                 31.7     0.11367     2.81
                                 53.0     0.03634     3.26
                                189.8     0.02671     4.68
                                602.0     0.00237     6.50
                              1,148.5     0.00074     7.81
                              1,866.4     0.00058     8.96
                             17,875.6     0.00071    17.04




Simulated regression Using the steady state distribution of firms, we
estimate the following regression:

  ln(Wagei,j ) = ᾱ + αT · WorkerTenurei,j + αT 2 · WorkerTenure2i,j +
                         αA · FirmAgej + αS · ln(FirmSizej ) + αG · FirmGrowthj


   6
    The size distribution reported in Table 1 gives us 20 independent moments. With the
addition of the capital income share we have 21 moments to match but only 17 parameters:
eight values of N , seven probabilities Γ(N ), plus α and ρ. Once we have the values of
these parameters we also have the labor supply. The implied value is L = 27.2.



                                          18
    The index i identifies the worker and j the firm where the worker is
employed. This specification is similar to the one used in the empirical
literature although we include a smaller set of control variables consistent
with the structure of our model. The estimation results are reported in
Table 3 with t-statistics in parenthesis.

      Table 3: Wage equation estimation from model-generated data.

      Description                  (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)


      Constant                   -0.5583     -0.5771      -0.5159     -0.5360     -0.6272     -0.6316
                                (-174.7)    (-165.5)     (-181.5)    (-217.0)    (-206.7)    (-196.6)

      Worker tenure               0.0068     0.0031              -           -    0.0104      0.0067
                                  (30.2)     (13.5)              -           -    (45.8)      (31.4)

      Worker tenure2 /1,000      -0.0343    -0.0330              -           -   -0.0869     -0.0770
                                  (-10.9)     (-9.6)             -           -    (-27.5)     (-23.1)

      Firm age                   -0.0031            -    -0.0006             -   -0.0025             -
                                  (-45.9)           -     (-13.9)            -    (-35.1)            -

      Firm log-size               0.0105     0.0073       0.0084      0.0077      0.0095      0.0070
                                  (31.8)     (20.7)       (23.5)      (21.4)      (26.4)      (18.7)

      Firm growth                -0.6720    -0.5382      -0.7788     -0.6869             -           -
                                  (-43.7)    (-32.4)      (-49.7)     (-47.9)            -           -

      R-square                     0.372      0.239        0.231       0.216       0.252       0.160
      Observations                10,005     10,005       10,005      10,005      10,005      10,005

      Notes: t-statistics in parenthesis.


    The first column reports the coefficient estimates when all variables are
included in the regression. All the estimates are statistically significant. Of
special interest are the coefficients of firm’s size and growth. The estimates
for these two parameters are consistent with the findings of the empirical
literature. In particular, while the size of the firm has a positive impact on
wages, the effect of firm’s grow is negative. We discuss in details each of the
coefficient estimates.
The firm size effect: The largest firms are those that experienced tight fi-
nancial constraints in the past, when they were operating at a suboptimal
(smaller) scale. In order to accelerate their grow, these firms paid low wages
in exchange of higher future wages. Now that they are unconstrained (and


                                                    19
large), they pay higher wages in fulfillment of their promises. This generates
a positive correlation between firm’s size and wages. In quantitative terms
the effect of the firm’s size is important and comparable to those found in
the empirical literature. Brown and Medoff (1989) survey the empirical lit-
erature and report estimates of log-firm-size coefficient that ranges from 0.01
to 0.03. Similar results are reported by Bronars and Famulari (2001). The
findings of Bronars and Famulari are particularly relevant for us since, as
in our simulated regression, they include firm growth. If we compare firms
that are in the size class 1-19 (whose average size is 4.7) with firms that em-
ploy more than 2,500 employees (whose average size is 12,074), our estimates
imply that the average wage paid by the second group of firms is about 8
percent higher than the average wage paid by the first group of firms.
    It is important to emphasize that the presence of financial constraints
is not enough to generate the positive firm size-wage relation. What is key
is that these constraints are tighter for high capacity firms. Our estimated
value of ρ is 0.716. This implies that the financial tightness of new firms with
the largest N is almost 10 times the tightness of firms with the smallest N
(see Table 2). If ρ was equal to 1—implying that all new firms face the same
financial tightness—then the differences in wages would be fully captured by
the age of the firm.7
    To further illustrate the intuition behind this result, consider the following
example. Suppose that there are only two types of firms: low capacity and
high capacity firms. We refer to the first type of firms as “Small” and to
the second type as “Large”. Suppose that firms live for two periods. When
young they are financially constrained. When old they are unconstrained
and operate at the optimal scale. This implies that young firms pay lower
wages and operate at a smaller scale. Figure 3 plots the wages and size for
these two types of firms, when they are young and old. The top panels are
for the case in which all firms face the same financial tightness when young,
that is, ρ = 1. The bottom panels are for the case in which high capacity
firms face tighter constraints when young, that is, ρ < 1.
    When ρ is equal to one (top panels), the differential in wages between
young and old firms is the same for Small and Large firms. Therefore, a
dummy variable that differentiates young firms from old firms would be suf-
    7
      Indeed, if we constrain ρ to be one and we control for firm age, the estimated coefficient
for the size of the firm becomes insignificant. On the other hand, the sign and significance
of the coefficient for size is not affected by α. This is important for the growth coefficient.



                                              20
               Figure 3: Financial tightness and firm size-wage relation.
                     Same tightness                                    Same tightness
                  (Before controlling for age)                    (After controlling for age)



                   Small                  Large
                                           Old
                     q
                    Old                    q
       Wages




                                                       Wages
                                          ((((
                        (((                                         Small                  Large
                   ((((
                 q
               (((       q                                        q  Old
                                                                      q              q       q
                                                                                            Old
                Small             Large                         Small              Large
                Young             Young                         Young              Young

                            Employees                                       Employees

                   Different tightness                            Different tightness
                  (Before controlling for age)                    (After controlling for age)

                                          Large
                                            q
                                           Old
                    Small
                     Old
                     q
                                            
                                                                                         Large
       Wages




                                                       Wages




                                    
                                                                                          q
                                                                                            Old
                                                                     Small
                  q                                               q
                    
                                                                        q
                                                                        Old
                  
               
                Small         q                                Small           q
                Young       Large                                           Large
                                                               Young
                            Young                                           Young
                            Employees                                       Employees




ficient to account for the wage differential. In other words, after conditioning
on age, there is no relation between firm size and wages. This is shown in
the right-hand-side panel of Figure 3. When instead ρ is less than one, the
wage profile is steeper in Large firms than in Small firms (see the bottom
panels of Figure 3). In this case, an age dummy is unable to fully capture
the wage differential and there still remains a positive correlation between
firm size and wages, even after controlling for the age of the firm.
The firm growth effect: The second important result is the negative effect
of firm growth on wages. The intuition for this result arises naturally from
the discussion above: firms that grow are those with binding financing con-
straints. Because of these constraints, growing firms pay lower wages today
in exchange of higher future wages when they will be able to operate at the
optimal scale. Quantitatively, the estimates of this coefficient is not very
different from those in the empirical literature. Bronars and Famulari (2001)

                                                  21
report a coefficient of firm growth that ranges from -0.4 to -0.35.
Tenure and firm age: The other two variables included in the regression is
the worker’s tenure and the age of the firm. The positive effect of the worker’s
tenure derives from the fact that the wages paid by constrained firms increase
over time, and therefore, with the tenure of workers. The return to tenure
is smaller than the one estimated by Topel (1991), but comparable to the
effect estimated by Altonji and Shakotko (1987). The estimated coefficient
for firm’s age is negative. However, the sign and magnitude of this coefficient
depends on the variables we include in the regression. For instance, if we ex-
clude worker’s tenure, the coefficient of firm’s age decreases significantly and
it becomes positive if we also exclude firm size from the regressors. In brief,
the unconditional correlation between wage and firm age is positive while it
becomes negative after controlling for some workers and firms characteris-
tics. The fact that the relation between firm age and wages depends on the
variables included in the regression is consistent with the empirical findings
that the effect of age is not clear cut (see Section 2.1).

Sensitivity analysis: Table 4 reports the estimates for alternative values
of the coefficient of risk aversion σ. When σ = 0.5 (low concavity), the firm-
size wage effect increases more than 20 percent. In this case, the wages of
firms with more than 2,500 employees are about 10 percent higher than the
wages paid by firms in the size class 1-19. This derives from the fact that the
cost of offering an increasing wage profile is smaller when the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution is high. Consequently, firms offer a steeper wage
profile and the effects of firm size and growth on wages are stronger. The
opposite is true when σ = 2.0. In the limit case in which σ = ∞, all firms
would pay a constant wage and the model would not generate any wage
differential.8
   8
     There is a limit to how small σ can be. If this parameter is very small, the wage profile
becomes so steep that large-unconstrained firms pay much higher wages than the ones
offered to new workers. This implies that the gains from replacing an existing worker (and
paying lower wages) exceed the loss in sunk capital. With σ = 0.5 the non-renegotiation
condition is no longer satisfied, as we will show in Section 6.




                                             22
                            Table 4: Sensitivity analysis

                    Description                 (1)         (2)        (3)
                                              σ = 0.5     σ = 1.0    σ = 2.0

                    Constant                   -0.5548     -0.5583    -0.5488
                                              (-120.6)    (-174.7)   (-301.8)

                    Worker tenure              0.0071      0.0068     0.0043
                                               (21.8)      (30.2)     (33.5)

                    Worker tenure2 /1,000      -0.0257    -0.0343    -0.0239
                                                 (-5.7)    (-10.9)    (-13.2)

                    Firm age                   -0.0039    -0.0031    -0.0018
                                                (-40.0)    (-45.9)    (-46.6)

                    Firm log-size              0.0130      0.0105     0.0069
                                               (27.3)      (31.8)     (36.1)

                    Firm growth                -1.2324    -0.6720    -0.2821
                                                (-61.3)    (-43.7)    (-28.7)

                    R-square                    0.412       0.372      0.325
                    Observations               10,045      10,005     10,133

                    Notes: t-statistics in parenthesis.



5   Job-to-job flows and employer vs. occupational tenure

In this section we extend the model to overcome two apparent shortcomings
of our analysis. First, the turnover of workers generated by the model tends
to be too small, since it is just the result of workers and firms death. In reality,
a substantial fraction of workers switch their occupation from one employer
to the other without unemployment spells. See, for example, Akerlof, Rose,
and Yellen (1988) and Fallick and Fleischman (2001). Another important
feature of our model is that employer tenure is an important determinant
of wages. However, a recent paper by Kambourov and Manovski (2002)
argues that the tenure of a worker with an employer is not very important for
the determination of wages. What matters is the occupational tenure—i.e.,
the experience in a particular occupation even if with multiple employers.
To address these issues, we extend the model to allow for occupation-to-
occupation flows.
    We make the following assumptions. First, in each period a firm is able
to contact a measure m of workers, who already hold a job. We interpret


                                               23
these workers as holding jobs in the same occupation as that offered by the
new employer. Because the worker does not change occupation, he or she
can transfer the (occupation) specific human capital to the new employer.
This allows the new employer to save on the investment cost κw .
    Second, the firm is able to attract the worker simply by offering the
utility earned with the current employer. As in Burdett and Mortensen
(1998) and Burdett and Coles (2003), the worker is unable to let the current
and new employers compete over his services, and the poaching firm has all
the bargaining power. The microfundations for these assumptions, based on
the existence of some renegotiation costs, are developed in Hashimoto (1981)
and Anderlini and Felli (2001).9 Notice that the new employer is willing to
offer a utility greater than qres because it saves on the training cost kw .
    To keep the model tractable, we also make two additional simplifying
assumptions. First, the matching technology is balanced as in Burdett and
Vishwanath (1988), in the sense that the number of workers contacted by
the firm is proportional to its size, that is, m = χN . This implies that
each employed worker has a probability χ of being contacted by another
employer offering a job in the same occupation. Notice that the mass of
workers contacted by a firm and the workers who get contacted by other
firms are not stochastic. Consequently, the mass of workers poached by a
firm is equal to the mass of workers leaving the firm. Here we are proceeding
as if we can apply some law of large numbers. Second, we assume that each
firm contacts workers that are employed in firms with the same capacity and
age. The idea is that workers employed in firms of the same type are more
likely to have transferable skills. This implies that the promised utilities of
the workers who quit the firm are exactly equal to the utilities of the new
hired workers. As a result, neither the state variables of the firm nor their
law of motion change.
    The previous assumptions are simple abstractions that allow us to keep
   9
     The idea goes as follows. The poaching firm makes a take-it or leave-it offer to the
contacted worker. The offer is private information and in order to make the offer verifiable
to the employer, the worker needs to exercise some effort. The current employer would
match the external offer if the worker demands to renegotiate the contract. However,
because to renegotiate the contract the worker has to face an effort cost, the utility from
renegotiating is smaller than the utility from accepting the external offer. This generates
an hold-up problem and the worker never tries to renegotiate the contract. Anticipating
this, the poaching firm offers an expected utility slightly higher than the utility that the
worker earns by staying with the current employer.



                                            24
the model tractable because the firm faces exactly the same problem it was
facing before. However, we can now distinguish between employer tenure and
occupational tenure. We then have that employer tenure is no longer relevant
for the determination of wages once we control for occupational tenure.
    Even though the firm’s problem does not change with the addition of
job-to-job flows, the tenure of workers with the same employer is shorter on
average. Consequently, the coefficient estimates of the wage equation may
change. Using a value of χ = 0.15, the new estimates are:10

 ln(Wage)     =   −0.8614 + 0.0476 · WorkerTenure −0.0016 · WorkerTenure2
                   (-110.8)    (27.1)                    (-10.7)

                  −0.0024 · FirmAge + 0.0091 · ln(FirmSize) −0.496 · FirmGrowth
                   (-29.4)                 (27.4)                  (-28.7)


   As can be verified, these numbers are not very different from the case in
which there are no job-to-job flows as reported in Table 3.

6   Contracts implementation

In the analysis of the long-term contract we have assumed that the firm
commits to the long-term wage contracts. Commitment could be problem-
atic because the promised utilities increase over time until the firm becomes
unconstrained. More specifically, a new worker starts with qt = qres and
receives qt+j ≥ qres , for all j > 0. Because new workers can be hired with
initial utility qres , the firm may have an incentive to renege promises that
exceed qres . The goal of this section is to discuss the conditions that prevent
the firm from renegotiating the long-term contract. We then discuss why
collateralized debt is the only form of external financing for the firm.
     Before continuing, it will be convenient to summarize the timing of the
model. First workers decide whether to provide effort—which has a cost
`¯ in forgone utility—and whether to quit the firm. Then production takes
place and the firm observes whether the worker has provided effort. At this
point the firm could renege its wage promises. Afterwards, the firm decides
  10
     Together with η = 0.9778 and p = 0.9714 used in the calibration, χ = 0.15 implies that
about 80 percent of workers have more than one year of tenure with the same employer.
This is the number reported for the U.S. economy by Farber (1999).


                                            25
whether to renegotiate the debt. Renegotiation entitles the investors to seize
the firm’s assets. After the payment of the wages and the repayment of the
debt, the survival of the firm and the workers are observed.

6.1     Worker-firm relationship
If both the worker and the entrepreneur cooperate (the worker by exerting
effort and the entrepreneur by paying the promised wage), output is produced
and the worker earns the promised wage. The only Nash Equilibrium of each
period sub-game is the one in which the firm reneges its promises and pays
zero wages. Anticipating that, the worker withdraws effort and quits. In
the repeated game, however, cooperation can be sustained through trigger
strategies, provided that replacing the worker is sufficiently costly for the
firm. Suppose that the worker and the firm follow these strategies (which for
simplicity are specified independently of the investors’ past history):

      • Worker: The worker provides effort as long as the firm pays the con-
        tracted wages. If one of the two parties has reneged sometimes in the
        past (either the worker has shirked or the firm has paid a wage different
        from the one contracted), the worker withdraws effort and quits.

      • Firm: The firm pays the contracted wages as long as the worker pro-
        vides effort. If one of the two parties has reneged sometimes in the past
        (either the worker has shirked or the firm has paid a wage different from
        the one contracted), it sets the wage to zero.

    The equilibrium associated with these strategies is sub-game perfect. To
see this, let’s consider first the worker. Providing low effort would trigger
a wage cut which forces the worker to quit the firm and be left with the
reservation value qres starting from the next period. But the utility from
                  ¯
doing so, U (0)+`+ηq     res , is not bigger than the utility obtained from providing
effort, that is, U (wt ) + ηpqt + η(1 − p)qres . Thus, along the equilibrium path,
the worker never shirks and quits. If the firm has sometimes paid a different
wage from the one contracted, quitting is optimal since the firm would pay
a zero wage both today and in the future.
    Consider now the firm. When the firm expects the worker to quit to-
morrow, setting the wage to zero today is always the firm’s best response.
Thus, given each worker’s strategy, paying zero wages is optimal when the
worker has sometimes shirked. Along the equilibrium path, the firm never

                                         26
finds optimal to deviate from the promised long-term contract because, if
the firm reneges its wage promises, the worker quits and the firm looses the
sunk investment κw . Therefore, the assumptions that part of the investment
is worker-specific, is key to prevent the firm from renegotiating the contract.
     The fact that the replacement of an existing worker is costly for the
firm, creates an indirect form of “collateral” for workers. This allows the
firm to borrow from the workers beyond what it can borrow from external
investors. Of course, there is a limit to this. If the worker’s utility becomes
very large, the loss of sunk investment could be smaller than the gains from
reducing the wage obligations (by reneging the long-term contract and hiring
a new worker). This may happen if κ̄f /κ is close to 1 and the initial assets
of the firm, a0 , are small. In this paper we have implicitly assumed that
κ̄f /κ is sufficiently small and a0 sufficiently large so that this never arises in
equilibrium.
     To show that the non-renegotiation condition is satisfied in the numerical
exercises conducted in the paper, Table 5 reports the maximum gains that
can be obtained by replacing an existing worker (and paying lower wages
afterwards). The maximum gain can be achieved by firms with the largest
capacity N once they become unconstrained.11 These firms are paying the
highest wages to the first cohort of workers. Denote the wage paid to this
cohort by wmax . A firm could replace these workers with new workers receiv-
ing a constant wage wres . This is the wage that gives the reservation utility
qres = βU (wres )/(1 − ηβ). By doing so, the firm would save wmax − wres in
wage payments in each period, with expected discounted value given by
                                          β(wmax − wres )
                             RG(P) ≡                      ,
                                          1 − β(1 − χ)ηp
where RG stands for Renegotiation Gains and P are the model’s parameters.
Notice that the term β(1 − χ)ηp becomes the discount factor of the gains for
the firm because the worker remains in the firm with probability (1 − χ)ηp:
the worker does not quit the firm with probability 1 − χ, he survives with
probability η, and the firm remains in operation with probability p.
    Table 5 reports the renegotiation gains for different curvatures of the
utility function. In computing these numbers we have used χ = 0.15. As
  11
     It can be shown that the maximal promised utility for which the firm does not rene-
gotiate is decreasing in the age of the firm. This together with the fact that the promised
utility of workers increases with tenure (till the firm becomes unconstrained), proves that
the incentive to renegotiate is the highest when the firm is unconstrained.

                                            27
expected from the theoretical analysis, the renegotiation gains increase as we
reduce the curvature of the utility function σ. This is because with a lower
σ it is cheaper to borrow from workers and the profile of wages is steeper.

Table 5: Renegotiation gains for different curvatures of the utility function.

                                  σ = 0.5   σ = 1.0   σ = 2.0


                       RG(P)       2.605     1.820     1.045



    The renegotiation gains are compared with the loss of workers specific
capital κw , which in the parameterized model takes the value of 1.935. For
the baseline parametrization with σ = 1, the non-renegotiation condition is
satisfied. However, for smaller values of σ this is no longer the case.

6.2    Investors-firm relationship
Suppose that when the entrepreneur renegotiates (defaults on) the debt con-
tract, investors have the right to liquidate the assets of the firm but cannot
exclude the entrepreneur from participating in financial markets. In other
words, the entrepreneur can get new financing from other investors. Further-
more, when the firm refinances investment, it can retain the hired workers.
This implies that the investment in recruitment and training is not lost.
    Under the above conditions, collateralized debt is the only type of financ-
ing that the firm can get from investors. To see this, suppose that the firm
could borrow above the value of the collateral. After receiving the loan, the
entrepreneur would renegotiate down the part of the debt in excess of the
collateral and obtain a new (identical) financial contract from other investors.
Anticipating this, only secured loans will be offered.

7     Empirical analysis

We have seen that our model is consistent with several empirical findings.
The model also generates some predictions about the interaction between
individual wages, worker’s tenure, employer’s size and firm’s growth that, as
far as we know, are yet to be tested. These predictions can be summarized
as follows:

                                       28
1. The initial size of the employer, when the worker is hired, has a posi-
tive effect on wages. This is because, on average, small firms have tighter
constraints and pay lower wages initially.
2. The growth rate of the firm has a negative effect on wages. In fact, the
growth rate of the firm is an indicator of its financial tightness and when
firms are constrained they temporarily pay lower wages.
3. The wage tenure profile of workers in fast growing firms is steeper. Again,
fast growing firms pay lower wages initially in the promise of higher future
wages. Therefore, the wage tenure profile of these workers is steeper.
4. If we consider the extended model with transferability of worker-specific
capital, then the return to (labor market) experience should be positively
correlated with the growth rate of the firm.

    To test these predictions, we use data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth, started in 1979 (NLSY79). This is a nationally representa-
tive sample of 12,686 young men and women who were 14-22 years old when
they were first interviewed in 1979. We focus on a sample of 6,111 individuals
designed to be representative of the non-institutionalized civilian segment of
the U.S. young population. These individuals have been interviewed annu-
ally through 1994 and starting in 1996 every two years. Because of missing
data concerning information on the size of the employer, we use only the 13
more recent waves, from 1986 to 2002. The initial total sample with non
missing observations on key variables includes 18,570 observations.
    We make some further selection. First, we restrict the sample to full time
workers (working a minimum of 35 hours per week) with reliable data on
wages and with positive labor market experience. Firms’ growth rates are
self reported and thus likely to be subject to substantial measurement error.
To eliminate outliers that are likely to be the result of measurement errors
and/or exceptional events in the life-cycle of the firm, we restricted the av-
erage annual growth rate of the employer over the tenure of the worker to
be greater than -10 percent and smaller than 100 percent.12 This leads to
our final sample of 11,651 observations for 2,447 individuals (11,616 obser-
vations for 2,446 individuals when considering information about industries
and geographical location). Further details are provided in Appendix E.
  12
    For robustness, we also repeated the estimations after imposing a minimum average
growth rate of -50 percent and a maximum growth rate of 150 percent. The results do not
change substantially.

                                          29
   Table 6 reports some descriptive statistics for the variables used as re-
gressors in the wage equations below—including the usual Mincer regressors.
One important variable is the size of the firm. Because the NLSY79 reports
only the employment size of the establishment where the respondent works,
we use this variable to proxy for the firm size. The survey also asks whether
the employer has more than one establishment. We use this information to
better approximate the whole size of the employer.

                                Table 6: Sample Statistics

       Description                           Mean      Std. Dev.     Min           Max


       Hourly wage                            13.38      14.08        2            500

       Male                                   0.57        0.49        0              1

       Black                                  0.10        0.30        0              1

       Hispanic                               0.06        0.24        0              1

       White                                   .83         .37        0              1

       Years of schooling                     13.5        2.47        4             20

       Experience                             12.49       5.31        0             32

       Tenure                                 3.48        3.19       .02           16.40

       Initial firm size                     273.71      802.15       1           15,000

       Initial multiple establishment         0.64        0.48        0              1

       Average yearly firm’s growth rate      0.10        0.19       -0.1            1

       No. of observations                   11,651

       No. of individuals                     2,447


       Notes: Tenure, years of schooling and labor market experience are in years. The
       original measure of tenure in weeks is converted into years dividing by 52. Hourly
       wages are in dollars. White refers to individuals that are neither black nor hispanics.
       Initial firm’s size is the number of employees at the location of the current job at the
       time when the worker was hired. Initial multiple establishment is a dummy variable
       that equals one if the employer had more than one establishment at the time when
       the worker was hired. Firm’s growth rates are averages of the yearly firm’s growth
       rate during the tenure of the worker with the current employer. See Appendix E for
       more details.




                                                 30
     We start investigating the correlation between the average annual firm’s
growth rate during the tenure of the worker (Firm growth) and the (logged)
number of employees when the worker was hired (Initial firm size). We find
a statistically significant negative correlation of about 1 percent. This is in
line with the previous findings that small firms grow faster. We also inves-
tigated the magnitude of the firm’s size effect in our sample. In a standard
OLS regression that includes all the variables in Table 6 plus a full set of
year dummies, twelve industry dummies and four regional dummies, we find
a coefficient for the current logged size of the firm of about of 3 percent. This
is consistent with the values reported by Brown and Medoff (1989). After
considering a fixed effects (within) estimator to control for workers’ unob-
served heterogeneity, the size coefficient falls to about 1.5 percent, but it is
still highly significant.

Empirical results: To test properties 1-4 described above, we estimate
the following wage equation:

 ln Wit = µi + βx · Xit + αS · ln Sit + αG · Git + αT · Git · Tit + αE · Git · Eit

where Wit is the hourly wage earned by worker i in the primary job at time
t; µi is the individual fixed effect; Xit is a set of controls for the worker; Sit
is the size (number of employees) of the current employer when the worker
was hired; Git is the average yearly growth rate of the firm during the worker
tenure with the firm; Tit is the tenure in the current job; Eit is the working
experience (current age minus years of schooling minus six). In the controls
Xit we include a square polynomial in tenure, a square polynomial in expe-
rience, a full set of year dummies, and a dummy variable which takes the
value of one if the firm had more than one establishment at the time when
the worker was hired. We also consider a specification that includes twelve
industry dummies, four regional dummies and a dummy variable for living
in a metropolitan area to control for a possible spurious correlation between
firms’ growth rates and sectoral and geographical characteristics, that may
affect wages. To to control for workers’ heterogeneity, we use a fixed effects
(within) estimator.
    We are interested in the sign of the coefficients α’s. The coefficient αS
is expected to be positive while αG should be negative. The coefficients αT
and αE capture the interaction of firm’s growth with tenure and experience.
These coefficients tell us whether the slope of the wage profile changes with

                                        31
the growth rate of the firm. According to the considerations made above, we
expect these coefficients to be positive.
    The top section of Table 7 reports the estimation results. The basic
estimations are reported in columns 1-3. The regressions in columns 4-6 add
to the basic regressions twelve industry dummies, four regional dummies,
and a dummy for working in a metropolitan area. The coefficient estimates
have the expected sign and are statistically significant at the conventional
levels. In particular, workers earn higher wages on average when they start
working with larger firms. Fast growing firms initially pay lower wages and
offer steeper wage profiles. These are the patterns predicted by our model
and are key to generate a positive relation between firm size and wages.
    In order to show that these results are also generated by our model, we
repeat the same regressions using simulated data from the model specification
discussed in Section 5. In order to be as close as possible to the characteristics
of the NLSY79 sample, we simulate 2,500 workers for 15 years. These are the
approximate number of years covered by the NLSY79. The estimation results
are reported in columns 1-3, in the second section of Table 7. The estimated
coefficients have the same sign as those estimated from the NLSY79 data
and are statistically significant.
    Although we obtain the same signs, the magnitude of the coefficients for
the firm’s growth and its interactions with tenure and experience are bigger
than the estimates from the data. It should be noted, however, that in the
NLSY79 the growth rates of the firm are self-reported. This implies that
measurement errors are likely to be quite important. We then ask how the
estimations from the artificial data would change if there were measurement
errors also in the simulation.
    In columns 4-6 we repeat the estimations after adding artificial measure-
ment errors to the size of the firm. In particular, we add a noise that is
normally distributed with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 40
percent to the true logged size of the firm. As can be seen in columns 4-6,
the addition of the noise reduces (in absolute value) the estimates of the
coefficients of the growth rate and its interaction with tenure and experience
while the coefficient of the initial firm size increases. Now they are much
closer to the parameter estimated from the NLSY79. In general, a bigger
measurement error leads to smaller (in absolute value) estimates of αG , αT
and αE and to a larger estimate of αS . Of course, it is not possible to say how
big the measurement errors are in the data. But the numbers reported in
Table 7 show that our model can generate similar estimates for measurement

                                       32
 Table 7: Wage equation estimation with NLSY79 and simulated data.
A) NLSY79 Data

Description                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)


Initial (log) firm size when        .017**     .0162**      .0168**    .0151**    .0139**      .0145**
the worker was hired                 (4.38)      (4.05)       (4.18)     (3.70)     (3.40)       (3.54)

Average (yearly) firm growth       -.083**     -.201**      -.165**    -.095**    -.210**      -.172**
during worker’s tenure              (-2.66)     (-3.68)      (-2.83)    (-3.00)    (-3.84)      (-2.94)

Interaction between firm            .023**                    .015*     .024**                   .015*
growth and tenure                    (3.46)                  (1.75)      (3.51)                 (1.78)

Interaction between firm                       .0148**        .009*                .015**        .009*
growth and experience                            (3.44)      (1.69)                 (3.41)      (1.68)

No. of Observations                 11,651      11,651       11,651     11,616     11,616       11,616
No. of Individuals                   2,447       2,447        2,447      2,446      2,446        2,446


B) Simulated Data

Description                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)


Initial (log) firm size when        .004**      .001**       .003**     .011**      .009**      .011**
the worker was hired               (11.40)       (2.36)       (7.52)   (18.71)     (15.77)     (18.62)

Average (yearly) firm growth      -1.620**     -1.707**    -1.897**    -.246**     -.300**     -.353**
during worker’s tenure           (-153.18)    (-134.41)   (-165.01)     (-37.7)   (-36.05)    (-42.44)

Interaction between firm            .306**                   .232**     .088**                  .070**
growth rate and tenure            (117.33)                  (80.54)    (42.25)                 (30.87)

Interaction between firm                         .155**      .085**                 .036**      .023**
growth and experience                           (93.81)     (49.87)                (35.20)     (20.67)

No. of Observations                 26,171      26,171       26,171     22,754     22,754       22,754
No. of Individuals                   2,438       2,438        2,438      2,328      2,328        2,328


Panel A: The dependant variable is the log hourly wage of workers with at least 35 working hours
per week. The regressions in columns 1-3 include experience in level and squared; tenure in level and
squared; twelve year dummies. The regressions in columns 4-6 add four region dummies; a dummy
for working in a metropolitan area; twelve industry dummies. All regressions include a dummy
variable for multi-establishment firms when the worker was hired.
Panel B: Data is obtained by simulating a cohort of 2,500 individuals for 15 years. The model also
includes job-to-job flows as discussed in Section 5. All regressions include age in level and squared
and tenure in level and squared. The regressions in columns 4-6 are estimated on the simulated
data after adding a measurement error to the size of the firm. The measurement error is normally
distributed with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 0.4. As in Panel A we also restrict the
average annual growth rate of the firm to be between -10 percent and 100 percent.

All regressions use a fixed effects (within) estimator. t-statistic in parenthesis; * Significant at 10
percent level; ** Significant at 5 percent level.
                                                 33
errors that are quite reasonable.

8   Conclusion

In this paper we have studied how financial constraints affect the compensa-
tion structure of workers. Firms that are financially constrained find optimal
to offer an upward profile of wages in order to alleviate their financial restric-
tions. Because large firms are more likely to have experienced a history of
financial tightness with low wage payments, they have to pay high wages after
becoming unconstrained. This mechanism can generate a positive correlation
between firm size and wages. We test the key properties of the model that
generate this relation using data from the 1979-2002 National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY79). The estimation results support our theory.
    By offering an upward profile of wages, firms implicitly borrow from work-
ers. This rises the question of why firms are able to borrow from workers
beyond what they can borrow from external investors. In our model this is
possible because workers can use punishment mechanisms that are not avail-
able to external investors. An external investor can punish the debtor only
by confiscating the firm’s physical assets, which represents the only collat-
eral that the firm can use to raise funds in financial markets. But the firm
can expand its debt capacity by using another form of implicit “collateral”
in the hands of workers. If a worker quits, the firm looses the job-specific
investment. This gives the worker a credible punishment tool in the event
of repudiation that is not available to investors. The cost of replacing the
worker—due to the sunk nature of the investment—guarantees that the long-
term wage contract between the worker and the firm is never reneged and
allows the firm to use the wage policy to finance its growth.
    Indeed, there is both direct and indirect evidence that firms borrow from
their employees. In some cases, the borrowing is explicit.13 In others, the loan
is implicit in the compensation structure of employees, as in our model. For
example, the widespread use of stock options and/or stock grants to ordinary
workers, such as middle-run managers, secretaries and clerks—whose effort,
  13
     An example is Energy Services Group International, an energy-services engineer-
ing and construction company in Williamsburg, VA. The company got a major new
contract from an electric utility in Florida but it could not persuade banks to lend
any more money. Only employees came forward with investments that ranged from
$200 to $74,000 in exchange of promissory notes. See Inc. Magazine, January 1992,
http://www.inc.com/magazine/19920101/3886.html.


                                        34
when individually considered, is likely to have a negligible effect on the overall
value of the firm—can hardly be justified as a way to provide incentives.
This view is also expressed in Hall and Murphy (2003). Most likely, stock
options are used to delay the cash compensation of employees and retain
more funds in the firm. In accordance with this interpretation, Blasi, Kruse,
and Bernstein (2003) find that stock options were especially rewarding for
workers hired before their companies went public—i.e., companies that were
likely to be financially constrained when they awarded the options. Also
consistent with this interpretation is the finding of Core and Guay (2001) for
which the use of stock options is more common in firms that are financially
constrained.




                                       35
A     Characterization of the firm’s problem

Let γt , µt , λt nt and θt denote the lagrange multipliers associated with constraints
(2), (3), (4) and (5) respectively. Then the Lagrangian can be written as:
              ∞                                         t
                            (                                       !
              X                                         X
                        t
        L =         β             at + bt − κ                nτ         +
              t=0                                       τ =0
                                                            t
                                     "                                  #
                                                           X
                                γt at + bt − κ                    nτ +
                                                           τ =0
                                                t
                                     "                          #
                                                X
                                µt κ̄f                n τ − bt +
                                               τ =0
                                                                                 
                                              ∞
                                              X
                                λ t nt              β j U (wt,t+j ) − qres  +
                                            j=1
                                         t
                                     "                                                   # )
                                         X
                                θt              (κ + A − wτ,t+1 )nτ − (1 + r)bt − at+1     .
                                         τ =0

The first order conditions with respect to wτ,t and at , for t ≥ 1, are

                                  βλτ Uc (wτ,t ) = θt−1 ,                   ∀τ ≤ t             (20)

and
                                                θt−1 = β(1 + γt ),                             (21)
respectively. Using (21) to substitute for θt−1 in (20) yields (6) in the text.

B     First order conditions for the recursive formulation

The Lagrangian can be written as:


                            L = a + b − κN 0 + βV (a0 , q 0 , N 0 , H 0 )
                                           h                      i
                                + γ a + b − κN 0
                                           h                i
                                + µ κ̄f N 0 − bt
                                                 h                            i
                                + λH 0 β(U (w0 ) + q 0 ) − q

where γ, µ and λH 0 are lagrange multipliers. The problem is also subject to the
laws of motion for the next period value of a and H, that is, constraints (13) and
(14), respectively.

                                                           36
   The first order conditions are:

        b:     1 + γ − µ = β(1 + r)Va0                                            (22)


       w0 :    Va0 = λUc0                                                         (23)


        q0 :   Vq0 + λH 0 = 0                                                     (24)
                                                                       
         0                              0
       N :     β        κ + A − ψ(q)w Va0 + VN 0 + ψ(q)VH 0 ≥ (1 + γ)κ − µκ̄f     (25)

where the last condition is satisfied with equality if N 0 < N . The envelope condi-
tions are:

                        Va = 1 + γ                                                (26)
                                                          h               i
                        Vq = −βψq (N 0 − N ) w0 Va0 − VH 0 − λH 0                 (27)
                                        h                     i
                    VN      = βψ(q) w0 Va0 − VH 0                                 (28)
                                    h                     i
                    VH      = −β w0 Va0 − VH 0                                    (29)

   Equation (15) in the text comes from using (26) to substitute for Va in (23).
We now show that the above conditions also imply that λ = λ0 .
   By substituting (26) in (29) we get:
                                                h                     i
                                −VH = β (1 + γ 0 )w0 − VH 0 .                     (30)

    From (23) we have that (1 + γ 0 )w0 = λ(w0 )1−σ = λ(1 − σ)U (w0 ), which substi-
tuted in (30) yields             h                      i
                       −VH = β (1 − σ)λU (w0 ) − VH 0 .                        (31)
Now consider the promise-keeping constraint q = β[U (w0 ) + q 0 ]. Multiplying the
left and right-hand side by (1 − σ)λ we get:
                                        h                                     i
                        (1 − σ)λq = β (1 − σ)λU (w0 ) + (1 − σ)λq 0 .             (32)

Equations (31) and (32) imply:

                                    −VH             = (1 − σ)λq                   (33)
                                                                  0
                                   −VH 0            = (1 − σ)λq                   (34)

                                                     37
Updating the first term we also have that:

                                           −VH 0 = (1 − σ)λ0 q 0                                          (35)

Condition (34) and (35) then imply that λ = λ0 .

C   Recursive formulation of the general model

The problem solved by a firm with capacity N can be written recursively as follows:
                                            (                                                       )
                                                                      0   0   0   0              0
       V (a, z, N, H) =       max            d + β p · V (a , z , N , H ) + (1 − p) · L                   (36)
                              b,w0 ,z 0 ,
                               N 0 ≤N


                              subject to


                   d = a + b − κN 0 ≥ 0                                                                   (37)
                                       0
                    b ≤ κ̄f N                                                                             (38)
                                h                         i
                   z = β U (w0 ) + ηp z 0                                                                 (39)
                   a0 = κN 0 + AN 0 − H 0 w0 − (1 + r)b − κw (1 − η)N 0                                   (40)
                      0                               0
                  H       = ηH + ψ(z)(N − ηN )                                                            (41)
                      0                0          0           0   0
                  L       = κf N + AN − H w − (1 + r)b                                                    (42)

where L is the liquidation value of the firm, which consists of the sum of its physical
capital and its current profits minus the value of debt.
    Let γ, µ and λH 0 be the lagrange multipliers associated with the constraints
(37), (38), and (39), respectively. Following the same steps as in Appendix B we
obtain the first order conditions:

     b:     1 + γ − µ = β(1 + r)(1 + pγ 0 )                                                               (43)


    w0 :    1 + pγ 0 = λUc0                                                                               (44)


    z0 :    Vz 0 + ηλH 0 = 0                                                                              (45)
                                                                            
    N0 :    β (1 + pγ 0 ) κ + A − ψ(z)w0 − (1 − η)κw                                                      (46)
                                                                                
                           +p VN 0 + ψ(z)VH 0 − η(1 − p)κw                            ≥ (1 + γ)κ − µκ̄f



                                                      38
where the last equation is satisfied with equality if N 0 < N . Notice that (43), (44)
and (46) make use of the envelope condition Va = 1 + γ. The remaining envelope
conditions are:

                                          h                   i
                    Vz = βψz (N 0 − ηN ) pVH 0 − (1 + pγ 0 )w0 − λH 0            (47)
                                    h                     i
                    VN = −ηβψ(z) pVH 0 − (1 + pγ 0 )w0                           (48)
                             h                      i
                    VH = ηβ pVH 0 − (1 + pγ 0 )w0                                (49)

D    Computation of the equilibrium

Solving for the firm’s problem: For given N and qres , the firm problem is
solved backward starting from the state in which the firm is unconstrained. Let’s
assume that the firm takes T periods to become unconstrained. Therefore, we
know that NT +1 = N and γT = γT +1 = 0.
    We start by guessing the value of wT +1 and HT +1 . Using the first order
condition 1 = λUc (wT +1 ), we determine the lagrange multiplier λ. Using the
promise-keeping constraint zT = β[U (wT +1 ) + ηpzT +1 ], and imposing zT = zT +1 ,
we determine the (transformed) promised utility at time T +1. Using condition (47)
with the terminal condition VH,T = VH,T +1 , we determine the partial derivative of
the value function with respect to H. Finally, we determine bT using the borrowing
limit bT = κ̄f NT +1 and µT using the first order condition µT = 1 + γT − β(1 +
r)(1 + pγT +1 ). At this point we have all the terminal conditions to solve the
problem backward at each point t = T, T − 1, ..., 0. The solution at each point t is
determined as follows:
    1. Using the budget constraint with dt = 0, we determine the firm’s assets:
                                        at = κNt+1 − bt

    2. The wage wt is determined using the first order condition:
                                    1 + pγt = λUc (wt )

    3. We now determine the variables Nt , Ht and bt−1 using the laws of motion
       for at , Ht+1 , and the borrowing limit:
                  at = (κ + A)Nt − Ht wt − (1 + r)bt−1 − κw (1 − η)Nt
               Ht+1 = ηHt + ψ(zt )(Nt+1 − ηNt )
                bt−1 = κ̄f Nt


                                           39
    4. The values of VH,t and zt−1 are determined using condition (47) and the
       promise-keeping constraint, that is:

                       VH,t = −ηβ(1 + pγt+1 )wt+1 + ηβpVH,t+1
                       zt−1 = β[U (wt ) + ηpzt ]

    5. The values of µt−1 and γt−1 are then determined using the first order con-
       ditions for debt and employment, that is:

           1 + γt−1 − µt−1 = β(1 + r)(1 + pγt )
                                                                              
           β (1 + pγt ) κ + A − ψ(zt−1 )wt − (1 − η)κw + p ψ(zt−1 ) − ψ(zt ) VH,t
                                                         
                                           −η(1 − p)κw       = (1 + γt−1 )κ − µt−1 κ̄f


    After solving for all t = T, T −1, ..., 0, we check whether z0 = zres and H1 = N1 .
The condition H1 = N1 implies that N0 = H0 = 0. If the two conditions are not
satisfied, we change the guesses for wT +1 and HT +1 until convergence.
    In the solution of the model we also solve for the initial assets a0 . If a0 is
bigger than the initial assets, we increase T . This takes advantage of the fact that
smaller are the initial assets of the entrepreneur and longer is the transition to the
unconstrained status.

Labor market equilibrium: To compute the labor market equilibrium we
start by guessing the equilibrium value of zres . Given this value we solve for the
firm’s problem for all values of N . The procedure to solve for the firm’s problem
has been described above. After finding the invariant distribution of firms, we find
the aggregate demand of labor and we check the clearing condition in the labor
market. We update zres until the labor market clears.

E    Data appendix

In the NLSY79, information on the number of employees at working location in the
current or most recent job (the so called CPS job) is collected in all survey years
except 1981-1985. Since to construct firms’ growth rates we need to link informa-
tion between consecutive surveys, we focus on the 13 more recent waves. They
include the 9 annual waves from 1986 to 1994 and 4 bi-annual waves from 1996 to
2002. Following is the description of the main variables used in the estimation.



                                          40
Regional Dummies. There are four regional dummies constructed from the variable
“Region of current residence”.
Schooling. This is the variable “Highest grade completed as of May 1 survey year”.
Experience. This is calculated as the age of the worker at interview date, minus
years of schooling, minus six.
Working Hours. Until 1993 the number of working hours per week is obtained
from the variable “Hours per week usually worked at current/most recent job”.
Starting from 1994, job 1 always coincides with the CPS job and information about
working hours is obtained from the variable “Hours per week worked at job 1”.
Metropolitan Area. This is obtained from the question “Is Respondent current
residence Urban/Rural?”.
Multiple establishments. Until 1993, information about whether the firm has mul-
tiple establishments is obtained from the question “Does employer at current job
have greater-than-one location?”. Starting in 1994, we use the question “Does
employer at job 1 have greater-than-one location?”
Firm’s Size. The NLSY79 provides information on the total employment size of
the employer by only reporting the size of the establishment where the respondent
works. Until 1993, this is equal to “Number of employees at location of current
job”. Starting in 1994 we use “Number of employees at location of job 1”. In
order to account for firms with more than one establishment, we also include a
multi-establishment dummy. We set to missing value observations with a reported
value of either 99995 or 99996.
Industry Dummies. Until 1993 the industry dummies were constructed by using
the variable “Type of business or industry of most recent job (Census 3 digit)”.
Starting in 1994 we used the variable “Type of business or industry job 1 (Census
3 digit)”. From these variables we constructed twelve industry dummies: 1) Agri-
culture, Forestry and Fisheries; 2) Mining; 3) Construction; 4) Manufacturing;
5) Transportation, Communication and Public Utilities; 6) Wholesale and Retail
Trade; 7) Finance, Insurance and Retail Estate; 8) Business and Repair Services;
9) Personal Services; 10) Entertainment and Recreation Services; 11) Professional
and Related Services; and 12) Public Administration.
Hourly wage. Until 1993 the hourly wage in dollar is obtained from the variable
“Hourly rate of pay current job”. Starting in 1994 we used the variable “Hourly
rate of pay of job 1”. To eliminate obvious data entry errors we drop observations
whose hourly wage is greater than $500 or it is less than $2. We also investigated
the robustness of our results by imposing a maximum hourly wage of $100 and a
minimum of $5.

                                       41
Employer Tenure. This is obtained from the five variables “Total Tenure in weeks
with employer job 1 (2, 3, 4, 5)”. We then identify whether job 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5
corresponds to the CPS job by using the questions “Internal Check: Is job 1 (2,
3, 4, 5) the same as current job”. After 1993 the CPS job corresponds to job 1.
The tenure variable is originally expressed in weeks and it is converted into years
dividing by 52.
New vs. Continuing Jobs. To identify whether the current CPS job is a new or a
continuing job, we follow the procedure detailed in Appendix 9 of the user’s guide
to NLSY79. In brief, we first identify the number of the job (1 to 5) corresponding
to the CPS job in the current survey. Then we identify what is the number of the
job in the previous survey that corresponds to the CPS job in the current survey.
For the 1979-1992 surveys, the NLSY79 contains two variables that allows to do
the match. After 1992, the match is obtained with just one variable. A job is
classified as new if either variables report a valid missing code. If at least one of
these variables contains a valid number (1 or greater), this is the number of the job
in the previous survey that is the same as the CPS job in the current survey. Then
the CPS job in the current survey is a continuing job if in the previous survey the
reported job number was also a CPS job. To eliminate possible data entry errors
we also require that a continuing job should have a tenure greater than 30 weeks,
while a new job should have a tenure smaller than 52 weeks.
Average Firm’s Growth Rates. To calculate the average firm’s yearly growth rate
over the tenure of the worker, we first calculate the annual growth rate of the
current employer for all years in which the worker stayed with the same employer
(continuing job). Then we take the average of these rates. To eliminate possible
data entry errors we drop from the sample any observation whose average annual
growth rate is bigger than 100% and smaller than -10%.




                                         42
References

 Abowd, J. M. and F. Kramarz (2000). Inter-industry and firm-size wage
   differentials: New evidence from linked employer-employee data. Un-
   published manuscript, Cornell University.
 Akerlof, G., A. Rose, and J. Yellen (1988). Job switching and job satisfac-
    tion in the US labour market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activ-
    ity 2, 495–582.
 Altonji, J. and R. Shakotko (1987). Do wages rise with job seniority?
    Review of Economic Studies 54 (3), 437–59.
 Anderlini, L. and L. Felli (2001). Costly bargaining and renegotiation.
   Econometrica 69 (2), 377–411.
 Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoff (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy. New York:
   Cambridge Uinversity Press.
 Baker, G., M. Gibbs, and B. Holmstrom (1994). The wage policy of a firm.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (4), 921–950.
 Bayard, K. and K. Troske (1999). Examining the employer-size wage pre-
    mium in the manufacturing, retail trade, and service industries using
    employer-employee matched data. American Economic Review, Papers
    and Proceedings 89 (2), 99–103.
 Blanchflower, D. G., A. J. Oswald, and M. D. Garrett (1990). Insider power
    in wage determination. Economica 57 (226), 143–70.
 Blasi, J., D. Kruse, and A. Bernstein (2003). In the Company of Own-
    ers: The Truth About Stock Options (And Why Every Employee Should
    Have Them). Basic Books.
 Bronars, S. and M. Famulari (2001). Shareholder wealth and wages: Evi-
    dence for white-collars workers. Journal of Political Economy 109 (2),
    328–54.
 Brown, C. and J. L. Medoff (1989). The employer size-wage effect. Journal
    of Political Economy 97 (5), 1027–59.
 Brown, C. and J. L. Medoff (2003). Firm age and wages. Journal of Labour
    Economics 21 (3), 677–697.
 Burdett, K. and M. Coles (2003). Equilibrium wage-tenure contracts.
    Econometrica 71 (5), 1377–1404.

                                    43
Burdett, K. and D. Mortensen (1998). Wage differentials, employer size,
   and unemployment. International Economic Review 39 (2), 257–73.
Burdett, K. and T. Vishwanath (1988). Balanced matching and labor mar-
   ket equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 96 (5), 1048–1065.
Core, J. E. and W. R. Guay (2001). Stock option plans for non-executive
   employees. Journal of Financial Economics 61, 253–287.
Doms, M., T. Dunne, and K. Troske (1997). Workers, wages, and technol-
  ogy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 253–90.
Fallick, B. and C. Fleischman (2001). The importance of employer-to-
    employer flows in the US labour market. Federal Reserve Board Finance
    and Economics Discussion Paper # 2001-18.
Farber, H. (1999). Mobility and stability: the dynamics of job change
   in labour markets. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Hanbook of
   Labor Economics, pp. 2439–83. New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Fazzari, S. M., G. R. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen (1988). Financing
   constraints and corporate investment. Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity 88 (1), 141–95.
Gilchrist, S. and C. P. Himmelberg (1996). Evidence on the role of cash
   flow for investment. Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (3), 541–72.
Hall, B. J. and K. J. Murphy (2003). The trouble with stock options.
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (3), 49–70.
Hanka, G. (1998). Debt and the terms of employment. Journal of Financial
  Economics 48 (3), 245–82.
Harris, M. and B. Holmstrom (1982). A theory of wage dynamics. Review
   of Economic Studies 49 (3), 315–33.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1994). A theory of debt based on the inalienability
   of human capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841–79.
Hashimoto, M. (1981). Firm-specific human capital as a shared investment.
   American Economic Review 71 (3), 475–482.
Holmstrom, B. (1983). Equilibrium long-term contracts. Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 98 (Supplement), 23–54.
Kambourov, G. and I. Manovski (2002). Occupational specificity of human
  capital. Unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto and University
  of Pennsylvania.

                                  44
Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 105 (2), 211–48.
Kremer, M. and E. Maskin (1996). Wage inequality and segregation by
   skill. NBER Working Paper # 5718.
Nickell, S. and D. Nicolitsas (1999). How does financial pressure affect
   firms? European Economic Review 43 (8), 1435–56.
Nickell, S. and S. Wadhwani (1991). Employment determination in British
   industry: Investigations using micro-data. Review of Economic Stud-
   ies 58 (5), 955–69.
Oi, W. Y. and T. L. Idson (1999). Firm size and wages. In O. Ashenfelter
    and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labour Economics, pp. Volume 3B.
    Amsterdam: North Holland.
Rios-Rull, J. (1996). Life-cycle economies and aggregate fluctuations. Re-
   view of Economic Studies 63 (3), 465–89.
Ross, S. A., R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan (1993). Fundamentals of
   Corporate Finance. Irwin Press, 2nd Edition.
Shapiro, C. and J. E. Stiglitz (1984). Equilibrium unemployment as a
   worker discipline device. American Economic Review 74 (3), 433–44.
Smith, C. (1977). Alternative methods for raising capital: Rights versus
  underwritten offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 5 (3), 273–307.
Topel, R. (1991). Specific capital, mobility and wages: Wage rise with
   seniority. Journal of Political Economy 99 (1), 145–76.
Troske, K. (1999). Evidence on the employer size-wage premium from
   worker-establishment matched data. Review of Economics and Statis-
   tics 81 (1), 15–26.
Zabojnik, J. and D. Bernhardt (2001). Corporate tournaments, human
   capital acquisition, and the firm size-wage relation. Review of Economic
   Studies 68 (3), 693–716.




                                   45
