                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                NAFTA’s AND CUSFTA’s IMPACT
                                 ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                                             John Romalis

                                         Working Paper 11059
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11059


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




I would particularly like to thank my advisors, Daron Acemoglu, Rudi Dornbusch and Jaume Ventura.
Thanks for generous support are due to the IMF and Reserve Bank of Australia. Thanks are also due to Mark
Aguiar, Mary Amiti, Sven Arndt, Christian Broda, Robert Feenstra, Gita Gopinath, Roberto Rigobon, Shang-
JinWei, Alwyn Young and participants at seminars and lunches at Chicago GSB, Dartmouth, EIIT
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Harvard, IMF, MIT, NAEFA Conference, Penn State,
University of Illinois (Urbana), University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania and USITC. Any errors
are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by John Romalis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s Impact on International Trade
John Romalis
NBER Working Paper No. 11059
January 2005
JEL No. F1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper identifies the effects of preferential trade agreements on trade volumes and prices using

detailed trade and tariff data. It identifies demand elasticities by developing a difference in

differences based method that exploits the fact that the additional wedge driven between

consumption patterns in a liberalizing versus a non-liberalizing country is directly related to the tariff

reduction. Supply elasticities are identified by using tariffs as instruments for observed quantities.

Analysis of world-wide trade data for 5,000 commodities shows that NAFTA and CUSFTA have

had a substantial impact on international trade volumes, but a modest effect on prices and welfare.

NAFTA and CUSFTA increased North American output and prices in many highly-protected sectors

by driving out imports from non-member countries.

John Romalis
The University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.romalis@gsb.uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
The growing trend towards preferential trade liberalization depicted in Figure 1 and
the potentially harmful eﬀects of preferential trade agreements on international trade
makes analysis of these agreements important. There are over 200 preferential trade
agreements currently in force, and while almost every country is a party to at least
one such agreement perhaps a more important fact is that typically 200 countries are
not parties to each agreement. This paper seeks to empirically analyze the eﬀects of
the second-largest of these agreements, the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), on trade volumes, prices and welfare of both member countries and non-
members. It uses detailed trade data to identify key supply and demand parameters
in a simple static model that is then used to analyze NAFTA. The paper finds that
both supply and demand are very sensitive to price changes. NAFTA therefore has
substantial eﬀects on trade volumes, but price and welfare eﬀects are found to be
modest.

    On January 1, 1994 the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between
the United States, Canada and Mexico entered into force and incorporated the prior
Canada-US Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA). For convenience I will often refer to
both agreements simply as “NAFTA”. NAFTA is by far the largest free trade pact
outside of the European Union and is the first reciprocal free trade pact between
a substantial developing country and developed economies (Hufbauer and Schott,
1993). While NAFTA is not a “deep” integration like the European Union, it contains
provisions that go beyond mere removal of tariﬀs and quantitative trade restrictions,
including disciplines on the regulation of investment, transportation and financial
services, intellectual property, government purchasing, competition policy, and the
temporary entry of business persons (Hufbauer and Schott, 1993). Since the advent
of NAFTA one of the more striking occurrences has been the rapid increase in Mexican
trade. Mexico has become the US’s second largest trading partner, accounting for
11.5 percent of US merchandise imports in 2001 and 13.9 percent of US exports, up
from 6.9 and 9.0 percent respectively in 1993. Only Canada is a partner for more
US trade. Mexico now accounts for a larger share of US trade than Korea, Thailand,
Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Taiwan combined.

    Despite NAFTA’s size, empirical studies often have great diﬃculty in identifying


                                          2
an eﬀect of NAFTA. The reason for the mixed results in studies of relatively ag-
gregated trade data is very simple. These studies have great diﬃculty distinguishing
NAFTA’s impact from the impact of two other events that occurred at a similar time.
The first of these events is Mexico’s unilateral trade liberalization that began in 1986.
In general equilibrium, import liberalization also promotes exports. Mexico’s imports
and exports therefore began growing prior to NAFTA. This eﬀect is evident in Figure
2. The second event is the Peso devaluation of 1994-95 that also coincided with rapid
growth in Mexico’s exports.

      By contrast, this paper finds that NAFTA has had a substantial impact on trade,
though only a modest eﬀect on prices and welfare. It does so by identifying key supply
and demand elasticities in detailed trade data, and then using those parameters to
estimate the impact of NAFTA on trade volumes and prices. It develops a diﬀerence
in diﬀerences based estimation technique to identify demand elasticities that focuses
on where each of the NAFTA partners sources its imports of almost 5,000 6-digit Har-
monized System (HS-6) commodities and comparing this to the source of European
Union (EU) imports of the same commodities. The technique enables identification
of NAFTA’s eﬀects on trade volumes even when countries’ production costs shift. In-
verse supply elasticities are identified by regressing observed import prices (excluding
duties) on observed quantities, using tariﬀs as instruments for observed quantities.

      The main advantage of using the detailed trade and tariﬀ data is that it enables
identification of key supply and demand parameters. Studies of aggregate trade pat-
terns are at the mercy of other factors that aﬀect trade. The potential disadvantage is
that product-level studies pay no respect to some general equilibrium considerations
such as trade balance conditions, but this need not be the case.

      NAFTA’s impact on trade at the product level can be simply demonstrated with
a few figures. Figure 3A shows that Mexico’s share of US imports has increased most
rapidly in commodities for which it has been given the greatest increase in tariﬀ pref-
erence, defined as the diﬀerence between the US tariﬀ on a commodity sourced from
Mexico and the US’s Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariﬀ rate for the same commod-
ity.1 For the 389 commodities where the US tariﬀ preference for Mexican goods has
  1
      The MFN tariﬀ is the tariﬀ applicable to imports from countries that have normal trade relations
with the US.


                                                   3
increased by at least 10 percentage points, the simple average of Mexico’s share of US
imports has risen by 224 percent since 1993. For the 2663 commodities where Mexico’s
tariﬀ preference has not increased, its share has risen by a more modest 23 percent.
The timing and cross-commodity pattern of Mexico’s trade increase are themselves
highly suggestive that trade was very responsive to NAFTA’s tariﬀ preferences, and
Figure 3B further supports the case. Figure 3B shows Mexico’s share of EU imports
from 1989-2000. Without the benefit of a free trade agreement until late 2000, the
evolution of Mexico’s trade with the EU has been very diﬀerent. Its share of EU
imports of commodities with high NAFTA preferences declined by 77 percent, while
its share of EU imports of commodities where NAFTA did not increase preferences
rises by 64 percent. This growing wedge between US and EU import patterns will
identify demand elasticities and, when combined with estimated supply elasticities,
NAFTA’s impact on trade volumes and prices.

   Canada’s share of US imports has also increased since CUSFTA came into eﬀect
in 1989, and Figures 4A to 4C also suggest that CUSFTA was partly responsible. For
commodities where there was no increased preference for goods of Canadian origin,
Canadian goods now account for a 2 percent smaller share of US imports than they did
in 1988. But where the preference increased by at least 10 percentage points, Canada’s
share of US imports increased by 99 percent. The timing and cross-commodity pat-
tern again suggest that CUSFTA is at work. Figure 4C shows Canada’s share of
US imports from 1980 to 2000. For most of the 1980s, Canada’s share of US im-
ports is declining in all tariﬀ classes, but just before CUSFTA, Canada’s share begins
to rebound for commodities where large tariﬀ preferences were negotiated. Figure
4B provides a comparison with Canada’s trade with the EU, which does not have a
preferential trade agreement with Canada. For the commodities with no CUSFTA
preferences, Canada’s share of EU imports has declined by 6 percent. For commodi-
ties with high CUSFTA preferences, Canada’s share of EU imports has declined by 40
percent. Figures 3A to 4C together suggest that NAFTA/CUSFTA have had a sub-
stantial impact on trade, and even though US tariﬀs are typically low, trade appears
to be quite sensitive to even small trade preferences.

   Preferential Trade Areas (PTAs) have received a great deal of analytical and em-
pirical attention since Viner (1950) distinguished between the trade creation and trade
diversion eﬀects of preferential tariﬀ liberalization. Much of this attention is driven

                                          4
by the ambiguous welfare implications of PTAs. Favorable eﬀects (“trade creation”)
result from removing distortions in the relative price between domestically produced
commodities and commodities produced in other members of the PTA. Unfavorable
eﬀects (“trade diversion”) come from the introduction of distortions between the rel-
ative price of commodities produced by PTA members and non-members (Frankel,
Stein and Wei 1996). Research has also been motivated by the political economy of
PTAs, such as whether PTAs help or hinder movement towards the first best of global
free trade (for example, Baldwin 1996, Levy 1997, Bagwell and Staiger 1999).

   Much empirical work has been devoted towards evaluating trade and welfare ef-
fects of PTAs (Baldwin and Venables 1995). One major group of studies of PTA’s are
ex-ante simulations using Applied General Equilibrium (AGE) models that produce
price and welfare predictions in addition to trade volume predictions. The other ma-
jor group are ex-post studies examining changes in the direction of aggregate trade
between countries or regions following the introduction of the PTA. Examples of
AGE modelling of NAFTA are Kehoe and Kehoe (1995), Brown, Deardorﬀ and Stern
(1995), Cox (1995), Sobarzo (1995) and studies surveyed in Baldwin and Venables
(1995). All models predicted welfare gains for NAFTA members, though the wel-
fare estimates are sensitive to whether the models are “first generation” with perfect
competition and no dynamics, “second generation” with increasing returns and im-
perfect competition, or “third generation” with the addition of capital accumulation.
Later generation models have more potential for welfare changes and typically sug-
gest greater welfare gains. Examples of ex-post studies that use aggregate trade data
for NAFTA are Gould (1998) and Garces-Diaz (2001). Gould finds that NAFTA has
increased US-Mexico trade, but has had no eﬀect on US-Canada or Mexico-Canada
trade. Garces-Diaz finds that Mexico’s export boom is not attributable to NAFTA.

   Papers more similar to this are Clausing (2001), Fukao, Okubo and Stern (2003),
Krueger (1999, 2000) and Chang and Winters (2002). Clausing was first to exploit
tariﬀ variation at the detailed commodity level using US import data from 1989 to
1994. Clausing finds that US import growth was related to tariﬀ preferences conferred
on Canada and also concludes that CUSFTA was primarily trade creating. Fukao,
Okubo and Stern analyze US imports at the HS 2-digit level for the period 1992-
1998. Of the 70 sets of industry regressions they run, NAFTA tariﬀ preferences had a
significant eﬀect on US imports in 15 cases. Research at the 3 and 4-digit SIC industry

                                          5
level by Krueger (1999, 2000) finds no evidence that NAFTA has had any impact on
intra-North American trade. In a study of MERCOSUR, Chang and Winters (2002)
examine export price data for five non-member countries. They find that due to
the tariﬀ preference, competition from Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay has led to
significant and substantial reductions in American, Chilean, German, Korean and
Japanese export prices to Brazil.

    Related papers include Kehoe and Ruhl (2002), who find that growth in the
extensive margin following trade liberalizations is an important source of new trade,
especially for the previously thin Canada-Mexico trade relationship. Head and Ries
(1999) study the industry rationalization eﬀects of tariﬀ reductions and find that on
balance, NAFTA has had little net eﬀect on the scale of Canadian firms. Trefler
(2001) finds that Canadian industries that experienced the largest tariﬀ cuts under
NAFTA experienced substantial labor productivity gains, but a decline in both output
and employment. Yeats (1997) finds that the fastest growth in intra-MERCOSUR
trade was in commodities in which members did not display a comparative advantage,
inferred from the lack of exports of these commodities outside MERCOSUR. This was
interpreted as evidence of the trade diversion eﬀects of MERCOSUR.

    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a simple “first genera-
tion” model of preferential trade liberalization that is used to derive the estimating
equations and underpin the welfare analysis. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4
presents and discusses the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


2    Theoretical Framework and Empirical Strategy

This paper seeks to exploit the commodity and time variation in the tariﬀ prefer-
ence that is aﬀorded to goods originating in NAFTA partners to identify NAFTA’s
and CUSFTA’s eﬀect on trade and welfare. The paper identifies demand elasticities
by focusing on where NAFTA members and the EU source their imports of diﬀerent
commodities. It seeks to explain changes in North American import sources using the
preference aﬀorded to commodities of North American origin. The idea is that where
North American output is aﬀorded no new preference (where the MFN tariﬀ rate is
zero, for instance), NAFTA’s only impact should come through a general equilibrium


                                          6
eﬀect on output prices, or through reductions in “border eﬀects” due to NAFTA pro-
visions that go beyond tariﬀ liberalization. For commodities where NAFTA causes a
new preference to open up for North American goods, the preference should have an
additional eﬀect causing North American consumers to substitute towards newly pre-
ferred goods and away from other sources of supply. Supply elasticities are identified
using tariﬀs as instruments that, for a given supply price, shift the demand curve.
This strategy can be derived from a simple model. The model and the estimated
parameters are then used to evaluate NAFTA’s eﬀects on trade volumes, prices and
welfare.

       A. Model Description

       Firms produce commodities under perfectly competitive conditions. Trade is
driven by preference for variety and by commodities being diﬀerentiated by coun-
try of origin. Countries may impose ad-valorem tariﬀs on imports. Countries may
then enter into preferential trading agreements whereby each country in the agree-
ment lowers tariﬀs on imports from partner countries but need not adjust the tariﬀ on
imports from other countries. This causes consumers to substitute towards the output
of preferred countries and away from all other sources of supply, including domestic
production. Factor supplies are not explicitly modelled. The model assumptions are
set out in detail below.

       1. Countries are denoted by c and time by t.2

       2. There is a continuum of industries z on the interval [0,1]. In each country, every
industry produces a commodity using an industry-specific factor under conditions
                                            ¡         ¢
of perfect competition with marginal cost at qtS (zc ) (henceforth often denoted as
at (zc )), where qtS (zc ) is production of commodity z in country c. Note that marginal
cost depends on the quantity produced and may vary across producing country and
time. I assume a constant inverse supply elasticity:


                        ¡         ¢
                   ln at qtS (zc ) = η (zc ) ln qtS (zc ) + ln Pbct + Dct + Dcz + εczt             (1)


   2
       In the empirical analysis “country” will often mean collection of countries such as the European
Union or a “Rest of the World” group of countries. Aggregation is discussed in the Appendix.

                                                    7
   where η (zc ) is the inverse supply elasticity, Pbct is the aggregate price index in
country c, Dct is a country-by-year fixed eﬀect, Dcz is a country-by-product fixed
eﬀect and εczt is a random supply shock.

   3. In every period consumers in each country are assumed to maximize Cobb-
Douglas preferences over their consumption of the output of each industry, Qct (z),
with the fraction of income spent on industry z being bc (z) (Equations 2 and 3).
Expenditure shares for each industry are therefore constant for all prices and incomes.


                                         Z1
                                 Uct =         bc (z) ln Qct (z) dz.               (2)
                                          0


                                         Z1
                                              bc (z) dz = 1.                       (3)
                                         0



   4. The output of each industry is not a homogeneous good. Although firms in
the same country produce identical goods, production is diﬀerentiated by country
of origin. Qct (z) can be interpreted as a sub-utility function that depends on the
quantity of each variety of z consumed. I choose the CES function with elasticity
                              D
of substitution σ z > 1. Let qct (zc0 ) denote the quantity consumed in country c of
commodity z produced in country c0 . Qct (z) is defined by Equation 4:


                                       ÃN                  ! σ σZ−1
                                        X           σ Z −1     Z
                                           D
                             Qct (z) =    qct (zc0 ) σZ             .              (4)
                                              c0 =1




   5. There may be transport costs for international trade. Transport costs are intro-
duced in the convenient ‘iceberg’ from; gc0 t (zc ) units must be shipped from country
c for 1 unit to arrive in country c0 ; gct (zc ) = 1, ∀c .

   6. Tariﬀs: τ c0 t (zc ) − 1 is the ad-valorem tariﬀ imposed by country c0 on imports
of commodity z from country c; τ ct (zc ) = 1, ∀c . Tariﬀs are rebated as a lump-sum to
consumers.


                                                      8
      B. Equilibrium

      In equilibrium, consumers maximize utility, firms maximize profits and trade is
balanced. Because of the assumption of perfect competition, prices (exclusive of tariﬀs
and transport costs) are equal to marginal cost, at (zc ) . Consider the consumers in
country 1, which will be a NAFTA country and for now we will call the US. Tariﬀs
and transport costs raise the price paid by US consumers for goods imported from
country c to at (zc ) g1t (zc ) τ 1t (zc ). Let T1t (z) denote tariﬀ revenue collected in the
                                                             D
US on imports of commodity z, let Y1t denote US income, and q1t (zc ) denote US
consumption of commodity z produced in country c. US income is equal to the sum
of firm revenues plus tariﬀ revenue.3


                                                X
                                                                        D
                               T1t (z) =              (τ 1t (zc ) − 1) q1t (zc ) at (zc ) ,                            (5)
                                                  c


                                           Z1                               Z1
                                   Y1t =        at (z1 ) qtS   (z1 ) dz +        T1t (z) dz.                           (6)
                                           0                                 0



      US consumers maximize utility subject to expenditure being equal to income in
every period:


                              X
                                D
                               q1t (zc ) at (zc ) g1t (zc ) τ 1t (zc ) = b1 (z) Y1t .                                  (7)
                               c



      Diﬀerentiating the Lagrangian for the consumers’ constrained optimization prob-
lem with respect to consumption levels of each commodity, we find that the tariﬀ on
imported goods causes domestic consumers to substitute towards domestically pro-
duced varieties. The amount of substitution depends on the level of the tariﬀ and on
the elasticity of substitution between varieties:

                                 D
                                                  µ                 ¶σZ µ               ¶σZ µ               ¶σ Z
                                q1t (zc )             τ 1t (zc0 )           at (zc0 )           g1 (zc0 )
              ∀z, ∀c , ∀t ,      D
                                           =                                                                       .   (8)
                                q1t (zc0 )            τ 1t (zc )            at (zc )            g1 (zc )
  3
      Revenue from firm sales will all accrue to factors of production (inputs), which are assumed to
be domestically owned. Underlying factor markets are not modelled.

                                                                9
   Equilibrium conditions for all other countries are symmetric, which will be ex-
ploited by the empirical work to control for the eﬀect of unobserved movements in
marginal cost that may be correlated with tariﬀ movements. Finally, all commodity
markets have to clear, taking into account output that melts in transit:


                                                            X
                          ∀z, ∀c , ∀t ,   qtS (zc ) =        qcD0 t (zc ) gc0 t (zc ) .                         (9)
                                                             c0




   C. Empirical Strategy

   (i) Demand Elasticity

   I use Equation 8 to derive estimating equations for demand elasticities. Equivalent
equations exist for every other country, specifically, let country 2 be the aggregate
of the twelve countries that were always members of the EU for the sample period
1989-1999:


                           D
                                          µ                 ¶σZ µ               ¶σZ µ                ¶σZ
                          q2t (zc )           τ 2t (zc0 )           at (zc0 )           g2t (zc0 )
          ∀z, ∀c , ∀t ,    D
                                     =                                                                     .   (10)
                          q2t (zc0 )          τ 2t (zc )            at (zc )            g2t (zc )


   Using Equations 8 and 10 we can eliminate the marginal cost terms:



                    D              D
                                                 ·                                 ¸
                   q1t (zc )      q2t (zc )          τ 1t (zc0 )       τ 2t (zc0 )
                ln D         − ln D         = σ z ln             − ln
                  q1t (zc0 )     q2t (zc0 )          τ 1t (zc )        τ 2t (zc )
                                                   ·                                ¸
                                                        g1t (zc0 )      g2t (zc0 )
                                              +σ z ln              − ln               .                        (11)
                                                        g1t (zc )        g2t (zc )



   Elimination of the unobserved marginal cost terms is important because relative
costs will shift following a trade liberalization. Equation 11 can be transformed into
an equation for Cost including Insurance and Freight (CIF) import values, to match
how EU trade data are collected:



                                                       10
                      D                        D
                                                              ·                                 ¸
            at .g1t .q1t (zc )       at .g2t .q2t (zc )           τ 1t (zc0 )       τ 2t (zc0 )
         ln           D
                                − ln           D
                                                         = σ z ln             − ln
            at .g1t .q1t (zc0 )      at .g2t .q2t (zc0 )          τ 1t (zc )        τ 2t (zc )
                                                                        ·                                 ¸
                                                                              g1t (zc0 )       g2t (zc0 )
                                                           + (σ z − 1) ln                − ln               . (12)
                                                                              g1t (zc )         g2t (zc )



       So long as I only examine countries c and c0 for which the EU does not change
                              τ 2t (zc0 )
its relative tariﬀs, ln       τ 2t (zc )
                                            is simply a commodity fixed eﬀect. Since I do not have
detailed transport cost data for EU trade, to identify σ Z I assume that relative trans-
                                                                                  g1t (zc0 )          g2t (zc0 )
port costs of shipping commodities to the US and the EU, ln                       g1t (zc )
                                                                                               − ln   g2t (zc )
                                                                                                                 ,   is the
sum of a commodity fixed eﬀect, a year fixed eﬀect and an error term that is orthog-
onal to US tariﬀs.4 This produces the basic demand elasticity estimating Equation
13 based on CIF import values, where Dz and Dt are full sets of commodity and year
dummies respectively, while εcc0 z is a random disturbance term:


                            D                        D
                  at .g1t .q1t (zc )       at .g2t .q2t (zc )                    τ 1t (zc0 )
             ln             D
                                      − ln           D
                                                               =Dz + Dt + σ z ln             + εcc0 z                 (13)
                  at .g1t .q1t (zc0 )      at .g2t .q2t (zc0 )                   τ 1t (zc )


       Now consider country c to be Canada or Mexico and country c0 to be any other
country. NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s increase in the US tariﬀ preferences for Canadian
                                 τ 1t (zc0 )
and Mexican goods, ln            τ 1t (zc )
                                             ,   will increase the share of those goods in US consump-
tion relative to their share of EU consumption. The size of the increased share in an
arbitrary industry z depends positively on the size of the increased US tariﬀ prefer-
ence, and positively on the elasticity of substitution σ between varieties of z.

       The choice of EU as “country 2” to identify demand elasticities is of minor im-
portance to the empirical analysis. The EU was chosen for two main reasons. Firstly,
its detailed trade data has long been available electronically. Secondly, the European
Union is a relatively large trading partner for the US, Canada and Mexico, which
   4
       The assumption may not be completely innocuous. The most significant recent feature of interna-
tional trade costs has been the relative decline in air-freight costs. This is likely to disproportionately
benefit some commodities and some trade routes. See Hummels (1999) for a detailed examination
of international trade costs.



                                                           11
maximizes the number of products that can be used to estimate demand elasticities
and increases the precision of the estimates. The cost of choosing the EU as country
2 is that the EU is excluded from the list of control countries c0 . This means that the
paper does not directly use some of the substitution between the output of NAFTA
countries and EU output to identify demand elasticities. For transparency purposes
I also report estimates obtained using all trade involving NAFTA countries or EU
countries, including trade between EU members, but note that relative EU tariﬀs
ln ττ2t2t(zc0 )
         (zc )
                are no longer a commodity fixed eﬀect.

   (ii) Supply Elasticity

   In Equation 1 the marginal cost of producing a commodity in country c was
allowed to increase with the quantity produced in that country. NAFTA countries
may face an elasticity of supply that is less than infinite, so that demand shifts caused
by preferential trade liberalization aﬀect equilibrium prices. These price changes
are an important ingredient of welfare analysis and it is necessary to estimate how
prices respond to preferential trade liberalization. The mean supply elasticity can be
estimated in a manner that mostly utilizes very detailed price and quantity data for
                                                          P S
US imports. Taking Equation 1 and noting that qtS (zc ) = j qjt  (zc ):


                            "                             #
                                     S
                                    q1t(zc )
     ln at (zc ) = η (zc ) − ln P      S
                                                      S
                                                + ln q1t (zc ) + Pbct + Dct + Dcz + εczt   (14)
                                    j qjt (zc )




            qS (z )
   where   P 1t S c       is the share of Country c’s output of zc that is exported to the
            j qjt (zc )
US, η (zc ) is the inverse supply elasticity, Dct and Dcz are full sets of country-by-year
dummies and country-by-product dummies, and εczt are random supply shocks. The
aggregate price index Pbct is absorbed by the fixed eﬀects Dct . Tariﬀ-line level data
                                                                       S
(15,000 commodities) exists for supply prices at (zc ) and quantities q1t (zc ) supplied to
the US. I estimate the share of Country c’s output of zc that is exported to the US at
the HS 6-digit level (5000 commodities). The World Bank’s WITS database contains
bilateral trade data for most countries at the HS 6-digit level for some years between
1989-1999 (depending on reporting country). For each available reporting country
and year, I extract the share of their exports of each HS 6-digit product that are

                                                12
exported to the US. I then multiply this by the fraction of each reporting country’s
GDP that is exported to estimate the required share. The parameter η (zc ) can be
identified using tariﬀs as an instrument since, for a given supply price at (zc ), tariﬀs
shift demand. This can be seen from the demand equation. From the model’s CES
demand assumption, demand for product zc is given by:



    D
ln q1t (zc ) = −σ z ln at (zc ) − σ z ln τ 1t (zc ) − σ z ln g1t (zc ) + (σ z − 1) ln Pb1tz + ln b1 (z) Y1t
                                                                                                     (15)



    where Pb1tz is the ideal price index for commodity z in the US:


                                         "                                 # 1−σ
                                                                              1
                                          X
                               Pb1tz =          (at .g1t .τ 1t (zc ))1−σ                             (16)
                                            c




    Any change in tariﬀs imposed by the US on imports of product z from any source
will shift the demand curve for zc , because the tariﬀ changes shift either τ 1t (zc ), the
price index Pb1tz or both. These movements in the demand curve identify the supply
curve.


3     Data Description

(i) International trade data

    International trade data for almost all of the world is now collected according
to the Harmonized System (HS), a schedule that is standard across countries at the
6-digit level, or approximately 5,000 commodities. Most of this data is available
from the World Bank’s WITS database. For some key countries I use more complete
national sources of data. The US International Trade Commission (USITC) maintains
a database at the 10-digit level (15,000 commodities) of US imports classified by
commodity, country of origin, import program, month and port of arrival. Eurostat
and Statistics Canada maintain similar databases for the EU and Canada.

                                                     13
      For the purposes of Figures 2 to 4C it is useful to keep a balanced panel of
products. Changes in HS commodity classifications lead to some attrition, but I am
able to track US and EU trade in 4,655 6-digit commodities annually from 1989 to
2000. Because Canada entered into CUSFTA with the US in 1989, it is useful to
collect data for earlier years. Prior to 1989, US trade data was collected according
to a diﬀerent commodity schedule, the TSUSA. Concordances are available for this
data, but revisions to the TSUSA also lead to attrition. I am able to track 4,483
commodities continuously from 1988 to 2000, and 3,592 from 1980 to 2000.

      The data also contains information on physical quantities imported for most com-
modities, allowing the calculation of unit price variables. I estimate supply elasticities
using these prices.

      (ii) Tariﬀ Data

      Tariﬀ data is also collected from both national sources and the World Bank’s WITS
database. Tariﬀ data is based on either tariﬀ schedules or detailed data on import
duties collected. US tariﬀ schedules for the years 1997 to the current year are available
from the USITC. I extracted US tariﬀ data for 1989 to 1996 from USITC files.5 US
tariﬀs are almost invariably set at the HS 8-digit level (10,000 commodities). While
most tariﬀs are ad-valorem, there are still several hundred specific tariﬀs applied. The
USITC calculates the ad-valorem equivalent of any specific tariﬀs. The distribution of
US MFN tariﬀs in 1999 is illustrated in Figure 5A. The simple average of tariﬀ rates
is low at 5.2 percent, but importantly there is a large amount of dispersion, with the
standard deviation of MFN tariﬀ rates being 12 percent. Under NAFTA, all but a
couple hundred of these tariﬀs have been eliminated for Canada and are in the process
of being eliminated for Mexico, creating a large variation in the preference given to
goods of Canadian or Mexican origin (Figure 5B). Table 1 shows that much of this
variation occurs within fine product classifications. Table 1 reports the percentage of
the variance of US MFN tariﬀ rates and tariﬀ preferences for Canada and Mexico at
the tariﬀ-line level that can be explained by full sets of dummy variables for broader
industry classifications. Much of the tariﬀ variation remains unexplained by these
variables, therefore existing industry-level studies of NAFTA ignore most of the tariﬀ
variation.
  5
      This data was made available by Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002).


                                                14
       Preferential treatment for some goods existed prior to CUSFTA/NAFTA. In 1965,
Canada and the US negotiated the Auto-Pact, allowing duty-free trade in many
automotive goods. The Auto Pact was incorporated into CUSFTA. Mexico was a
beneficiary of the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), under which the US
(and other developed countries) gave developing countries preferential access to their
markets. The US gave duty free access to the output of developing countries for
several thousand HS 8-digit commodities, although goods where developing countries
may have gained most from preferential access were often excluded (notably many
agricultural items and textiles, clothing and footwear), and the preference could be
removed under “competitive needs limitations” to the GSP. Details of the Auto Pact
and GSP program are included in the tariﬀ schedules. Although the US engaged in
some fine tuning of the GSP program, there are only two changes that aﬀected a
significant amount of US trade during the sample period. The first was the expulsion
(“graduation”) of Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore and Taiwan from the scheme at the
end of 1988. This can be accommodated by dropping either pre-1989 data or these
four countries from the analysis - I drop the pre-1989 data.6 The second change was
that upon entry into NAFTA, Mexico was no longer entitled to claim GSP benefits
for trade with the US.

       Tariﬀs are aggregated from the HS 8-digit level to the 6-digit level in two diﬀerent
ways: by taking simple averages; or by taking trade weighted averages. There are
several limitations to using tariﬀ schedules to calculate tariﬀs. One limitation is the
eﬀect of the maquiladoras on Mexican exports to the US. Under ‘production sharing’
provisions US duty does not have to be paid on the US sourced content of many
exports to the US, while the full value of those transactions is recorded in US trade
data. Mexico will also not collect duty on many intermediate inputs that are destined
to be exported. Tariﬀ schedules will therefore often overstate the NAFTA preferences.
A second limitation of the tariﬀ schedule is that preferential tariﬀ arrangements are
often circumscribed by restrictive rules of origin that need to be satisfied to qualify
for the tariﬀ preference. To partly address these limitations I also calculate tariﬀs
using data on actual import duty paid. The drawback of this approach is that tariﬀ
   6
       There is a detailed concordance between the 1988 and 1989 US data detailing the change in
trade and tariﬀ schedules. I considered that keeping a broader set of comparison countries was more
important than keeping an extra year of data. The substitution elasticity estimates are not very
sensitive to this choice.

                                                15
rates can only be observed when there is trade. Where there is no trade, I revert to
the tariﬀ schedule for that item. This alternative set of 8-digit “applied” tariﬀs are
also aggregated to the 6-digit level using simple averages and trade weighted averages.
This gives a total of four measures of tariﬀs at the HS 6-digit level.

      Quantitative restrictions on imports of many textile, clothing and footwear com-
modities under the Multi-Fibre Agreement (MFA) and of many agricultural commodi-
ties provide a further complication. Many of these restrictions are binding, although a
large number are not (Carolyn Evans and James Harrigan, 2003). They are extremely
diﬃcult to account for, since many restrictions encompass many HS commodities and
most apply bilaterally. The existence of binding quotas will tend to bias downwards
the estimated substitution elasticities. Eliminating commodities subject to quotas
did not, however, lead to higher substitution elasticity estimates.

      The preferences given to Canadian and Mexican production are systematically
related to some of the characteristics of the commodities. This is evident from Figures
3A to 4C showing a systematic negative relationship between the preference and
Canada’s and, to a lesser extent, Mexico’s share of US imports. Canadian and, to a
lesser extent, Mexican tariﬀs are strongly correlated with US tariﬀs.7 Given that the
most protected sectors are agriculture and simple manufactures like textiles, apparel
and footwear, the highest preferences are mostly in these sectors, subject to the
existence of quantitative restrictions. The NAFTA preferences are biased towards
commodities in which developed countries have a comparative disadvantage. This
eﬀect can also be seen in price data in Tables 2A to 2C. The relative price of Canadian
and US goods is usually substantially higher in commodities where there are large
tariﬀ preferences under NAFTA. This suggests that NAFTA may have caused an
expansion of North American production of commodities for which North America is
a relatively high cost producer.

      Data on Canadian import duties charged is collected for all years and products by
Statistics Canada. The ad-valorem component of tariﬀ schedules is also available for
most years for many countries, including Canada and Mexico, from the World Bank’s
WITS database. Canadian tariﬀ data is aggregated to the 6-digit level in the same
  7
      The simple correlations of HS 6-digit tariﬀs is 0.5 for the US and Canada, 0.25 between the US
and Mexico, and 0.35 between Canada and Mexico.


                                                 16
way as US tariﬀ data. Mexican trade data is only available at the 6-digit level in
the WITS database, so Mexican tariﬀs were aggregated to the 6-digit level by taking
simple averages. I can therefore estimate demand elasticities using the imports of
each of the NAFTA partners.


4        Results

A. Demand Elasticity

        The mean elasticity of substitution is estimated using Equation 13 and setting
σ z = σ for all commodities. There is insuﬃcient tariﬀ variation to obtain meaningful
                                                                                      D
substitution elasticity estimates for detailed industries. To recapitulate, at .g1t .q1t (zc )
                                                                                  D
is the CIF value of US imports of commodity z from country c at time t; at .g2t .q2t (zc )
is the CIF value of EU imports of commodity z from country c at time t; τ 1t (zc ) − 1
is the US ad-valorem tariﬀ on imports of commodity z from country c at time t;
Dz and Dt are full sets of commodity and year dummies respectively; and εcc0 z is a
random disturbance term. The parameter σ is of interest because it is one of the key
determinants of the eﬀect of trade impediments on the volume of trade and because
it is a critical ingredient of welfare analysis of trade liberalization.

        I use HS 6-digit trade and tariﬀ data from 1989-1999. Later years are omitted
because the Mexico-EU free trade agreement commenced in 2000. Country c is al-
ternatively Canada or Mexico, country c0 is the aggregate of all countries that did
not substantially change their preferential trade relations with either the US or the
EU between 1989 and 1999. A list of these countries is provided in Appendix Table
1. A discussion of this aggregation appears in the Appendix. Four diﬀerent measures
of tariﬀs are used; depending on whether the tariﬀ schedule or actual duty paid are
used to calculate tariﬀs at the 8-digit level, and on whether tariﬀs were aggregated
to the 6-digit level using simple averages or trade weights.

        Results are reported in Tables 3A and 3B. Table 3A reports results based on
changes in the destination of Canadian exports while Table 3B reports results based
on the destination of Mexican exports.8 The estimates of the mean elasticity of sub-
stitution range between 6.2 and 10.9 and are reasonably precisely estimated. Moving
    8
        OLS estimates only are reported. Earlier drafts of this paper also reported GLS estimates that

                                                   17
across the columns, the estimates are slightly sensitive to the choice of tariﬀ measure -
the estimates using Canadian exports are lower when the tariﬀ schedule is used. The
estimates based on Mexican exports tend to be higher than those based on Canadian
exports. The estimates are very similar whether the ‘control’ countries c0 are limited
to those listed in Appendix Table A1 or include all non-NAFTA countries. The esti-
mates are similar in magnitude to elasticities estimated by Clausing (2001) and Head
and Ries (2001).

   These elasticities of substitution suggest that consumers are very willing to substi-
tute between diﬀerent sources of a commodity. One implication of this willingness to
substitute is that small costs to international trade, whether due to natural barriers
such as transport costs or artificial barriers such as tariﬀs, will have a large eﬀect on
trade volumes. With a substitution elasticity of 6, ignoring for a moment terms of
trade eﬀects, the median US tariﬀ of 5.5 per cent will reduce consumption of imported
varieties relative to domestic varieties by 27 per cent. With a substitution elasticity
of 11, this reduction in relative consumption is 45 per cent. But on some products
the eﬀect of trade barriers will be much more dramatic; US tariﬀs range up to 350
per cent.

   I also estimate Equation 13 using, alternately, Canada and Mexico as “Country 1”.
The trade and tariﬀ data were obtained at the HS 6-digit level for Mexico and Canada
from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database, and at the
tariﬀ-line level for Canada from Statistics Canada. One caveat with these results is
that the tariﬀ schedules in the WITS database only include the ad-valorem component
of tariﬀs, and are not available for all years.9 This is not a severe limitation in the case
of Canada, because Canadian data on duties collected are available for all years at
the tariﬀ-line level and these “applied” tariﬀs can also be used to estimate elasticities.
Substitution elasticity estimates obtained using Canada’s applied tariﬀs and reported
in Tables 3C and 3D ranged from 5.0 to 5.5 when examining the destination of US
exports and 7.2 to 8.1 when examining Mexican exports. The estimates obtained
using Mexican tariﬀ data and reported in Table 3E are much lower, at 2.0 to 2.5
sought to exploit the serial correlation of the disturbances and Heckman estimates that sought to
model the missing observations. These estimates were very similar.
  9
    Canadian tariﬀ schedules for 1990-1992 and 1994 had to be estimated from surrounding years’
data, as did Mexican tariﬀ schedules for 1990, 1992-1994 and 1996.


                                               18
when examining US exports and 0.6 to 0.8 when examining Canadian exports. These
low estimates partly result from the greater measurement error in the Mexican tariﬀ
data, but may also result from a important force driving Mexican imports being the
US tariﬀ reductions on Mexican goods containing suﬃcient North American content,
stimulating Mexican imports of components from the US and Canada.

      B. Supply Elasticity

      I estimate the mean inverse supply elasticity using Equation 14 and setting η (zc ) =
η for all products. I obtain both IV and OLS estimates using the most detailed US
import price and quantity data available, the 10-digit level. Estimation of Equation 14
requires estimates of the share of Country c’s output of zc that is exported to the US.
The World Bank’s WITS database contains bilateral trade data for most countries
at the HS 6-digit level for some years between 1989-1999 (depending on reporting
country). For each available reporting country and year, I extract the share of their
exports of each HS 6-digit product that are exported to the US. I then multiply this
by the fraction of each reporting country’s GDP that is exported to estimate the
required share.

      I use four tariﬀ rates as instruments for the observed output quantity in Equation
14. Firstly, I use the US tariﬀ rates on exports from Country c, Canada, Mexico and
all other countries. Secondly, I only use the tariﬀ rate on exports from Country c. An
increase in this tariﬀ will, conditional on the supply price, shift demand downwards.
Thirdly, I omit the tariﬀ rate on exports from Country c but include the other three
tariﬀ measures. An increase in these tariﬀ rates will, conditional on the supply price
and the tariﬀ on exports from Country c, shift demand for zc upwards. Tariﬀs are
measured at the 10-digit level using data on duties paid. Where data on duties paid
is not available, I use the tariﬀ schedule.10 I omit all products where there is a
specific tariﬀ, because a specific tariﬀ generates a causal link from supply prices to
the measured ad-valorem equivalent tariﬀ.

      Column 1 of Table 4 contains results where the four tariﬀ rates are used as an
instrument for quantity. I estimate the parameter η to be 0.29. This result suggests
that supply to the US is fairly elastic, even for products zc where the US consumes
 10
      When the tariﬀ schedule is used the MFN rate is used for the “all other countries” tariﬀ measure.


                                                   19
most of the output. A shock to demand that causes a 1 percent increase in worldwide
consumption of zc will cause the supply price to increase by 0.29 percent. Column 2
reports the results when the tariﬀ on exports from Country c is the only instrument.
The estimate of η is unchanged at 0.29. Column 3 reports the results when the
tariﬀ on exports from Country c has been omitted from the set of instruments. The
estimate of η is less precisely estimated and slightly lower at 0.22. Column 4 reports
OLS results purely for inspection, they have no useful interpretation since OLS does
not identify the supply curve.

      With estimates of demand and supply elasticities at hand we now have the two
essential parameters for welfare analysis of NAFTA.

      C. Welfare and Trade Volume

      With estimates of demand and supply elasticities it is possible to make tentative
calculations of NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s price and welfare eﬀects without invoking
the greatly simplifying “small country” assumption. I use the simple model in Section
2 of the paper. The model, while extremely parsimonious with parameters, will be
applied to rich trade and tariﬀ data. This calculation will be incomplete, but it will be
consistent with the structure of the model and the estimated parameters. The strategy
is to estimate the first-order welfare eﬀects of CUSFTA and NAFTA on the USA,
Canada, Mexico and the Rest Of the World (“ROW”). The important ingredients
of that calculation are reported in this section, the details of that calculation and
additional data requirements are left to the Appendix.

      I estimate the eﬀects of each trade agreement on the purchasing power of a coun-
try’s output, holding output quantities constant. Nominal income is given by Equa-
tion 6, and the ideal price index corresponding to the utility function in Equation 2
is:


                                   "                                   # b1−σ
                                                                           c (z)
                                  Y X
                         Pbct =            (at .gct .τ ct (zc0 ))1−σ               .   (17)
                                  z   c0



      This measure will understate welfare because it will fail to account for a second-
order eﬀect from the reoptimization of production and factor supply following changes

                                                20
in relative prices. The calculations proceed in four steps. Firstly, I estimate how prices
and quantities of each product respond to the tariﬀ liberalization, keeping existing
aggregate income constant. I then use product prices and industry price indexes to
estimate expenditures on each country’s goods and the change in aggregate incomes.
These new aggregate incomes are then used to recalculate equilibrium product prices.
This process is iterated until the estimated changes in prices and incomes are consis-
tent with no change in each countries’ trade balance. Welfare calculations are then
performed.

    (i) Equilibrium

    From Equation 1, ignoring fixed eﬀects and supply shocks, the inverse supply
curve is:

                                                  Ã             !
                                                   X
                               ln at (zc ) = η ln   qcS0 t (zc ) + ln Pbct                               (18)
                                                      c0




    Totally diﬀerentiating Equation 18 yields:

                                        Ã                              !
                                         X
                      d ln at (zc ) = η   sc0 t (zc ) d ln qcS0 t (zc ) + d ln Pbct                      (19)
                                                c0



                             q S (zc )
    where sc0 (zc ) =      P c0 tS          is simply the proportion of the output of zc that is
                              j qjt (zc )
                           0
supplied to country c . Totally diﬀerentiating the demand Equation 15 yields:



d ln qcD0 t (zc ) = −σd ln at (zc ) − σd ln τ c0 t (zc ) − σd ln gc0 t (zc ) + (σ − 1)d ln Pbc0 tz + d ln Yc0 t
                                                                                                         (20)



    In equilibrium, the change in demand due to NAFTA will equal the change in
supply. Substituting d ln qcD0 t (zc ) from Equation 20 for d ln qcS0 t (zc ) in Equation 19
and ignoring transport costs (that I assume to be unchanged) yields how equilibrium



                                                      21
supply prices at (zc ) change in response to changed tariﬀs, industry price indexes Pbc0 tz
(defined in Equation 16), aggregate price indexes Pbct and aggregate incomes:



                          η   X                                    X
     d ln at (zc ) =         [    − sc0 (zc ) σd ln τ c0 t (zc ) +     sc0 (zc ) (σ − 1)d ln Pbc0 tz
                       1 + ησ c0                                   c 0
                         X                     1
                       + sc0 (zc ) d ln Yc0 t + d ln Pbct ]                                          (21)
                           0
                                               η
                          c

Equation 21 together with Equations 16, 17 and 6 defining Pbc0 tz , Pbct and Yc0 t form a

non-linear system of equations involving hundreds of thousands of products. I make
one modification to the system to make the general equilibrium not too computa-
tionally burdensome to solve numerically. I group all non-NAFTA countries into the
aggregate ROW. Although I treat the output of each country in the ROW as a sepa-
rate product, I compute the change in the aggregate income for the ROW and price
indexes Pbc0 tz and Pbct that are common to every country in the ROW.

   The solution is obtained iteratively in four steps. Firstly, the change in tariﬀs un-
der CUSFTA/NAFTA is inserted into Equation 21 to yield estimates of price changes
of individual products d ln at (zc ). This only captures the ‘proximate’ eﬀect of the tar-
iﬀ reductions on the price of output produced in NAFTA countries. In the second
step these new prices are then used to construct the change in price indexes d ln Pbc0 tz
and d ln Pbct using Equations 16 and 17. The change in these price indexes are then
used in the third step to reestimate the price changes of individual goods using Equa-
tion 21. This time the prices of all goods in an industry are aﬀected if there were
any tariﬀ changes in that industry. Iterating the second and third steps quickly leads
to convergence of the individual goods prices and the price indexes. In the fourth
step these new prices and price indexes are used to estimate the change in income
d ln Yc0 t . I use the fact that in an equilibrium with an unchanged trade balance, the
change in a country’s income equals the change in expenditures on its output (net of
taxes and transport costs) plus the change in taxes collected on imported goods. The
change in quantities demanded are estimated by substituting the tariﬀ reductions and
the changes in goods prices, price indexes and aggregate incomes into Equation 20.
Changed expenditures and trade taxes are then a simple function of the tariﬀ reduc-
tions and the estimated price and quantity responses. Iterating the second through

                                                   22
fourth steps leads to convergence in the estimates of goods prices, price indexes and
national incomes. More details of solving for the change in equilibrium prices are in
the Appendix.

      (ii) Welfare and Trade Volume

      The welfare decomposition for CUSFTA and NAFTA is summarized in Table 6.
Increases in the real value of output of NAFTA members is oﬀset by the decline in
tariﬀ revenue, leaving small welfare changes in this simple static model. To an extent
the welfare result is not surprising, because the model omits many of the potential
channels of welfare changes such as entry and exit of varieties, firm heterogeneity,
scale economies, and factor accumulation. But the results also suggest that something
about the agreements is not altogether wholesome - too much tariﬀ revenue is being
forgone for too small a reduction in the price index. In part this reflects the evidence
that the biggest tariﬀ preferences are being given on products where North American
firms are not low-cost producers. In other words, there is too much trade diversion.
On a less negative note the welfare eﬀects for the aggregate ROW are also small.

      So why the recent relative popularity of regional agreements? The eﬀects of CUS-
FTA/NAFTA on the most protected sectors may provide part of the answer. The
left panels of Figure 6 show the combined estimated eﬀects of NAFTA and CUSFTA
on output prices in 6-digit sectors where the MFN tariﬀ exceeds 10 percent. The
median highly-protected sector in the US and Canada appears to expand, though
only slightly, while the median highly protected Mexican sector contracts slightly. It
should be remembered that these calculations will not account for the eﬀects of more
stringent rules of origin, which may further shore up the position of highly protected
sectors (Krueger 1999). The reason why many protected sectors benefit is quite sim-
ple. The preferential tariﬀ reductions are squeezing out imports from non-member
countries in many of these sectors, which on average drives up the price of North
American supply. Since there is a high cross-product correlation in tariﬀ rates in the
US, Canada and, to a lesser extent, Mexico, there could be a large reduction in im-
ports in these sectors.11 This trade diversion is confirmed econometrically in the next
subsection. If highly protected sectors do in fact benefit from NAFTA and CUSFTA,
 11
      The simple correlations of HS 6-digit tariﬀs is 0.5 for the US and Canada, 0.25 between the US
and Mexico, and 0.35 between Canada and Mexico.


                                                 23
then this may make future multilateral liberalization in these sectors more diﬃcult
because the price eﬀects of true free trade in these sectors will now be even larger.
This is consistent with evidence on tariﬀs found in Limao (2003). By contrast the
alternative of unilateral liberalization where the US, Canada or Mexico drop all their
tariﬀs looks grim for highly-protected industries (Figure 6, right panels), though the
price declines if the rest of the world also eliminated its tariﬀs would be smaller.

      Trade volume eﬀects are more substantial. CUSFTA causes a 5 percent increase in
two way trade between Canada and the US. NAFTA causes an 23 percent increase in
two way trade between Mexico and the US and a 24 percent increase between Mexico
and Canada. Aggregate trade with the rest of the world is not greatly aﬀected except
for a 10 percent decline in trade between Mexico and the rest of the world. Declines
in imports from the rest of the world in some highly-protected sectors is partly oﬀset
by increased imports elsewhere.

      D. Econometric Confirmation of Trade Diversion

      A concern raised by the welfare analysis was the role of trade diversion in reducing
static welfare gains and, by often benefitting highly-protected sectors, potentially
making multilateral liberalization harder. Trade data enables a direct search for this
trade diversion. Consider the value of exports of commodity z from a non-NAFTA
country c0 to a NAFTA country and to the EU, grossed up for transport costs and
tariﬀs. From the CES demand assumption:



                     D
     at .g1t .τ 1t .q1t (zc0 )                τ 1t (zc0 )             g1t (zc0 )             Pb1tz     b1 (z) Y1t
ln                             = − (σ − 1) ln             −(σ − 1) ln            +(σ − 1) ln       +ln
                                                                                             Pb2tz
                     D
     at .g2t .τ 2t .q2t (zc0 )                τ 2t (zc0 )             g2t (zc0 )                       b2 (z) Y2t
                                                                                                     (22)


                    ³     ´
      where Pb1tz    Pb2tz is the ideal price index of all sellers of commodity z in the
NAFTA country (EU) inclusive of tariﬀs and transport costs. Trade diversion results
from NAFTA because tariﬀ reductions on North American output directly lower
North American price indexes Pb1tz , thereby depressing exports from other countries
c0 to North America. These tariﬀ reductions also indirectly aﬀect North American
(and to a much lesser extent EU) price indexes by aﬀecting the pre-tariﬀ prices that

                                                    24
suppliers charge in these markets. A regression of the log-diﬀerence between North
American and EU imports from the control countries on preferential and MFN tariﬀs
should reveal trade diversion. In the absence of a closed-form solution for how prices
respond to tariﬀ changes I estimate the following equation:



     M1t (zc0 )
ln              = β 1 ln τ U S,t (zCan ) + β 2 ln τ U S,t (zMex ) + β 3 ln τ Can,t (zU S ) + β 4 ln τ Can,t (zMex)
     M2t (zc0 )
                  +β 5 ln τ Mex,t (zU S ) + β 6 ln τ Mex,t (zCan ) + β 7 ln τ U S,t (zMF N ) + β 8 ln τ Can,t (zMF N )
                  +β 9 ln τ Mex,t (zMF N ) + β 10 ln τ EU,t (zMF N ) + Dz + Dt + εzt                             (23)



      where M1t (zc0 ) (M2t (zc0 )) are North American (EU) imports of product z from the
control countries c0 measured on a CIF basis (since EU trade data inclusive of actual
tariﬀs paid is unavailable) and the explanatory variables are preferential and MFN
tariﬀs. For example, τ U S,t (zCan ) is the US tariﬀ on product z imported from Canada
plus one, and τ U S,t (zMF N ) is the US MFN tariﬀ on product z plus one. I assume that
relative transport costs ln gg1t (zc0 )
                              2t (z 0 )
                                        and relative expenditures ln bb12 (z)Y1t
                                                                          (z)Y2t
                                                                                 are captured by
                                       c

full sets of product and year fixed eﬀects and a disturbance term that is orthogonal to
the tariﬀs. The sum of the coeﬃcients on the preferential tariﬀs (β 1 to β 6 ) gives some
idea about how trade from non-member countries is diverted as a result of NAFTA, as
it reveals the decline in exports from the control countries to North America relative
to the EU that results from a 1 percent reduction in intra-North American tariﬀs. The
results in Table 5 provide strong evidence that NAFTA/CUSFTA have been trade
diverting. Every 1 percent reduction in intra-North American tariﬀs causes a 2.8 to
3.9 percent decline in exports from c0 to North America relative to the EU when c0
includes only the Appendix Table A1 countries, and a 1.3 to 2.2 percent decline if
c0 includes all non-NAFTA countries. Therefore imports into North America tend to
decline in highly-protected sectors following NAFTA, with the implication that the
price and quantity of North American output tends to rise in these sectors.

      Trade diversion has not been found in existing econometric studies of NAFTA,
and the finding of trade diversion is in stark contrast to Clausing, who has reasonably
precise estimates suggesting no trade diversion. Clausing regresses growth rates of US
imports from the rest of the world on the CUSFTA trade preferences, and finds no

                                                    25
correlation. The likely reason for this is that rapid growth of emerging market man-
ufacturing exports in the 1980’s and 1990’s led to substantial growth of US imports
of the simple manufactures that these countries excelled at producing. The CUSFTA
trade preferences tend to be high on these products. Trade diversion may have been
masked by the rapid growth in imports that would have occurred in the absence of
CUSFTA. The specification in this paper essentially uses EU trade data to eliminate
the bias caused by that correlation.


5   Conclusion

This paper uses detailed world-wide trade data to identify the eﬀects of NAFTA and
CUSFTA on international trade. It develops a diﬀerence in diﬀerences based method
to identify demand elasticities using the tariﬀ changes by focusing on where NAFTA
members and the European Union source their imports of diﬀerent commodities from.
It identifies supply elasticities using tariﬀs as instruments for observed quantities.
NAFTA and CUSFTA have had a substantial eﬀect on international trade quantities,
but less eﬀect on prices and welfare in member and non-member countries. Intra-
North American trade increased most rapidly in commodities where the greatest
trade preferences were conferred, even though Canada and the US appear to be high
cost producers of many of these commodities. The share of EU imports of the same
commodities coming from North America declined. Welfare calculations using the
estimated parameters and the paper’s simple static model suggest almost zero welfare
impact on member and non-member countries. Of some concern is the possibility
that NAFTA and CUSFTA actually increased North American output and prices in
many highly-protected sectors by driving out imports from non-member countries.
This development might make future multilateral trade liberalization more diﬃcult
because it magnifies the price and output decline these sectors would experience
following MFN tariﬀ reductions.




                                         26
6    Appendix

A. Aggregation

    Demand elasticity estimates where the control countries are not aggregated are
provided in Appendix Table 2. Applied tariﬀs are used for this table where available
because they capture more nuances of trade policy. The estimates are mostly but
not always lower than their counterparts reported in the main tables. The reason for
aggregating “control countries” for estimating the demand elasticity is to avoid the
elasticity estimates being driven by movements in a very large number of very thin
trading relationships. This is much less of a concern for estimating supply elasticities
since these are identified from movements in production rather than trade - there
are fewer very small observations. The demand elasticity can still be identified from
preferential tariﬀ reductions when aggregating across countries and persisting with
the assumption that each country produces a distinct variety. From the CES demand
assumption, US demand for product z from the aggregate of the control countries c0
relative to US demand for product z from country c is given by:

            P D
             q1t (zc0 )
             c0
                              X µ τ 1t (zc0 ) ¶−σZ µ at (zc0 ) ¶−σZ µ g1 (zc0 ) ¶−σZ
               D
                          =                                                            (24)
              q1t (zc )        c0
                                    τ 1t (zc )        at (zc )        g1 (zc )


    The equivalent equation for relative EU demand is:

            P D
             q2t (zc0 )
             c0
                              X µ τ 2t (zc0 ) ¶−σZ µ at (zc0 ) ¶−σZ µ g2 (zc0 ) ¶−σZ
               D
                          =                                                            (25)
              q2t (zc )             τ 2t (zc )        at (zc )        g2 (zc )
                               c0




    Taking the log diﬀerence between relative US and EU demand:




                                                 27
          q D (zc )         q D (zc )
      ln P1tD         − ln P2tD         = σ z [ln τ 2t (zc ) − ln τ 1t (zc )]
           q1t (zc0 )        q2t (zc0 )
          c0                  c0
                                             +σ z [ln g2t (zc ) − ln g1t (zc )]
                                                                                                        (26)
                                                  P                                                
                                                       τ 1t (zc0 )−σZ at (zc0 )−σZ g1 (zc0 )−σZ
                                                   c0                                              
                                             − ln  P             −σ Z           −σZ           −σ Z 
                                                       τ 2t (zc0 )     at (zc0 )     g2 (zc0 )
                                                      c0
                                                                                                        (27)

   The demand elasticity could be identified oﬀ US and EU tariﬀ changes on the
output of country c, but if we aggregated control countries c0 into groups that are
subject the same tariﬀs by the US and to the same tariﬀs by the EU (though the US
and EU tariﬀs may diﬀer) then Equation 27 gets much closer to the estimating equa-
tion. For example, for a set of countries c0 given MFN treatment but not preferential
treatment by both the US and the EU, Equation 27 becomes:



                    D                 D
                                                      ·                                ¸
                   q1t (zc )         q2t (zc )            τ 1t (zc0 )      τ 2t (zc0 )
               ln P D          − ln P D          = σ z ln             − ln
                    q1t (zc0 )        q2t (zc0 )          τ 1t (zc )       τ 2t (zc )
                  c0                 c0
                                                    +σ z [ln g2t (zc ) − ln g1t (zc )]
                                                                                                        (28)
                                                         P                                
                                                              at (zc0 )−σZ g1 (zc0 )−σZ
                                                          c0                              
                                                    − ln  P            −σZ           −σ Z             (29)
                                                              at (zc0 )     g2 (zc0 )
                                                             c0




   The demand elasticity can again be identified oﬀ the preferential tariﬀ reductions
and relative EU tariﬀs ln ττ2t2t(z(zcc0)) are simply product fixed eﬀects as before. Note
however that unobserved production costs in the control countries do not entirely
disappear and might not be entirely captured by fixed eﬀects if iceberg transport
costs change. Most trade between the control countries in Appendix Table 1 and the
US and the EU is conducted on an MFN basis. This is not true when “All” countries
are used as the control, since intra-EU trade is not conducted on an MFN basis.


                                                   28
       B. Solving Industry Equilibrium Prices

       The eﬀect of one country’s tariﬀ reductions on the supply price of each variety
of z, at (zc ), and on the price index for all varieties of z was solved iteratively at the
HS 6-digit level (5000 commodities). The solution is aided by the price index for
industry z in country c0 , Pbc0 tz , having a convenient representation in terms of relative
consumption shares when it is normalized by the price of any variety of z. Dividing
the price index for product z in Equation 16 by the price of country c0 ’s output of zc0
yields:


                                         "                                # 1
                              Pbc0 tz     X µ at .gc0 t .τ c0 t (zc ) ¶1−σ 1−σ
                                       =                                                                                 (30)
                             at (zc0 )     c
                                                   at (zc0 )


       Under the model’s assumptions,
                                  ³ all of the ´
                                               elements of this normalized price index
                                                                                    1−σ
                                                          at .gc0 t .τ c0 t (zc )
other than σ are data. The term                                at (zc0 )
                                                                                          is simply the share of Country c0 ’s
consumption of z that comes from Country c divided by the share that comes from
Country c0 . This is simply a combination of trade and production data. Let time
t and t0 denote the pre- and post-liberalization periods respectively. The new price
index (normalized by the old price of zc0 ) is a weighted sum of the new tariﬀs and the
new supply prices induced by those tariﬀs12 :
                               "                                                        # 1
                   Pbc0 t0 z     X µ at .gc0 t .τ c0 t (zc ) ¶1−σ µ at0 τ 1t0 (zc ) ¶1−σ 1−σ
                             =                                                                                           (31)
                  at (zc0 )      c
                                          at (zc0 )                 at τ 1t (zc )


                            ³                             ´1−σ
                                at .gc0 t .τ c0 t (zc )
       where the weights             at (zc0 )
                                                                   are observable data from the pre-liberalization
period. The first step is to calculate the initial impact of the tariﬀ reductions on
output prices in the US, Canada and Mexico. Using Equation 21 this impact is:


                                                     η X
                        d ln at (zc ) =                     (−sc0 (zc ) σd ln τ c0 t (zc ))                              (32)
                                                  1 + ησ c0

  12
       Transport costs are assumed to be invariant to the tariﬀs and the quantities supplied.



                                                                       29
   The second step is to use the new tariﬀs and prices of NAFTA-country output to
compute the change in industry price indexes using Equation 31. The change in the
aggregate price indexes Pbct is estimated from the changes in the industry price indexes
using Equation 17, where the expenditure weight bc (z) is estimated consumption of
z in each country or country group c divided by that country’s GDP. The estimated
change in the price indexes can be inserted into Equation 33 to solve for new supply
prices of every variety:



                     η X³                                                                ´ d ln Pb
                            −sc0 (zc ) σd ln τ c0 t (zc ) + sc0 (zc ) (σ − 1)d ln Pbc0 tz +
                                                                                                  ct
d ln at (zc ) =
                  1 + ησ c0                                                                 1 + ησ
                                                                                               (33)



   These prices are in turn used to recalculate all price indexes. The price estimates
converge after a few iterations. I then use the fact that in an equilibrium with an
unchanged trade balance, the change in a country’s income equals the change in
expenditures on its output (net of taxes and transport costs) plus the change in taxes
collected on imported goods. The change in quantities demanded are estimated by
substituting the tariﬀ reductions and the changes in goods prices and price indexes
into Equation 20. Changed quantities and prices give changed expenditures on each
country’s output. Changed tariﬀ revenue is calculated using the tariﬀ reductions and
the estimated price and quantity responses. The change in aggregate incomes can be
inserted into Equation 34 to solve for new supply prices of every variety:



                            η X
       d ln at (zc ) =             (−sc0 (zc ) σd ln τ c0 t (zc ) + sc0 (zc ) (σ − 1)d ln Pbc0 tz
                         1 + ησ c0
                                                     d ln Pbct
                         +sc0 (zc ) d ln Yc0 t ) +                                                  (34)
                                                     1 + ησ



   These prices are in turn used to recalculate the price indexes and aggregate in-
comes. This process is iterated until the estimated changes in prices and aggregate
incomes generate no change in the trade balance.

                                                       30
      C. Additional Data Description for Model Solution

      Data is for the year preceding each trade agreement unless unavailable, in which
case the closest year is used. The tariﬀ data used for the US and Canada are applied
tariﬀs because they are conveniently arranged with the trade data in the Feenstra
database of US trade data and the Canadian trade data from Statistics Canada and
because they capture more nuances of trade policy than the tariﬀ schedules alone.
Tariﬀ schedules are used for Mexico because applied tariﬀs are unavailable.

      sc (zc ) : important data for the model are the shares of each country’s output of
each product that are consumed domestically. Production data for US manufacturing
sectors is from the NBER Productivity Database and was merged with US import
and export data at the 4-digit SIC level produced by Feenstra (1996, 1997). US
consumption of US output by industry is calculated as US shipments less US exports.
The estimates of sc (zc ) for the US from the SIC data are applied to every 6-digit
HS code that falls within a 4-digit SIC code. Where a 6-digit HS code maps into
more than one SIC code, I use 10-digit HS import data for the US to select the SIC
code that matches the largest amount of trade at the 6-digit level.13 The equivalent
production, import and export data for US non-manufacturing sectors and for Canada
and Mexico at the 2-4-digit ISIC level (depending on product) came from the OECD’s
STAN database and the estimates of sc (zc ) are mapped into HS 6-digit codes using
a concordance provided by Mary Amiti of the IMF. sc (zc ) for other countries is
estimated simply as the share of each country’s GDP that is not exported to North
America (other countries are combined into the “ROW”).

      sc0 (zc ) : the share of each country’s output of each product that is consumed by
other countries is calculated using trade data and the estimates of sc (zc ). sc0 (zc ) is
simply the share of each product that is exported multiplied by the share of exports
that go to country c0 :


                                                     qc0 t (zc )
                                     (1 − sc (zc )) P                                     (35)
                                                       qc0 t (zc )
                                                    c0 6=c


 13
      The 10-digit import data for the US includes a concordance to (import based) SIC.



                                                  31
    The export shares come from the World Bank’s WITS database at the HS 6-digit
level.

    Production at the HS 6-digit level is estimated as exports at the HS 6-digit level
from the WITS database divided by the coarser estimates of the share of each product
that is exported (1 − sc (zc )). Consumption at the HS 6-digit level is imports minus
exports from the WITS database plus estimated production.

    bc (z) : expenditure weights in the utility functions for each country or country
group, bc (z), is simply the consumption in country c of each HS 6-digit product
(regardless of source) divided by the GDP of that country from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators.

    I set the value of σ at 6 which is close to the median estimate. Higher values of σ
lead to a greater trade volume response but have a small eﬀect on welfare estimates.
The inverse supply elasticity η is taken from the more precisely estimated values in
Table 4 of 0.29.

    D. Caveat on Model Results for Mexico

    Mexican tariﬀ schedules overstate tariﬀ collection due to duty exemptions for
Maquiladoras. The model therefore overpredicts the decline in Mexican tariﬀ revenues
(which according to the World Bank World Development Indicators were just over 1
percent of GDP in 1993), overpredicts the decline in the Mexican price index, and
overpredicts the increase in the real value of pre-NAFTA output. Without detailed
applied tariﬀ data this can only be addressed with an ad-hoc adjustment to Mexican
tariﬀs which I have not made. The impact of this caveat on other countries is very
limited. The change in trade resulting from NAFTA is also overstated, but by less
since much of the increase in trade is driven by US tariﬀ reductions which are much
more accurately measured.




                                          32
References
 [1] Armington P. (1969), “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place
    of Production”, IMF Staﬀ Papers 16 (March), pp.159-78.
 [2] Arndt, Sven W. (2003), “Global Production Sharing Networks and Regional
    Integration”, mimeo, Claremont McKenna College.
 [3] Bagwell K. and R. Staiger (1999), “An Economic Theory of GATT”, American
    Economic Review, Vol. 89, No.1, pp.215-248.
 [4] Baldwin R. (1996), “A Domino Theory of Regionalism”, in Baldwin R., P. Haa-
    paranta and J. Kiander eds., Expanding the Membership of the EU, Cambridge
    University Press.
 [5] Baldwin R.E. and A. J. Venables (1995), “Regional Economic Integration”, in
    Grossman G.M. and K. Rogoﬀ eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol-
    ume 3, North-Holland.
 [6] Brown D.K., A.V. Deardorﬀ and R.M. Stern (1995), “Estimates of a North
    American Free Trade Agreement”, in Kehoe P.J. and Kehoe T.J. (eds.), Modeling
    North American Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
 [7] Chang, Won and L. Alan Winters (2002), “How Regional Blocs Aﬀect Excluded
    Countries: The Price Eﬀects of MERCOSUR”, American Economic Review,
    92(4), pp.889-904.
 [8] Clausing K. A. (2001), “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in the Canada-
    United States Free Trade Agreement”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 34(3),
    August 2001, pp.677-696.
 [9] Cox D.J. (1995), “An Applied General Equilibrium Analysis of NAFTA’s Impact
    on Canada”, in Kehoe P.J. and Kehoe T.J. (eds.), Modeling North American
    Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[10] Deardorﬀ A. and R. Stern (1994), “Multilateral Trade Negotiations and Pref-
    erential Trading Arrangements” in A. Deardorﬀ and R. Stern (eds), Analytical
    and Negotiating Issues in the Global Trading System, The University of Michigan
    Press, Ann Arbor.
[11] Evans, Carolyn L. and James Harrigan (2003); “Tight Clothing: How the MFA
    Aﬀects Asian Apparel Exports”, NBER Working Paper No. 10250, January 2003.
[12] Feenstra Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott (2002); “U.S. Imports,
    Exports, and Tariﬀ Data, 1989-2001”, NBER Working Paper No. 9387, December


                                        33
    2002.
[13] Frankel J., E. Stein and S. Wei (1996), “Improving the Design of Regional Trade
    Agreements. Regional Trading Arrangements: Natural or Supernatural?”, AEA
    Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 86, No. 2, pp.52-56.
[14] Fukao K., T. Okubo, and R.M Stern (2003), “An Econometric Analysis of Trade
    Diversion under NAFTA”, North American Journal of Economics and Finance,
    14(1), March 2003, pp.3-24.
[15] Garces-Diaz D. (2001), “Was NAFTA Behind the Mexican Export Boom (1994-
    2000)?”, mimeo (on SSRN), Banco de Mexico, February.
[16] Gould D. (1998), “Has NAFTA Changed North American Trade?”, Federal Re-
    serve Bank of Dallas Economic Review, First Quarter, pp.12-22.
[17] Head K. and J. Ries (1999), “Rationalization eﬀects of tariﬀ reductions”, Journal
    of International Economics, Vol. 47(2), pp.295—320.
[18] Heckman J. (1976), “The common structure of statistical models of truncation,
    sample selection, and limited dependent variables and a simple estimator for such
    models”, The Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, Vol. 5, pp.475-492.
[19] Hufbauer G. and J. Schott (1993), NAFTA: An Assessment, (Washington DC,
    Institute for International Economics).
[20] Hummels D. (1999), “Have International Trade Costs Declined?”, mimeo.
[21] Kehoe P.J. and Kehoe T.J. (1995), “Capturing NAFTA’s Impact with Applied
    General Equilibrium Models”, in Kehoe P.J. and Kehoe T.J. (ed.), Modeling
    North American Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[22] Kehoe, Timothy J. and Kim J. Ruhl (2002), “How important is the New Goods
    Margin in International Trade?”, mimeo, University of Minnesota, October 2002.
[23] Kemp M. and H. Wan (1976), “An Elementary Proposition Concerning the For-
    mation of Customs Unions”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 6, pp.95-
    97.
[24] Krueger A. (1999), “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion Under NAFTA”, NBER
    Working Paper No. 7429.
[25] Krueger A. (2000), “NAFTA’s Eﬀects: A Preliminary Assessment”, World Econ-
    omy, Vol. 23, No.6, pp.761-75.
[26] Levy P. (1997), “A Political-Economic Analysis of Free-Trade Agreements”,
    American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No.4, pp.506-519.
[27] Limao Nuno (2003), “Preferential Trade Agreements as Stumbling Blocks for

                                         34
    Multilateral Trade Liberalization: Evidence for the U.S.”, mimeo, University of
    Maryland, June 2003.
[28] Sobarzo H.E. (1995), “A General Equilibrium Analysis of the Gains from NAFTA
    for the Mexican Economy”, in Kehoe P.J. and Kehoe T.J. (eds.), Modeling North
    American Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
[29] Trefler D. (2001), “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agree-
    ment”, mimeo (on SSRN), University of Toronto, April.
[30] Viner J. (1950), The Customs Union Issue, (New York: Carnegie Endowment).
[31] Wall H. (2000), “NAFTA and the Geography of North American Trade”, mimeo
    (on SSRN), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, November.
[32] Yeats A. (1997), “Does Mercosur’s Trade Performance Raise Concerns about the
    Eﬀects of Regional Trade Arrangements?”, World Bank Policy Research Working
    Paper No. 1729.
[33] Oﬃce of the United States Trade Representative (1999), U.S. Generalized System
    of Preferences Guidebook, Executive Oﬃce of the President, Washington D.C.,
    March 1999.




                                        35
                                                             Figure 1: Preferential Trade Agreements in Force by Date Notified
                                                                                                          Source: World Trade Organization
                                                            200
                                                            180
                                                            160
                                                            140
                                           PTA's in Force




                                                            120
                                                            100
                                                            80
                                                            60
                                                            40
                                                            20
                                                             0
                                                              1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003
                                                                                     Year

                                                              Figure 2: Mexico’s and Canada’s Share of US Imports 1980-2000
                                                0.25                                                                                                                                                             0.10
Simple Average of Share of US Imports by




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Simple Average of Share of US Imports by
                                                                        Canada (Left Scale)
    Commodity (3592 commodities)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Commodity (3592 commodities)
                                                0.20                                                                                                                                                             0.08



                                                0.15                                                                                                                                                             0.06



                                                0.10                                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                                                                   Mexico (Right Scale)


                                                0.05                                                                                                                                                             0.02



                                                0.00                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                              1980
                                                                     1981
                                                                            1982
                                                                                   1983
                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                               1987
                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                    Figure 3A: Mexico’s Share of US Imports 1989-2000
                                            0.12




Simple Average of Share of US Imports by
                                            0.10



                                            0.08



              Commodity                     0.06



                                            0.04


                                                                                             No new US tariff preference (2629 commodities)
                                            0.02
                                                                                             New US tariff preference >0% and < 10% (1556 commodities)
                                                                                             New US tariff preference >= 10% (298 commodities)

                                            0.00
                                                    1989    1990   1991   1992    1993      1994      1995      1996        1997   1998       1999   2000
                                                                                                 Year

                                                    Figure 3B: Mexico’s Share of EU Imports 1989-2000

                                            0.008
Simple Average of Share of EU Imports by




                                            0.006
              Commodity




                                            0.004




                                            0.002

                                                                           No new US tariff preference (2629 commodities)
                                                                           New US tariff preference >0% and < 10% (1556 commodities)
                                                                           New US tariff preference >= 10% (298 commodities)

                                            0.000
                                                     1989   1990   1991   1992     1993      1994     1995      1996        1997   1998       1999   2000
                                                                                                 Year

                                                    Figure 3C: Mexico’s Share of US Imports 1980-2000
                                            0.14
                                                                                  1986-2000 GATT/WTO                           1994-2000 NAFTA
 Simple Average of Share of US Imports by




                                            0.12


                                            0.10
               Commodity




                                            0.08


                                            0.06


                                            0.04


                                            0.02                                                    No new tariff preference (2089 commodities)
                                                                                                    New tariff preference >0% and < 10% (1337 commodities)
                                                                                                    New tariff preference >= 10% (166 commodities)
                                            0.00
                                                 80
                                                 81
                                                 82
                                                 83
                                                 84
                                                 85
                                                 86
                                                 87
                                                 88
                                                 89
                                                 90
                                                 91
                                                 92
                                                 93
                                                 94
                                                 95
                                                 96
                                                 97
                                                 98
                                                 99
                                                 00
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              19
                                              20




                                                                                                  Year
                                                 Figure 4A: Canada’s Share of US Imports 1988-2000
                                               0.25




Simple Average of Share of US Imports by
                                               0.20



                                               0.15


              Commodity
                                               0.10



                                               0.05
                                                                                                   No new US tariff preference (1551 commodities)
                                                                                                   New US tariff preference >0% and < 10% (2540 commodities)
                                                                                                   New US tariff preference >= 10% (392 commodities)
                                               0.00
                                                      1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                                                                                    Year

                                                 Figure 4B: Canada’s Share of EU Imports 1988-2000

                                                           No new US tariff preference (1551 commodities)
    Simple Average of Share of EU Imports by




                                               0.04        New US tariff preference >0% and < 10% (2540 commodities)
                                                           New US tariff preference >= 10% (392 commodities)




                                               0.03
                  Commodity




                                               0.02




                                               0.01




                                               0.00
                                                      1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
                                                                                    Year

                                                 Figure 4C: Canada’s Share of US Imports 1980-2000
                                               0.35
  Simple Average of Share of US Imports by




                                               0.30


                                               0.25
                Commodity




                                               0.20


                                               0.15


                                               0.10


                                               0.05                                                         No new tariff preference (1286 commodities)
                                                                                                            New tariff preference >0% and < 10% (2092 commodities)
                                                                                                            New tariff preference >= 10% (214 commodities)
                                               0.00
                                                   80
                                                   81
                                                   82
                                                   83
                                                   84
                                                   85
                                                   86
                                                   87
                                                   88
                                                   89
                                                   90
                                                   91
                                                   92
                                                   93
                                                   94
                                                   95
                                                   96
                                                   97
                                                   98
                                                   99
                                                   00
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 19
                                                 20




                                                                                                      Year
                                                         Figure 5A: US Import Tariffs in 2000




                             Figure 5B: US Tariff Preferences for Canadian and Mexican Goods in 2000

                             4000


                             3500
                                                                                                                  Canada
                                                                                                                  Mexico
                             3000
Number of HTS8 Commodities




                             2500


                             2000


                             1500


                             1000


                              500


                                0
                                    0   1   2   3    4    5   6   7    8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16    17   18   19   20 >20
                                                    MFN Tariff Rate (%) Less Tariff on Imports from Canada, Mexico
                                                                 Figure 6: Highly Protected Sectors
                             (A) Effect of CUSFTA/NAFTA                                       (B) Effect of Unilateral Liberalization
                                                 Highly Protected US Sectors                                                                  Highly Protected US Sectors
                  80




                                                                                                               40
 Percent of Highly Protected Products




                                                                                              Percent of Highly Protected Products
                              60




                                                                                                                           30
                  40




                                                                                                               20
      20




                                                                                                   10
                  0




                                                                                                               0
                                        -10             -5                   0           5                                           -20      -15             -10                -5         0
                                                Percentage Change in Real Supply Price                                                       Percentage Change in Real Supply Price




                                              Highly Protected Canadian Sectors                                                            Highly Protected Canadian Sectors
                  40




                                                                                                               25
 Percent of Highly Protected Products




                                                                                              Percent of Highly Protected Products
                                                                                                                             20
                              30




                                                                                                                    15
                  20




                                                                                                          10
      10




                                                                                                 5
                  0




                                                                                                               0




                                        -10       -5              0                 5    10                                          -20     -15            -10               -5        0
                                                Percentage Change in Real Supply Price                                                       Percentage Change in Real Supply Price




                                              Highly Protected Mexican Sectors                                                             Highly Protected Mexican Sectors
                  30




                                                                                                               40
 Percent of Highly Protected Products




                                                                                              Percent of Highly Protected Products
                                                                                                                           30
                          20




                                                                                                               20
          10




                                                                                                   10
                  0




                                                                                                               0




                                        -10       -5              0                 5    10                                          -20   -15          -10           -5            0       5
                                                Percentage Change in Real Supply Price                                                       Percentage Change in Real Supply Price




Notes: ‘Unilateral Liberalization’ means the dropping of all tariffs by the relevant country. ‘Real Supply Price’
is the output price exclusive of tariffs and transport costs divided by the aggregate price index for that country.
Table 1: Proportion of HTS 8-digit Tariff Variation Captured by Broader Classifications
    Classification             MFN Tariff            Canada          Mexico
                                                   Preference       Preference
    HS-2 (97 categories)           0.387              0.389           0.370
    HS-4 (1258 categories)         0.557              0.573           0.522
    HS-6 (5115 categories)         0.684              0.705           0.651
 Notes: Table 1 reports the percentages of the variance in US MFN and preferential tariffs at the HTS 8-digit level
(10082 products) for the year 1999 that are captured by broader product classifications. Each tariff measure is
regressed on full sets of dummy variables for the broader classifications. The R-squared from each regression is
reported in Table 1. The 25 products with MFN tariffs above 50 percent are excluded from the calculations.
 Table 2A: Tariff Preferences and Relative Prices of US Imports from Canada and Mexico
 Year 1999 Tariff           Median Log Relative Price of US                Median Log Relative Price of US
 Preference (%)                  Imports from Canada                             Imports from Mexico
                            1989    1993     1999       N                   1989    1993     1999      N
 0                          0.082 0.088 0.168           1457               -0.094 0.014 -0.059          663
 (0,10]                     0.154 0.175 0.201           2496               -0.121 -0.033 0.007        1327
 >10                        0.423 0.533 0.602            521               -0.127 0.005 -0.057          234
 Notes: For each HTS10-digit product the FOB unit price of US imports from Canada, Mexico and the aggregate
 of all other countries has been calculated for the years 1989, 1993 and 1999. The log price of imports from
 Canada and Mexico relative to imports from all other countries is then calculated. The median log relative price is
 then tabulated for 3 arbitrary ranges of tariff preference given by the US to imports from Canada and Mexico.
 Products are only included if they are imported in all three years. The number of products for each calculation is
 reported.



Table 2B: Tariff Preferences and Relative Prices of Canadian Imports from US and Mexico
 Year 1999 Tariff             Median Log Relative Price of                   Median Log Relative Price of
 Preference (%)                 Canadian Imports from US                    Canadian Imports from Mexico
                            1989     1993    1999       N                   1989   1993     1999       N
 0                          -0.065 -0.036 -0.001        1257               -0.048 -0.011 0.016           76
 (0,10]                      0.018 0.012 0.039          1228               -0.182 0.203 0.126          136
 >10                         0.338 0.391 0.383           706               -0.245 0.269 0.207            36
 Notes: For each HTS10-digit product the FOB unit price of Canadian imports from the US, Mexico and the
 aggregate of all other countries has been calculated for the years 1989, 1993 and 1999. The log price of imports
 from the US and Mexico relative to imports from all other countries is then calculated. The median log relative
 price is then tabulated for 3 arbitrary ranges of tariff preference given by Canada to imports from the US and
 Mexico. Products are only included if they are imported in all three years. The number of products for each
 calculation is reported.



 Table 2C: Tariff Preferences and Relative Prices of Mexican Imports from US and Canada
 Year 1999 Tariff            Median Log Relative Price of                    Median Log Relative Price of
 Preference (%)                 Mexican Imports from US                      Mexican Imports from Canada
                            1989     1993    1999      N                    1989    1993    1999       N
 [0,10]                       -     -0.226 -0.263      1547                   -     0.002 0.105        640
 (10,20]                      -     -0.257 -0.441      2081                   -     0.098 0.037        813
 >20                          -     -0.076 0.000        709                   -     0.426 0.464        232
 Notes: For each HS 6-digit product the FOB unit price of Mexican imports from the US, Canada, and the
 aggregate of all other countries has been calculated for the years 1993 and 1999 (1989 data being unavailable).
 The log price of imports from the US and Canada relative to imports from all other countries is then calculated.
 The median log relative price is then tabulated for 3 arbitrary ranges of tariff preference given by Mexico to
 imports from the US and Canada. These tariff ranges differ from Tables 2A and 2B because there are almost no
 observations where the preference is zero. Products are only included if they are imported in both years. The
 number of products for each calculation is reported.
   Table 3A: Substitution Elasticity Estimates based on US and EU Imports from Canada
                           and Control Countries, 1989-1999
                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
       σ             6.52
                    (0.80)
                                 6.68
                                (0.90)
                                             9.38
                                            (0.88)
                                                         8.73
                                                        (1.06)
                                                                     6.25
                                                                    (0.77)
                                                                                 6.30
                                                                                (0.85)
                                                                                             8.49
                                                                                            (0.84)
                                                                                                         7.72
                                                                                                        (0.97)
  Commodity
                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Fixed Effects
  Year Fixed
                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Effects
  Control
                  Table A1    Table A1     Table A1 Table A1         All         All          All        All
  Countries
                   Schedule; Schedule; Applied; Applied; Schedule; Schedule; Applied; Applied;
  Tariff
                     import       simple       import     simple     import        simple      import      simple
  Measure
                   weighted      average     weighted average weighted            average     weighted average
  N                  35537        35533        35536      35532       36089        36085       36088       36084
  Commodities         4631         4631         4631       4631       4694          4694        4694        4694
Notes: Dependent variable is ln(US imports from Canada/US imports from control countries) - ln(EU12 imports
from Canada/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity. The substitution elasticity
estimate comes from regressions of this variable on a measure of the tariff preference that the US gives to goods
of Canadian origin. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were members of the EU in 1989. The “Table A1”
control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a control, this includes all
countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA countries. Robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in parentheses. There is a small difference between the number of
observations in columns for the same set of control countries because a small number of observations with
extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where ln(1+preference) is greater than 0.5) are discarded.



    Table 3B: Substitution Elasticity Estimates based on US and EU Imports from Mexico
                            and Control Countries, 1989-1999
                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
       σ             9.90
                    (1.02)
                                10.15
                                (1.15)
                                            10.90
                                            (1.19)
                                                         9.59
                                                        (1.25)
                                                                     9.88
                                                                    (1.00)
                                                                                10.04
                                                                                (1.08)
                                                                                            10.88
                                                                                            (1.16)
                                                                                                         9.61
                                                                                                        (1.20)
  Commodity
                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Fixed Effects
  Year Fixed
                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
  Effects
  Control
                  Table A1    Table A1     Table A1 Table A1         All         All          All        All
  Countries
                   Schedule; Schedule; Applied; Applied; Schedule; Schedule; Applied; Applied;
  Tariff
                     import       simple      import      simple     import        simple      import      simple
  Measure
                   weighted      average     weighted average weighted            average     weighted average
  N                  19335        19335        19334      19333       19414        19414       19413       19412
  Commodities         3415         3415         3415       3415       3427          3427        3427        3427
Notes: Dependent variable is ln(US imports from Mexico/US imports from control countries) - ln(EU12 imports
from Mexico/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity. The substitution elasticity
estimate comes from regressions of this variable on a measure of the tariff preference that the US gives to goods
of Mexican origin. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were members of the EU in 1989. The “Table A1”
control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a control, this includes all
countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA countries. Robust standard errors
adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in parentheses. There is a small difference between the number of
observations in columns for the same set of control countries because a small number of observations with
extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where ln(1+preference) is greater than 0.5) are discarded.
  Table 3C: Substitution Elasticity Estimates based on Canadian and EU Imports from USA
                            and Control Countries, 1989-1999
                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
     σ              5.51
                   (0.47)
                                 5.07
                                (0.45)
                                             2.99
                                            (0.44)
                                                          2.84
                                                         (0.46)
                                                                       5.31
                                                                      (0.42)
                                                                                    4.96
                                                                                   (0.41)
                                                                                                 3.09
                                                                                                (0.39)
                                                                                                              2.95
                                                                                                             (0.39)
Commodity
                    Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Fixed Effects
Year Fixed
                    Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Effects
Control
                 Table A1     Table A1     Table A1     Table A1        All          All          All          All
Countries
                   Applied;      Applied; Schedule; Schedule; Applied;             Applied; Schedule; Schedule;
Tariff
                    import        simple     import       simple       import       simple        import      simple
Measure
                   weighted      average weighted         average    weighted      average      weighted      average
N                   44280         44277       44278        44278       49038        49035         49038        49038
Commodities          5150          5150        5150        5150         5242         5242          5242        5242
 Notes: Dependent variable is ln(Canadian imports from US/Canadian imports from control countries) - ln(EU12
 imports from US/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity. The substitution
 elasticity estimate comes from regressions of this variable on a measure of the tariff preference that Canada gives
 to goods of US origin. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were members of the EU in 1989. The “Table A1”
 control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a control, this includes all
 countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA countries. Robust standard errors
 adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in parentheses. There is a small difference between the number of
 observations in columns for the same set of control countries because a small number of observations with
 extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where ln(1+preference) is greater than 0.5) are discarded.



      Table 3D: Substitution Elasticity Estimates based on Canadian and EU Imports from
                           Mexico and Control Countries, 1989-1999
                     (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
       σ            8.06
                   (1.14)
                                  7.85
                                 (1.16)
                                               6.80
                                              (1.24)
                                                           7.32
                                                          (1.31)
                                                                        7.64
                                                                       (1.10)
                                                                                    7.20
                                                                                   (1.14)
                                                                                                6.63
                                                                                               (1.19)
                                                                                                            7.02
                                                                                                           (1.28)
 Commodity
                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Fixed Effects
 Year Fixed
                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Effects
 Control
                  Table A1     Table A1     Table A1     Table A1       All         All         All          All
 Countries
                    Applied;     Applied;      Schedule; Schedule; Applied; Applied; Schedule; Schedule;
 Tariff
                     import        simple       import       simple       import      simple     import       simple
 Measure
                    weighted      average      weighted     average     weighted average weighted            average
  N                  13137         13137        13139        13139        13219       13219       13220       13220
  Commodities         2674          2674         2674         2674         2695        2695       2695         2695
 Notes: Dependent variable is ln(Canadian imports from Mexico/Canadian imports from control countries) -
 ln(EU12 imports from Mexico/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity. The
 substitution elasticity estimate comes from regressions of this variable on a measure of the tariff preference that
 Canada gives to goods of Mexican origin. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were members of the EU in
 1989. The “Table A1” control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a
 control, this includes all countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA
 countries. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in parentheses. There is a small
 difference between the number of observations in columns for the same set of control countries because a small
 number of observations with extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where ln(1+preference) is greater
 than 0.5) are discarded.
  Table 3E: Substitution Elasticity Estimates based on Mexican and EU Imports from USA,
                         Canada and Control Countries, 1990-1999
                                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                    σ                    2.50
                                        (0.48)
                                                          1.98
                                                         (0.41)
                                                                           0.77
                                                                          (0.88)
                                                                                            0.56
                                                                                           (0.82)
        Commodity
                                         Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
        Fixed Effects
        Year Fixed
                                         Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
        Effects
        Imports from
                                         USA              USA             Canada           Canada
        USA/Canada
        Control
                                       Table A1            All           Table A1            All
        Countries
                                           Schedule;          Schedule;        Schedule;          Schedule;
        Tariff Measure                      simple              simple           simple            simple
                                            average            average          average            average
         N                                   38002              42457            19692              20314
         Commodities                          4684               4844             3430               3524
Notes: Dependent variable in columns 1-2 is ln(Mexican imports from US/Mexican imports from control
countries) - ln(EU12 imports from US/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity.
Dependent variable in columns 3-4 is ln(Mexican imports from Canada/Mexican imports from control countries) -
ln(EU12 imports from Canada/EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity. The
substitution elasticity estimate comes from regressions of the dependent variable on a measure of the tariff
preference that Mexico gives to goods of US or Canadian origin. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were
members of the EU in 1989. The “Table A1” control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All”
countries are used as a control, this includes all countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the
exception of NAFTA countries. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in
parentheses. A small number of observations with extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where
ln(1+preference) is greater than 0.5) are discarded.
                        Table 4: Inverse Supply Elasticity Estimates 1989-1999
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                IV               IV               IV              OLS
                       η                       0.29
                                              (0.02)
                                                                0.29
                                                               (0.02)
                                                                                 0.22
                                                                                (0.04)
                                                                                                 -0.31
                                                                                                 (0.00)
        Commodity x Country
                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
        Fixed Effects
        Year x Country
                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
        Fixed Effects
        Estimation Technique                      IV               IV               IV             OLS
        Instruments (see notes)                  Set 1            Set 2           Set 3              -
        N                                     1,099,097        1,099,097        1,099,097       1,099,097
Notes: the dependent variable is the observed FOB unit price of each country’s exports in HS 10-digit US import
data. This is regressed on an estimate of the total quantity produced of each product by each exporting country.
That quantity estimate is produced using: the quantity exported to the US at the 10-digit level; the share of each
country’s exports at the HS 6-digit level that are exported to the US; and the share of each country’s GDP that is
exported. Four US tariff measures are used as instruments for the (estimated) quantity: US tariff rates on exports
from the exporting country, Canada, Mexico, and all other countries. Instrument “Set 1” includes all these tariffs;
“Set 2” only includes the tariff on exports from the exporting country; and “Set 3” includes the tariffs on exports
from Canada, Mexico, and all other countries. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                    Table 5: Trade Diversion inferred from North American and EU Imports from Control Countries (c’)
                     (1)           (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)                 (7)               (8)
Trade               2.84          2.96                3.37               3.87              1.44              1.33                2.23              2.11
Diversion         {0.000}        {0.000}            {0.000}            {0.000}           {0.004}            {0.009}            {0.000}           {0.000}
Tariff
ln τUS-Can          0.06           0.34               0.49              0.40              -0.71              -0.69              0.24               0.06
                   (0.93)         (0.82)             (0.54)            (0.53)             (0.75)             (0.81)            (0.37)             (0.42)
ln τUS-Mex          1.27           1.30               1.44              1.38               1.26               1.41              0.90               0.98
                   (0.60)         (0.57)             (0.44)            (0.45)             (0.49)             (0.48)            (0.34)             (0.33)
ln τCan-US          2.02           1.91               1.26              1.75               0.19               0.11              0.26               0.44
                   (0.52)         (0.54)             (0.45)            (0.47)             (0.35)             (0.37)            (0.34)             (0.30)
ln τCan-Mex        -0.95          -1.00              -0.30             -0.07               0.33               0.08              0.42               0.38
                   (0.42)         (0.44)             (0.29)            (0.57)             (0.32)             (0.30)            (0.24)             (0.23)
ln τMex-US         -1.32          -1.31              -1.10             -1.21              -0.61              -0.61             -0.48              -0.54
                   (0.55)         (0.54)             (0.50)            (0.51)             (0.42)             (0.41)            (0.38)             (0.38)
ln τMex-Can         1.76           1.71               1.57              1.61               0.98               1.03              0.89               0.96
                   (0.55)         (0.55)             (0.51)            (0.52)             (0.42)             (0.43)            (0.38)             (0.39)
MFN Tariffs         Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Commodity
                    Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Fixed Effects
Year Fixed
                    Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Effects
Control
                  Table A1       Table A1          Table A1           Table A1              All               All                All               All
Countries
                 Schedule;       Schedule;            Applied;          Applied;          Schedule;         Schedule;          Applied;          Applied;
Tariff
                   import          simple              import             simple           import             simple            import            simple
Measure
                  weighted        average            weighted            average          weighted           average           weighted          average
N                   42630          42454               42734              42447             43756             43633              43930            43626
Commodities          5312           5313                5321               5313             5349               5345              5354              5345
Notes: Dependent variable is ln(North American imports from control countries) - ln(EU12 imports from control countries) by year and HS 6-digit commodity, where
North America is the sum of the US, Canada and Mexico. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were members of the EU in 1989. The dependent variable is
regressed on measures of the tariffs that North American countries levy on goods from within North America and on the MFN tariffs of the US, Canada, Mexico and
the EU. For example, τUS-Can is the tariff that the US levies on goods from Canada plus 1. The first row “Trade Diversion” reports the sum of the coefficients on tariffs
levied by North American countries on imports from their NAFTA partners (the six coefficients reported below) – the p-value for the test that this sum is zero is
reported in braces. A significant positive number is evidence of trade diversion resulting from preferential tariffs. The “Table A1” control countries are listed in
Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a control, this includes all countries (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA
countries. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering on each commodity are in parentheses. There is a small difference between the number of observations in
columns for the same set of control countries because a small number of observations with extreme values of the calculated tariff (where ln(1+tariff) exceeds 0.5) are
discarded. Data on actual duties collected is not available for Mexico so regressions always include the Mexican tariff schedule. Since Mexican tariffs on US and
Canadian goods are very similar the separate effects of these two tariffs may difficult to empirically disentangle.
Table 6: Model Results
Change in Welfare due to CUSFTA (% of GDP)
                    Real Value of       Real Tariff
Country            Existing Output       Revenue                                    Welfare
USA                      0.01              -0.02                                     -0.01
Canada                   0.28              -0.28                                      0.00
Mexico                   0.00               0.00                                      0.00
Rest of World            0.00                 -                                       0.00
See text for an explanation of the decomposition

Change in Welfare due to NAFTA (% of GDP)
                    Real Value of       Real Tariff
Country            Existing Output       Revenue                                    Welfare
USA                      0.03              -0.03                                      0.00
Canada                   0.02              -0.02                                      0.00
Mexico*                  1.09              -1.39                                     -0.30
Rest of World            0.00                -                                        0.00
*See Appendix for a caveat on Mexican results.
See text for an explanation of the decomposition.

Change In Bilateral Trade Due to CUSFTA (billions 1988 USD \ %)
Partners                USA           Canada             Mexico                                                ROW
USA                                    5.35%              0.08%                                                0.11%
Canada                  8.32                             -2.38%                                               -0.49%
Mexico                  0.04           -0.05                                                                   0.01%
ROW                     0.64           -0.32               0.00
Note: Elements below principal diagonal are in billions of 1988 USD, other elements are percentage changes.


Change In Bilateral Trade Due to NAFTA (billions 1993 USD \ %)
Partners                USA           Canada            Mexico                                                 ROW
USA                                   -0.17%            23.38%                                                -0.34%
Canada                 -0.34                            23.74%                                                -0.49%
Mexico                 18.47            0.81                                                                  -9.58%
ROW                    -2.48            -0.32            -1.97
Note: Elements below principal diagonal are in billions of 1993 USD, other elements are percentage changes.
                                    Appendix Table 1
Countries with no substantial change in preferential trade relations with the EU
Afghanistan                   Gabon                          Norfolk Is
Angola                        Gambia                         North Korea
Antigua Barbuda               Ghana                          Norway
Argentina                     Greenland                      Oman
Aruba                         Grenada Is                     Pakistan
Australia                     Guatemala                      Palau
Bahamas                       Guinea                         Panama
Bahrain                       Guinea-Bissau                  Papua New Guin
Bangladesh                    Guyana                         Paraguay
Barbados                      Haiti                          Peru
Belize                        Honduras                       Philippines
Benin                         Hong Kong                      Pitcairn Is
Bermuda                       India                          Qatar
Bhutan                        Indonesia                      Rwanda
Bolivia                       Iran                           Samoa
Botswana                      Jamaica                        Saudi Arabia
Brazil                        Japan                          Senegal
Brunei                        Kenya                          Seychelles
Burkina Faso                  Kiribati                       Sierra Leone
Burundi                       Korea                          Singapore
Cambodia                      Laos                           Solomon Is
Cameroon                      Lesotho                        Somalia
Cape Verde                    Liberia                        Sri Lanka
Cayman Is                     Libya                          St Kitts-Nevis
Cen African Rep               Macao                          St Lucia Is
Chad                          Madagascar                     St Vinc & Gren
Chile                         Malawi                         Sudan
China                         Malaysia                       Suriname
Christmas Is                  Maldive Is                     Swaziland
Cocos Is                      Mali                           Switzerland
Colombia                      Marshall Is                    Taiwan
Comoros                       Mauritania                     Tanzania
Congo (DROC)                  Mauritius                      Thailand
Congo (ROC)                   Mongolia                       Togo
Cook Is                       Montserrat Is                  Tonga
Costa Rica                    Mozambique                     Trin & Tobago
Cote d'Ivoire                 Namibia                        Tuvalu
Cuba                          Nauru                          Uganda
Djibouti                      Nepal                          United Arab Em
Dominica Is                   Netherlands Ant                Uruguay
Dominican Rep                 New Caledonia                  Venezuela
Ecuador                       New Zealand                    Vietnam
El Salvador                   Nicaragua                      Yemen
Eq Guinea                     Niger                          Zambia
Ethiopia                      Nigeria                        Zimbabwe
Fiji                          Niue
                    Appendix Table 2: Substitution Elasticity Estimates when Control Countries are not Aggregated, 1989-1999
                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)         (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)
    Importing          USA           USA          USA          USA        Canada       Canada       Canada        Canada       Mexico       Mexico       Mexico       Mexico
     Country
        σ               5.50         5.26         7.83         6.72         3.23         3.12         5.01         4.80         2.80         2.50         1.99         2.16
                       (0.25)       (0.17)       (0.31)       (0.21)       (0.21)       (0.13)       (0.36)       (0.24)       (0.27)       (0.17)       (0.42)       (0.29)
Commodity x
Control Country         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Fixed Effects
Year Fixed
                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Effects
Preferred Country      Canada      Canada       Mexico       Mexico         USA          USA         Mexico      Mexico          USA          USA        Canada       Canada
Control Countries     Table A1       All       Table A1        All       Table A1         All       Table A1       All        Table A1         All      Table A1         All
                      Applied;     Applied;    Applied;      Applied;    Applied;      Applied;     Applied;     Applied;     Schedule;    Schedule;    Schedule;    Schedule;
Tariff Measure          import      import      import        import       import       import        import      import        simple       simple       simple       simple
                      weighted     weighted    weighted      weighted    weighted      weighted     weighted     weighted      average      average      average      average
N                      331993      743763       241892       514474       269207       589519        150356      306060        169278       377015       128734       277266
Commodities x           62607      137520        51771       109596        56578       122129         39337       81109         44087        94176        36392        76180
Control Countries
    Notes: Dependent variable is ln(importing country imports from preferred country/importing country imports from control country) - ln(EU12 imports from preferred
    country/EU12 imports from control country) by year and HS 6-digit commodity and control country. The substitution elasticity estimate comes from regressions of
    this variable on a measure of the tariff preference that the importing country gives to goods from the preferred country. The EU12 includes the 12 countries that were
    members of the EU in 1989. The “Table A1” control countries are listed in Appendix Table A1. When “All” countries are used as a control, this includes all countries
    (including intra-EU international trade) with the exception of NAFTA countries. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering on each commodity*Control Country
    are in parentheses. Observations with extreme values for the calculated tariff preference (where ln(1+preference) is greater than 0.5) are discarded. Mexican import
    data is only available from 1990 onwards.
