                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INCOME AND THE USE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS BY THE ELDERLY:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE NOTCH COHORTS

                                           John R. Moran
                                       Kosali Ilayperuma Simon

                                         Working Paper 11068
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11068


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




This work was supported by an unrestricted educational grant from The Merck Company Foundation, the
philanthropic arm of Merck & Co. Inc., awarded through Cornell University. We thank John Cawley, Gary
Engelhardt, Bill Evans, Don Kenkel, Jeff Kubik, Sean Nicholson and seminar participants at Cornell
University, Weill Medical College and the International Longevity Center for helpful discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2005 by John R. Moran and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Income and the Use of Prescription Drugs by the Elderly: Evidence from the Notch Cohorts
John R. Moran and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 11068
January 2005
JEL No. I12, I18

                                           ABSTRACT

We use exogenous variation in Social Security payments created by the Social Security benefits

notch to estimate how retirees' use of prescription medications responds to changes in their incomes.

In contrast to estimates obtained using ordinary least squares, instrumental variables estimates based

on the notch suggest that lower-income retirees exhibit considerable income sensitivity in their use

of prescription drugs. Our estimates are potentially useful for thinking about the health care usage

implications of any changes in transfer payments to the elderly that may occur in the future, and for

evaluating the benefits of the recently enacted Medicare prescription drug benefit.

John R. Moran
Center for Policy Research
Syracuse University
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
jmoran@maxwell.syr.edu

Kosali Ilayperuma Simon
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
106 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
kis6@cornell.edu
                                         1. Introduction

       The affordability of prescription drugs has become an increasingly important issue for the

elderly, who spend about a fifth of their income on health care1 (Crystal et al., 2000) and

consume a disproportionate share of pharmaceuticals. Using data from 1996, Moxley et al.

(2003) found that 88 percent of seniors used prescriptions medications during a 12 month period,

with 58 percent taking three or more different drugs over the course of a year. Anecdotes

concerning the use of potentially harmful cost-saving measures, such as foregoing medications,

ad hoc dosing adjustments, and “pill splitting,” have been widely reported in the popular press.

Researchers have recently begun to investigate the prevalence of such practices, as well as their

possible health consequences. Safran et. al (2002) found that nearly one in four low-income

elderly, defined as those with incomes below 200 percent of the Federal Poverty Line, failed to

fill a prescription due to cost concerns. Likewise, Piette et al. (2004) found that 16 percent of

adults over age 50 taking medications for a chronic medical condition have skipped doses due to

perceived cost pressures and, in the majority of cases, did so without conferring with their

physician.

       While the jury is still out on the health ramifications of patient-initiated reductions in

prescription drugs, several recent studies suggest that cost considerations may have resulted in

medically-harmful reductions in medication use among the elderly, particularly among those

with lower incomes. Tamblyn et al. (2001) found that the imposition of cost-sharing for

prescription drugs in the province of Quebec resulted in significant increases in hospitalizations,

nursing home admissions, and mortality among elderly Canadians who cut back on their

medication use in response to the newly-enacted cost-sharing provisions. Similarly, Heisler et al.

(2004) document a greater likelihood of declines in self-reported health among the elderly and

near elderly with cost-related medication reductions, as well as higher rates of angina, heart


                                                2
attacks and strokes among patients with cardiovascular disease who reduced their drug utilization

due to concerns about cost.

       Despite its significance for a variety of public policy issues,2 little is known about how

income influences prescription drug use. Most research has instead focused on the impact of

cost-sharing provisions in supplemental insurance plans (see, for example, Federman et al.,

2001).3 A recent exception is a study by Stuart and Grana (1998) who surveyed 4000 Medicare

beneficiaries in Pennsylvania. They found that Medicare beneficiaries with annual incomes

above $18,000 were 18 percent more likely than those with incomes below $6000 to use

prescription drugs to treat their health conditions. Similarly, Kassab et al. (1996) found that rural

Medicare beneficiaries with lower incomes were less likely to visit dentists than higher-income

beneficiaries, but that income was not correlated with hospital use. Finally, in a study of the

non-elderly employed population, Newhouse and Phelps (1974) found that the demand for health

care services rose with wage income, but not with non-wage income. They noted, however, that

an inability to fully control for health status may have biased their estimates downward due to

the possible correlation between income and health.

       A fundamental challenge faced by such studies is isolating the underlying causal

relationship between income and prescription drug use from a large number of inherently

unobservable characteristics that likely influence both an individual’s lifetime earnings (and

therefore the amount of income available after retirement), and their propensity to use

prescription medications. For instance, individuals differ in the extent to which they discount the

future, with those placing a higher value on current consumption being less likely to accumulate

financial and human capital, leaving them with lower incomes during retirement. Given their

higher discount rates, such individuals may also be less willing to forgo current consumption to




                                                 3
purchase prescription drugs, whose benefits often accrue in later years.4 Thus, absent an ability

to adjust for differences in discount rates, an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression would

produce an upward bias in the estimated relationship between prescription drug utilization and

income.

       Other unobservable factors, such as differences in risk aversion or health status, would

likely result in a downward bias. For example, more risk-averse individuals are less likely to sort

into riskier, and therefore, higher paying, jobs.5 Such individuals are also less likely to invest in

riskier assets which, on average, generate higher returns. At the same time, more risk-averse

individuals would presumably be more prone to use prescription drugs, all else equal, as a means

of safeguarding their health. Thus, failing to account for differences in risk preferences would

lead to a downward bias in the estimated relationship between income and prescription use.

Finally, because it’s difficult to fully control for differences in health using standard survey data,

a downward bias in the estimated income elasticity will occur if those in poorer health use more

prescription medications and earned (or saved) less during their working life than healthier

individuals.

       In this paper, we seek to circumvent these endogeneity problems by relying on a natural

experiment that generated large, exogenous differences in Social Security payments for

otherwise identical individuals based on their year of birth. The aptly-named Social Security

benefits “notch,” which we detail in the next section, came about as a result of an error in the

manner in which payments to beneficiaries were indexed for inflation, coupled with a subsequent

modification of the benefits formula to correct the initial error. The large differences in benefits

occasioned by these changes in the Social Security law have been used by others to estimate the

effect of income on retirement behavior (Krueger and Pischke, 1992), mortality (Snyder and




                                                  4
Evans, 2002), elderly living arrangements (Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry, forthcoming) and

elderly poverty rates (Engelhardt and Gruber, 2004).

       Using data from the 1993 wave of the Study of Asset and Health Dynamics Among the

Oldest Old (AHEAD), we find small and statistically insignificant effects of income on

prescription drug use when Social Security payments are treated as exogenous. However, when

the benefits notch is used as an instrument for Social Security income,6 a larger and statistically

significant effect of income on drug utilization emerges for households headed by beneficiaries

with less than a high school education (approximately 44 percent of our sample). We were

unable to obtain estimates for more-educated retirees because the notch instrument does not yield

a sufficiently strong first-stage relationship to permit a valid inference for these households.7

Nonetheless, it seems plausible that the large income effects we find for less-educated

households may apply more generally.

       Our estimates indicate that a $1000 increase in post-retirement income (in 1993 dollars)

for those in our low-education (lower-income) group would increase the number of prescription

medications used in a typical month by approximately 0.55 prescriptions per household.

Evaluated at the mean levels of drug utilization and Social Security income in the low-education

sample, this translates into an elasticity of roughly 1.32, suggesting that lower-income retirees

exhibit considerable income sensitivity in their use of prescription drugs. Thus, to the extent that

future retirees can be expected to behave like earlier cohorts, one would anticipate that

reductions in Social Security benefits (or other policy changes that affect retirement incomes,

such as increases in Medicare premiums) would significantly reduce prescription drug use

among lower-income beneficiaries, and possibly among those with higher incomes as well.




                                                 5
       The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief overview of the Social

Security benefits notch and how it has been used to identify income effects in other settings. In

Section 3, we discuss our data and empirical strategy. In section 4, we present our main results,

along with a series of specification checks. Concluding remarks are offered in Section 5.



                             2. The Social Security Benefits Notch

       Detailed accounts of the legislation that led to the benefits notch, as well as the specifics

of how Old Age and Survivor’s Insurance (OASI) benefits are calculated, can be found in all of

the existing papers that have made use of the notch (Krueger and Pischke, 1992; Snyder and

Evans, 2002; Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry, forthcoming). Here, we provide a general overview,

referring the reader to the papers listed above for a more in depth discussion.8

       Prior to 1972, Social Security benefits were calculated using nominal earnings histories,

truncated at the covered earnings maximum for each year. A formula was applied to each

worker’s Average Monthly Earnings (AME) to determine the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA),

which was equal to the worker’s monthly benefit if they retired at age 65; if they retired earlier,

the monthly benefit was reduced to reflect the longer period over which payments would be

made. The formula used to calculate the PIA was based on a set of earnings brackets and an

associated earnings replacement rate within each bracket that declined as higher brackets were

reached.

       To protect retirees from the effects of inflation, Congress periodically adjusted benefits,

enacting large increases in 1967, 1969, 1971 and 1972. In 1972, Congress amended the Social

Security Act to provide automatic indexation for workers who had not yet retired. The 1972

Amendments inadvertently conferred a windfall on these workers by continuing to use nominal




                                                 6
wages in the calculation of AME, while at the same time indexing the replacement rates used to

convert AME into monthly benefits. By combining a nominal wage, which grows with inflation,

with an indexed benefits formula, the 1972 Amendments created a stream of payments to future

retirees that were doubly indexed, and therefore more generous than intended.9 The high rates of

inflation that occurred shortly thereafter resulted in large increases in benefits for individuals

born after 1907, creating a potential threat to the solvency of the system.

          In 1977, in response to a rapid escalation in benefit costs brought on by this error,

Congress again amended the Social Security Act. The 1977 Amendments eliminated double

indexation by replacing the nominal wages used in the calculation of AME with an indexed

(real) wage, termed Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME). Importantly, workers near

retirement in 1977 (those born prior to 1917) retained doubly-indexed benefits under a

grandfather provision. This created a sizeable reduction in benefits for those born in 1917 or

later, relative to earlier cohorts.10 Other changes to the law, including increases in the covered

earnings maximum, led to a resumption of the upward trend in real benefits for those born after

1921.11

          Set against a gradual upward trend in benefits for successive birth cohorts, the rapid run-

up in benefits created by double indexation, coupled with the abrupt decline in benefits mandated

by the 1977 Amendments, generated what has come to be known as the Social Security “benefits

notch,” depicted in Figure 1.12 As others have noted, the differences in benefits engendered by

these changes in the Social Security Act were both large and unanticipated, making them well

suited for the analysis of income/wealth effects among the elderly.13

          The subsequent upward trend in benefits was substantially more pronounced for those

with higher incomes because an increase in the covered earnings maximum resulted in a




                                                   7
differential increase in the fraction of earnings subject to Social Security taxes for high-income

workers relative to low-income workers. Thus, when looking at real benefit levels across birth

cohorts, the size of the benefits notch created by double indexation is much larger for lower-

income retirees than for higher-income retirees due to the offsetting increase in benefits for the

high-income group arising from the higher earnings cap. Because our instrumental variables

approach compares retirees from the birth cohorts who received unusually high benefits (due to

double indexation) to retirees with more typical benefits from adjacent cohorts, any flattening of

the associated benefits notch weakens our first-stage regressions. This attenuation in the benefits

differential across our “treatment” and “control” groups precludes us from obtaining reliable

estimates for better-educated (higher-income) households, but yields a strong first-stage

relationship, and precise parameter estimates, when the roughly 44 percent of households with

less than a high-school education are considered.

       It is worth noting that there are many alternative ways of using changes in the Social

Security law to identify income effects and different researchers have adopted different

approaches. In the first paper to use the benefits notch as a source of exogenous variation in

retirement incomes, Krueger and Pischke (1992) exploited the fact that the 1977 Amendments

created a pronounced break in an otherwise upward trend in the real value of benefits to test

whether the trend toward earlier retirement was causally linked with rising Social Security

benefits. The absence of a reversal in this trend for the 1917-1921 birth cohorts, who experienced

a large, permanent reduction in their Social Security wealth relative to other retirees born

between 1901 and 1930, suggests that rising Social Security benefits most likely did not play a

causal role in hastening retirement. By contrast, Snyder and Evans (2002) focus more narrowly

on the notch years by comparing mortality rates among individuals who differed only by a




                                                8
quarter of birth; specifically, those born in the fourth quarter of 1916 (the approximate peak of

the notch) relative to those born in the first quarter of 1917. They find that, in contrast to the

conventional wisdom on the subject, an increase in income during retirement leads to higher

mortality rates, possibly due to greater activity and reduced social isolation on the part of those

with reduced incomes.

       Our approach is closest to that of Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry (forthcoming), who

compare the living arrangements of those who experienced relatively high Social Security

incomes with surrounding birth cohorts from 1900 to 1933 whose real Social Security benefits

were lower.14 They find that the propensity of elderly individuals to live in shared living

arrangements is inversely related to income, and that this effect is concentrated among lower-

income retirees, which they proxy for using differences in education. In the next section, we

describe our data and identification strategy in more detail.



                                 3. Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1. General Issues

       One practical difficulty with using the benefits notch to study prescription drug use is that

most of the variation in Social Security income induced by the notch applies to birth cohorts

centered around 1916, making it difficult to locate data sources with information on prescription

drug use that also contain a large enough sample of “notch babies” to yield reasonably precise

estimates. The only publicly-available data source (of which we are aware) that meets these and

other desirable criteria is the Study of Assets and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old

(AHEAD), a companion survey to the better known Health and Retirement Study.15 Aside from

the AHEAD data, the only other dataset that was potentially useful for our purposes was the




                                                 9
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). There were, however, two considerations which argued in

favor of using the AHEAD. First, unlike the AHEAD, the CEX is based on a random sample of

the entire population, so one would have to rely heavily on data from the late 1970s and early

1980s to capture a significant number of individuals born during the notch and surrounding

years. Second, the CEX provides data on drug expenditures (not quantities), which are often

filtered through supplemental health insurance policies of varying generosity. Thus, if two

households were to experience the same exogenous increase in Social Security income, one

might opt to purchase additional prescriptions directly, while the other might do so indirectly by

purchasing a more generous Medigap policy, or by upgrading to a policy that contains drug

coverage from one that does not. Though both households may be equally responsive to changes

in their income, one would appear to have a more elastic response if out-of-pocket spending were

used as the utilization measure. In contrast, the AHEAD asks respondents about the number of

prescription medications taken during a typical month, thereby allowing us to estimate the total

effect of an increase in Social Security income on prescription drug utilization, taking both of the

aforementioned channels into account.16

3.2. Data

       The AHEAD is a longitudinal survey of individuals aged 70 or older in 1993 and their

spouses (regardless of age). The first wave of the AHEAD, fielded in 1993, provides extensive

information on 8,222 individuals in 6,047 households on items such as their demographic

characteristics, income, wealth, employment status, health status, insurance holdings, and

utilization of medical care. Some questions were asked of only one household member, but were

designed to apply to the household as a whole, while others were asked of each household

member separately. African Americans, Hispanics, and residents of the state of Florida were




                                                10
over-sampled, with sample weights available to adjust for this and other non-representative

elements of the sample design. A response rate of just over 80 percent was obtained in the first

wave of the survey. One follow-up survey was conducted in 1995 and the surviving AHEAD

respondents were integrated into the HRS in 1998.

       Although the AHEAD is structured longitudinally, we were unable to take advantage of

this feature in our work because respondents were only asked about the number of prescription

drugs they use in the first wave of the survey. The drug questions that were repeated in later

waves either pertain to out-of-pocket spending, which is difficult to interpret for the reasons

discussed earlier, or are discrete outcomes that didn’t exhibit sufficient variation to generate

estimates with any reasonable degree of precision; e.g., whether the respondent took any

prescription medicines versus none.

3.3. Estimation Sample

       The unit of observation for our analysis is the household because it seems likely that

married or cohabiting individuals pool resources and make joint decisions when it comes to

purchasing items like prescription drugs. Approximately 46 percent of our sample is made up of

two-person households (in the vast majority of cases, a husband and a wife), with 54 percent of

households having only one member.

       Our first task is to designate a primary Social Security beneficiary for each household.

We do so for two reasons: (1) to determine which households were likely to have benefited the

most from double indexation (an indicator of which serves as our instrument); and (2) to split the

sample based on the educational attainment of the primary beneficiary, which turns out to be

important for our estimation strategy.




                                               11
       In so doing, we follow previous work in designating the male member of two-person

households as the primary Social Security beneficiary, omitting a small number of cases in

which the female is the only household member who reports receiving benefits.17 Thus, for all

households containing a male member, we use the male’s year of birth to assign the household to

either the treatment or control group.18 Households with no male members can be divided into

two categories: never-married females and widowed/divorced females. In the case of never-

married females, we designate the female as the primary beneficiary and use her year of birth to

determine treatment-control status for the household. In the case of widowed/divorced females,

we designate the deceased or former husband as the primary beneficiary and follow Engelhardt,

Gruber and Perry (forthcoming) in subtracting three years from the female’s year of birth to

generate a birth year for the deceased/former husband, which is then used to assign the

household to either the treatment or control group.19

       In creating our estimation sample, we restrict attention to the birth cohorts studied by

Krueger and Pischke (1992); namely, households whose assigned Social Security beneficiary

was born between 1901 and 1930. We also drop a small number of households that report no

Social Security income, or that report Social Security income of less than $100 per month (in

1993 dollars).20 These restrictions, coupled with observations lost from missing or incomplete

data, yield a final sample of 4,007 households.

3.4. Empirical Specification

       To estimate the impact of Social Security income on prescription drug use, we estimate

equations of the form shown below.

                                  Dh = α + βSSIncomeh + δX h + ε h                           (1)




                                                  12
where h indexes households. Dh is the typical number of prescription medications that each

household uses in a month, SSIncomeh is annual household Social Security income (measured,

for ease of interpretation, in thousands of 1993 dollars), X h is a vector of control variables and

ε h is the error term. The coefficient on household Social Security income, β , measures how a

one thousand dollar increase in annual Social Security income affects the number of prescription

drugs each household uses in a typical month. X h includes a standard set of demographic

variables for each household: indicator variables for the type of household (male head - married

or cohabiting; male head - single; female head - never-married; female head - widowed; and

female head - divorced), age of the head, race of the head (white, African American, or other),

Hispanic ethnicity of the head, whether the household is located in an MSA, and location

(indicators for each of the nine Census regions).21

       Other variables, such as measures of health status or insurance coverage, are not included

as controls because they represent additional outcome variables that are likely to be affected by

changes in Social Security income, including changes induced by the benefits notch.22 As a

result, β provides an estimate of the total effect of a change in income on prescription drug use,

incorporating all of the behavioral responses precipitated by the income change, e.g., changes in

labor force participation, health status, or insurance coverage. From a policy perspective, one

would want this type of estimate – one which takes all of the aforementioned adjustments into

account, rather than holding them constant - when calculating the likely impact of a change in

income on drug utilization.23

       Equation (1) will be estimated twice for each model specification; first by ordinary least

squares and second using an instrumental variables estimator that accounts for the endogeneity

of income. The first-stage regression is displayed in equation (2) below.


                                                13
                              SSIncomeh = γ + θNotchh + φX h + u h                               (2)

Our instrument, labeled Notchh , is an indicator variable that takes the value “one” for households

whose primary Social Security beneficiary was born during the notch years of 1915-1917, and

“zero” for households whose primary beneficiary was born in any other year between 1901 and

1930. The years 1915-1917 were selected because they represent the peak of the benefits notch

and provide the strongest first-stage relationship between Social Security income and notch

status for the cohorts in our sample.

        Table 1 provides descriptive information on the main variables used in our analysis,

separated into two sub-samples based on the educational attainment of the primary Social

Security beneficiary: 1,755 households whose primary beneficiary had less than a high school

education and 2,252 households whose primary beneficiary had a high school diploma or

better.24

        As mentioned previously, respondents were only asked about the number of prescription

drugs they use in the first wave of the survey. This is potentially problematic because the

benefits notch is based on year of birth, which is perfectly correlated with age in a single cross

section of individuals. Previous studies have addressed this problem either by relying on

extremely large datasets to compare individuals that differ only slightly in age (Snyder and

Evans, 2002), or by exploiting age by year-of-birth variation (Krueger and Pischke, 1992;

Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry, forthcoming; Engelhardt and Gruber, 2004).

        Because we have a relatively small number of observations, and do not have age by year-

of-birth variation in the data, we attempt to address this issue by showing that our results are not

sensitive to the inclusion of a progressively more flexible specification of the age variable; in

particular, we enter age as a polynomial function whose order ranges from one (linear) to three



                                                14
(cubic).25 It is also worth noting that the average age among those receiving higher Social

Security benefits due to the notch (our treatment group) is lower than the average age of those in

adjacent cohorts (our control group). Thus, if younger households are healthier on average, any

residual effects of age not captured by our age variables should impart a downward bias to the

estimated relationship between Social Security income and prescription drug use.

       A related concern is that there may be pure “cohort effects” in drug utilization that

potentially confound the treatment-control comparison groups we have formed. Two such

possibilities are the long-term repercussions of in utero exposure to the influenza virus in late

1918 and early 1919 (Almond, 2003), as well as the more general worry that using cohorts that

are sufficiently far apart in time could render the estimates susceptible to biases from any

unobserved differences between cohorts. In the next section, we provide some suggestive

evidence that these types of cohort effects are not driving our results. First, we show that

removing the “flu babies” from our sample, the most obvious source of a systematic difference in

drug utilization across birth cohorts, has virtually no impact on our estimates. And second, we

show that restricting attention to a narrower, and presumably more comparable, set of birth

cohorts (those born between 1910 and 1920) also does not greatly affect our results.

3.5. Effect of the Notch by Education Group

       As was discussed in detail earlier, the impact of the benefits notch varies substantially

based on income/education. This difference is evident in Table 2, where separate estimates of

equation (2) are presented based on the educational attainment of the primary Social Security

beneficiary. In each case, three model specifications are estimated to examine the sensitivity of

our findings to alternative methods of controlling for the effects of age. All specifications include

the full set of demographic variables described in the previous section and all are weighted using




                                                 15
the AHEAD household weights. We adjust our (robust) standard errors for clustering on birth

year.

        For the low-education (lower-income) group, having been born at the peak of the notch

years (1915-1917) increases household Social Security income by between $1,000 and $1,400

per year in 1993 dollars. Relative to a mean household Social Security income of $9,625 for this

group, this translates into an increase of between 10 and 14.5 percent. These regressions provide

a strong first-stage for our IV estimation strategy, with partial F-statistics for the notch indicator

ranging from 16.80 to 33.18 in our baseline specification, well above the threshold cited by

Staiger and Stock (1997) for establishing bias due to weak instruments.

        By contrast, the relationship between notch status and Social Security income is much

weaker for households whose primary beneficiary has a high school diploma or better. For these

households, having been born during the notch years only increases household Social Security

income by between $72 and $301 per year, corresponding to a percentage increase of between

0.6 and 2.7 percent when evaluated at the mean household Social Security income for this group

($11,085). Moreover, the partial F-statistics from these regressions are all below 1.00, suggesting

that there is not a strong enough first-stage relationship present to support an IV estimation

strategy for this group.26

        As a result, we focus on the 1,755 households from the low-education sub-sample

(approximately 44 percent of the full sample) to obtain estimates of the effect of income on

prescription drug utilization. It should be emphasized that what we refer to as the “low-

education” group, those with less than a high school diploma, is far more representative of the

population as a whole than would be the case today. For example, Goldin (1999), who analyzed

trends in education in the early part of the 20th century, found that the rate of high school




                                                 16
completion (relative to the population of 17 year olds in that year) was just 13 percent in 1915

and was only 41 percent as late as 1935.27



                                             4. Results

4.1. Baseline Estimates

        Our main estimates of the effect of income on prescription drug utilization are presented

in Table 3. Looking across the three age specifications, we find small and statistically

insignificant effects of income on the number of prescriptions used by each household when

these effects are estimated by ordinary least squares. By contrast, when the benefits notch is used

as an instrument for household Social Security income, we find large and statistically significant

effects of income on drug use across all three model specifications, with the magnitude of the

income effect rising a bit as tighter controls for age are incorporated. Focusing on the quadratic

age specification, our coefficient estimate indicates that a $1000 increase in Social Security

income (in 1993 dollars) would increase the number of prescription medications used in a typical

month by approximately 0.55 per household. Evaluated at the mean levels of drug utilization and

Social Security income in the sample (shown in Table 1),28 this translates into an elasticity of

approximately 1.32, implying a high degree of income sensitivity on the part of lower-income

retirees.

        Given that notch households receive higher Social Security payments than households

from adjacent cohorts, it follows that if higher incomes do in fact increase prescription use, a

reduced-form relationship between the benefits notch and prescription drug utilization should

emerge. In particular, this relationship will exist regardless of which income measure is used in

the construction of the IV estimates, thus providing a means of examining whether our use of the




                                                17
more reliably reported Social Security income measure has generated a spurious finding that

would not have emerged if total household income had been used in its place. In Table 4, we

present estimates of this reduced-form relationship, finding that households whose primary

Social Security beneficiary was born during the notch consume approximately 0.60 more

prescription medications in a typical month than households whose primary beneficiary was born

in adjacent (non-notch) years. The estimated effect of notch status on drug use is quite similar

across the three age specifications and is statistically significant at better than the 0.01 level in

each case.

4.2. Exclusion of Widows and Divorced Females

       In assigning a birth year to households headed by divorced or widowed females, it was

necessary to rely on the assumption that the former husbands of these women were born three

years earlier than their wives, three years being the median difference in spousal ages for

divorced and widowed elderly in 1982 (Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry, forthcoming). Although

this assumption would appear to be innocuous, in Table 5 we provide a quick check by re-

estimating equation (1) with these households omitted from the sample. Because the results are

quite similar to those from Table 3, we retain these households to enhance the precision of our

estimates when conducting specification checks that require the use of a smaller sample.

4.3. Cohort Effects

       To examine the sensitivity of our results to possible cohort effects, we focus on two that

seem especially plausible. The first involves individuals born during 1918 and 1919, who may

have had in utero exposure to the flu virus that was present in epidemic proportions during those

years. Almond (2003) presents evidence that such individuals may suffer from poorer health

throughout their lives, suggesting that our instrument may be correlated with unmeasured




                                                 18
differences in prescription drug utilization. We investigate this possibility by dropping those

households whose primary Social Security beneficiary was born during the flu years of 1918 and

1919. Results from this sensitivity check, which are displayed in Table 6, indicate little change

relative to our baseline estimates.

        A more general issue relates to the overall comparability of our treatment and control

groups, given that our control group is made up of households whose primary beneficiaries were

born over a period spanning 30 years. As one compares the notch households to households that

are further removed in time, the likelihood of there being systematic differences in prescription

drug use, for reasons unrelated to (notch-induced) differences in Social Security income,

increases.

        We examine this possibility by re-estimating equation (1) using only those households

whose primary Social Security beneficiary was born between 1910 and 1920, reducing by almost

two decades the range of cohorts being compared. As can be seen from Table 7, restricting

attention to a narrower range of birth cohorts slightly increases the estimated effect of Social

Security income on prescription use in our IV regressions (and this effect remains statistically

significant at conventional levels), while the OLS estimates are once again small and statistically

insignificant.

        The findings presented in this section obviously cannot completely exclude the

possibility of confounding due to unobserved differences across birth cohorts. However, for

such effects to compromise our results they would have to vary systematically across our

treatment and control groups. Two plausible sources of systematic differences in prescription use

across the notch and non-notch cohorts were examined and were not found to dramatically affect




                                                19
our estimates. Nonetheless, the potential existence of biases related to such cohort-based effects

should be kept in mind when considering our results.

4.4. Additional Variation in Social Security Benefits

         As discussed in Section 2, there are many way in which the benefits notch can be used to

identify the effect of income on the behavior of the elderly. We have opted for a simple “high-

low” comparison because it provides a particularly sharp difference in incomes across birth

cohorts, as evidenced by the strong first-stage relationship between Social Security income and

the notch indicator. However, this approach ignores year-to-year variation in benefits that

affected the cohorts under study, many of which can be attributed to other changes in the Social

Security law. To examine the robustness of our estimates to these additional sources of variation

(e.g., the ad hoc changes in benefits that preceded automatic indexation), we make use of the

synthetic benefits instrument created by Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry (forthcoming). A brief

summary of their instrument follows; for a more detailed account, the reader is referred to their

paper.

         The Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry (EGP) synthetic benefits instrument utilizes all year-

to-year variation in legislated Social Security benefits, holding real earnings constant. It is

calculated using a program that applies all of the legislated changes in Social Security benefits

that affected each birth cohort to a fixed earnings history - the median earnings profile of a male

worker born in 1916 (roughly the midpoint of the sample). Thus, by construction, their synthetic

benefits schedule yields an average benefit (by birth year and level of education) that omits any

differences in benefits attributable to household characteristics. It differs from our instrument,

which makes use of a single treatment group, by comparing exogenous differences in benefit

generosity across each birth cohort in the sample. In contrast to our simpler “high-low”




                                                20
comparison, it makes use of more sources of variation, but relies on smaller differences in Social

Security payments for identification. This was a logical approach for EGP because, given the

size of their sample, these small differences could be measured with a high degree of precision.

In our case, this approach is potentially problematic due to the relatively small number of

households within each birth cohort. As a result, we believe that our most reliable estimates are

those presented in Table 3; however, it is reassuring that exploiting these additional sources of

variation in Social Security benefits yields similar estimates. In addition, because the EGP

instrument mechanically eliminates differences in earnings histories across birth cohorts, it is

less vulnerable to confounding from unobserved cohort effects, and therefore provides another

means of checking our baseline estimates for bias from this source.

       Table 8 presents the results of re-estimating equation (1) using the EGP synthetic benefits

schedule as an instrument for the actual Social Security benefits reported by the households in

the AHEAD sample.29 To make the first-stage relationship more transparent, we updated the

EGP synthetic benefit schedule, which was measured in 1982-1984 dollars, to 1993 dollars using

the CPI calculator on the BLS webpage.30 As shown in Table 8, when age is measured linearly,

the EGP instrument delivers a second-stage coefficient estimate that is virtually identical to what

we found using the notch indicator (Table 3). When age is entered as a quadratic or cubic

function, the EGP instrument also generates estimates that are quite similar to those produced by

our instrument, albeit slightly larger.

4.5. Count Data Specification

       As a final robustness check, we examine the possibility that our second-stage equation

may be misspecified due to the fact that our dependent variable is measured as a count (number

of prescriptions). In the absence of zeros, the Poisson regression model can be transformed into a




                                                21
log-linear regression by imposing a logarithmic transformation to both sides of the regression

equation; this transforms the right-hand side of the model from one with an exponential

regression function and a multiplicative error to one with a linear regression function and an

additive error. Mullahy (1997) notes that applying standard linear instrumental variables

techniques to the transformed equation yields consistent estimates of the second-stage

coefficients. While such an approach is viable, strictly speaking, only in the absence of zeros, we

have adopted it here as a simple specification check because only 3.5 percent of the observations

in our sample are comprised of zero counts.

       In Table 9, we proceed by dropping these observations and re-estimating equation (1)

using a log-linear specification in conjunction with our notch instrument; however, we retain the

zero counts when attempting to replicate our earlier OLS results using a standard Poisson model.

Because the coefficient estimates are scaled differently in the Poisson and log-linear models than

in a linear model, it is easiest to compare the associated income elasticity estimates from Table 9

to those in Table 3. Such a comparison reveals identical elasticity estimates when the OLS

regressions from Table 3 are re-estimated as Poisson models in Table 9. Likewise, the log-linear

IV elasticity estimates in Table 9 are similar, albeit a bit smaller, to the linear IV estimates from

Table 3. The broad similarity of both sets of estimates suggests that treating the dependent

variable as continuous is unlikely to have greatly affected our results.



                                          5. Conclusions

       In this paper, we made use of a unique natural experiment that led otherwise identical

retirees to receive substantially different payments from the Social Security system. The benefits

notch is unique in that it constitutes the only break in an otherwise upward trend in the real value




                                                 22
of benefits in the history of the Social Security program. By comparing those households that

enjoyed artificially high benefits (the so-called notch cohorts) to adjacent cohorts whose benefit

levels were lower, ceteris paribus, we were able to construct instrumental variable estimates of

the income sensitivity of prescription drug use among lower-income retirees.

       We find that a $1000 increase in post-retirement income (in 1993 dollars) would increase

the number of prescription medications used by lower-income elderly households by

approximately 0.55 prescriptions per household. Evaluated at the mean levels of drug utilization

and Social Security income for this group, this translates into an elasticity of roughly 1.32. These

estimates contrast sharply with the small and statistically insignificant effects one obtains when

Social Security income is treated as exogenous. Although we were not able to obtain estimates

for retirees with higher incomes, the large elasticities we found for the 44 percent of elderly

households belonging to our low-education (lower-income) sample is suggestive of some degree

of income sensitivity among retirees further up the income distribution.

       Given that Social Security comprises a larger share of total income for lower-income

households, and given that these households are generally considered to be the most vulnerable

to economic and health shocks, the large income effects we found for this group are potentially

important when considering policy changes that affect transfer payments to lower-income

elderly, such as changes in Social Security benefits or Medicare premiums, as well as for

assessing the extent to which the new Medicare drug benefit will shield lower-income retirees

from income-induced changes in their use of prescription medicines.31 Moreover, because

approximately 59 percent of the households in our low-education (lower-income) sample would

still face significant cost sharing for prescription drugs under the new Medicare law, our results

bear directly on how future changes in Social Security are likely to affect their drug utilization,




                                                23
and possibly, the drug utilization of somewhat higher-income beneficiaries for whom our

estimates may also be applicable.

       In closing, a few potential limitations of our empirical approach should be noted. First,

because we did not have age by year of birth variation in our data, we were not able to control

for the independent effects of age in a fully flexible way (i.e., by using a full set of age

dummies). Instead, we modeled the effects of age using progressively higher-order polynomials

and found that our results were not particularly sensitive to the choice of a functional form for

the age variable. Second, because the Social Security notch varies by birth cohort, there is no

way to definitively control for pure cohort effects in the use of prescription drugs or other

variables. However, to bias our results, any unobserved cohort-level effects would have to vary

systematically across our treatment and control groups, and two specification checks based on

plausible sources of cohort-based effects did not produce large departures from our initial

estimates, nor did the use of a synthetic benefits instrument which, by construction, eliminated

any differences in lifetime earnings across birth cohorts. These limitations notwithstanding, the

changes in Social Security income created by the benefits notch provide a rare opportunity to

utilize plausibly exogenous variation in retirement incomes for the purpose of estimating the

income sensitivity of prescription drug use among a population of significant policy interest.




                                                24
                                        References


Almond, Douglas (2003) “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero
     Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population,” Working Paper, University of
     California at Berkeley.

Altman, Drew (2004) “The New Medicare Prescription Drug Legislation,” New England Journal
      of Medicine 350, 9.

Crystal, S. R.W. Johnson, J. Harman, U. Sambamoorthi and R. Kumar (2000) “Out-of-Pocket
       Health Care Costs among Older Americans,” Journal of Gerontology Series B:
       Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 55, S51-S62.

Engelhardt, Gary and Jonathan Gruber (2004) “Social Security and the Evolution of Elderly
      Poverty,” NBER Working Paper No. 10466.

Engelhardt, Gary, Jonathan Gruber and Cynthia Perry (forthcoming) “Social Security and
      Elderly Living Arrangements: Evidence from the Social Security Notch,” Journal of
      Human Resources.

Evans, William, Jeanne Ringel and Diana Stech (1999) “Tobacco Taxes and Public Policy to
       Discourage Smoking,” in Tax Policy and the Economy 13, James Poterba, editor.
       Cambridge, MA.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fuchs, Victor (1982) “Time Preferences and Health: An Exploratory Study,” in Economic
       Aspects of Health, Victor Fuchs, editor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Goldin, Claudia (1999) “A Brief History of Education in the United States,” NBER Working
       Paper, Historical Series No. 119.

Heisler, M., Kenneth Langa, Elizabeth Eby et al. (2004) “The Health Effects of Restricting
       Prescription Medication Use Because of Cost,” Medical Care 42, 626-634.

Kassab, C., A.E. Luloff, T.W. Kelsey and S.M. Smith (1996) “The Influence of Insurance Status
      and Income on Health Care Use among the Non-Metropolitan Elderly,” Journal of Rural
      Health 12, 89-99.

Kenkel, Donald (1991) “Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling,” Journal of
      Political Economy 99, 287-305.

Krueger, Alan and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (1992) “The Effect of Social Security on Labor Supply:
      A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation,” Journal of Labor Economics 10, 412-437.

Moxley, E., J.P. O’Connor, K.D. Noveielli, S. Teutsch and D.B. Nash (2003) “Prescription Drug
      Use in the Elderly: A Descriptive Analysis,” Health Care Financing Review 24, 127-141.



                                             25
Mullahy, John (1997) “Instrumental Variable Estimation of Count Data Models: Applications to
      Models of Cigarette Smoking Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics 79, 586-
      593.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and Charles E. Phelps (1974) "Price and Income Elasticities for Medical
     Care Services." In The Economics of Health and Medical Care: Proceedings of a
     Conference of the International Economics Association, ed. Shigeto Tsuru and Mark
     Perlman. London: Macmillan. Also available from Santa Monica: RAND Corporation
     (Pub. no. R-1197-NC).

Piette, John, Michele Heisler and Todd Wagner (2004) “Cost-Related Medication Underuse: Do
        Patients with Chronic Illnesses Tell Their Doctors?” Archives of Internal Medicine 164,
        1749-1755.

Safran, Dana Gelb, Patricia Neuman, Cathy Schoen, et al. (2002) “Prescription Drug Coverage
       and Seniors: How Well Are States Closing the Gap?” Health Affairs, Web Exclusive,
       W253-W268.

Social Security Administration (2004) Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal
       Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds, available online
       at: http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/TR/TR04/index.html

Snyder, Stephen and William Evans (2002) “The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence from
       the Social Security Notch,” NBER Working Paper # 9197.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock (1997) “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
        Instruments,” Econometrica 65, 557-586.

Stuart, B. and J. Grana (1998) “Ability to Pay and the Decision to Medicate,” Medical Care 36,
        202-211.

Tamblyn, Robyn, Rejean Laprise, James Hanley et al. (2001) “Adverse Events Associated with
      Prescription Drug Cost-Sharing Among Poor and Elderly Persons,” Journal of the
      American Medical Association 285, 421-429.

Viscusi, W. Kip (1993) “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic Literature
       XXXI, 1912-1946.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy (2003) “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
       of Market Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27, 5-76.




                                              26
                                      Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                Low Education Group:                          High Education Group:
                                Less than High School                      High School Diploma or More
                                      (N = 1755)                                   (N = 2252 )
                            Mean         Min.       Max.                  Mean         Min.       Max.
                         (Std. Dev.)                                   (Std. Dev.)

Household                   4.01          0.00         22.00               3.85          0.00         26.00
Prescriptions              (3.00)                                         (2.92)
(Usual number of
medications taken per
month)

Household Social            9625          1620         30,756            11,085         1392         48,000
Security Income            (4305)                                        (5206)
(1993 dollars)

Social Security             0.18          0.00          1.00               0.18          0.00          1.00
Beneficiary Born           (0.39)                                         (0.39)
Between 1915-1917

Head is a Single Male       0.13          0.00          1.00               0.10          0.00          1.00
                           (0.34)                                         (0.31)

Head is a Never-            0.02          0.00          1.00               0.03          0.00          1.00
Married Female             (0.13)                                         (0.16)

Head is a Female            0.36          0.00          1.00               0.34          0.00          1.00
Widow                      (0.48)                                         (0.47)

Head is a Divorced          0.03          0.00          1.00               0.03          0.00          1.00
Female                     (0.16)                                         (0.17)

Age of Head                77.43         63.00         93.00              76.35         64.00         92.00
                           (5.40)                                         (5.06)

Head’s Race is              0.11          0.00          1.00               0.03          0.00          1.00
African American           (0.31)                                         (0.17)

Head’s Race is Other        0.03          0.00          1.00               0.01          0.00          1.00
                           (0.16)                                         (0.09)

Head’s Ethnicity is         0.08          0.00          1.00               0.02          0.00          1.00
Hispanic                   (0.27)                                         (0.14)

Household is located        0.64          0.00          1.00               0.78          0.00          1.00
in a MSA                   (0.48)                                         (0.42)

Notes: Summary statistics are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. The omitted category for the head-of-
household variable is married male. All regression models also contain indicators for the nine Census regions.
                     Table 2. Effect of the Benefits Notch on Social Security Income by Educational Attainment

                                                    Low Education Group:                                             High Education Group:
                                                    Less than High School                                         High School Diploma or More

                                       Linear Age        Quadratic Age        Cubic Age                Linear Age        Quadratic Age        Cubic Age
                                      Specification      Specification       Specification            Specification      Specification       Specification

Notch Indicator - Effect                  1.402               1.064              1.044                    0.301               0.072              0.116
on household Social                      (0.243)             (0.236)            (0.255)                  (0.423)             (0.432)            (0.440)
Security income                          [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.000]                  [0.482]             [0.869]            [0.794]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

R-Squared                                 0.434               0.443              0.443                    0.321              0.322               0.323

N                                         1755                1755               1755                     2252                2252               2252

F-Statistic on Notch                      33.18               20.40              16.80                     0.51               0.03                0.07
Indicator

Notes: The dependent variable is annual household Social Security income measured in thousands of 1993 dollars. The notch indicator equals “one” if the
head of the household was born in 1915, 1916, or 1917, and “zero” otherwise. The age variable used in each specification is the age of the head. All models
also include controls for the type of household (male head – married or cohabiting; male head – single; female head - never-married; female head – widowed;
and female head - divorced), race of the head (white, African American, or other), Hispanic ethnicity of the head, whether the household is located in a MSA,
and region (indicators for each of the nine Census regions). All regressions are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors,
adjusted for clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.
                Table 3. Effect of Social Security Income on Number of Prescriptions: Baseline Estimates

                                               Linear Age                          Quadratic Age                           Cubic Age
                                              Specification                         Specification                         Specification
                                            OLS            IV                     OLS            IV                     OLS            IV

Household Social Security                   0.013           0.489                 0.003           0.552                 0.003           0.583
Income                                     (0.026)         (0.129)               (0.024)         (0.174)               (0.024)         (0.203)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                [0.626]         [0.001]               [0.896]         [0.004]               [0.903]         [0.008]

Elasticity                                   0.03            1.17                 0.01             1.32                 0.01            1.40

R-Squared                                   0.138             --                  0.142             --                 0.142              --

N                                           1755             1755                 1755            1755                  1755            1755

First-Stage Regression

Notch Indicator - Effect of                   --            1.402                   --            1.064                   --            1.044
benefits notch on household                                (0.243)                               (0.236)                               (0.255)
Social Security income                                     [0.000]                               [0.000]                               [0.000]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                     --            33.18                   --            20.40                   --            16.80

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. The age
variable used in each specification is the age of the head. All models also include controls for the type of household (male head – married or
cohabiting; male head – single; female head - never-married; female head – widowed; and female head - divorced), race of the head (white, African
American, or other), Hispanic ethnicity of the head, whether the household is located in a MSA, and region (indicators for each of the nine Census
regions). All regressions are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on birth year, are
displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                       29
      Table 4. Reduced Form Relationship Between the Benefits Notch and Prescription Drug Use

                                              Linear Age                   Quadratic Age                     Cubic Age
                                             Specification                 Specification                    Specification


Notch Indicator - Effect of                      0.686                          0.588                           0.609
benefits notch on number of                     (0.180)                        (0.182)                         (0.193)
prescriptions                                   [0.001]                        [0.003]                         [0.004]

R-Squared                                        0.145                          0.147                           0.147

N                                                1755                           1755                            1755

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their
spouse. All regressions include the controls listed at the bottom of Table 3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household
weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in
brackets.




                                                              30
                          Table 5. Excluding Households Headed By Widows and Divorced Females

                                               Linear Age                          Quadratic Age                          Cubic Age
                                              Specification                         Specification                        Specification
                                            OLS            IV                     OLS            IV                    OLS            IV

Household Social Security                   0.029           0.436                0.016           0.437                 0.016           0.443
Income                                     (0.030)         (0.132)              (0.028)         (0.181)               (0.028)         (0.187)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                [0.342]         [0.002]              [0.571]         [0.022]               [0.571]         [0.025]

Elasticity                                  0.07            1.06                  0.04            1.06                 0.04            1.07

R-Squared                                   0.092             --                 0.099             --                  0.099             --

N                                           1069            1069                 1069             1069                 1069            1069

First-Stage Regression

Notch Indicator - Effect of                   --            2.214                  --            1.821                   --            1.808
benefits notch on household                                (0.465)                              (0.481)                               (0.486)
Social Security income                                     [0.000]                              [0.001]                               [0.001]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                     --            22.67                  --            14.35                   --            13.82

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. All regressions
include the controls listed at the bottom of Table 3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for
clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                       31
             Table 6. Excluding Cohorts Born During the 1918 Flu Epidemic: Birth Cohorts 1918 and 1919

                                               Linear Age                          Quadratic Age                          Cubic Age
                                              Specification                         Specification                        Specification
                                            OLS            IV                     OLS            IV                    OLS            IV

Household Social Security                   0.020           0.455                0.008           0.497                 0.007           0.518
Income                                     (0.026)         (0.136)              (0.025)         (0.181)               (0.024)         (0.232)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                [0.458]         [0.002]              [0.750]         [0.011]               [0.767]         [0.034]

Elasticity                                  0.05            1.08                  0.02            1.18                 0.02            1.23

R-Squared                                   0.138             --                 0.143             --                  0.143             --

N                                           1534            1534                 1534             1534                 1534            1534

First-Stage Regression

Notch Indicator - Effect of                   --            1.457                  --            1.084                   --            1.065
benefits notch on household                                (0.273)                              (0.253)                               (0.298)
Social Security income                                     [0.000]                              [0.000]                               [0.001]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                     --            28.49                  --            18.33                   --            12.74

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. All regressions
include the controls listed at the bottom of Table 3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for
clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                       32
                              Table 7. Utilizing A Narrower Range of Birth Cohorts: 1910 – 1920

                                               Linear Age                          Quadratic Age                          Cubic Age
                                              Specification                         Specification                        Specification
                                            OLS            IV                     OLS            IV                    OLS            IV

Household Social Security                   0.007           0.507                0.003           0.606                 0.002           0.586
Income                                     (0.034)         (0.143)              (0.030)         (0.225)               (0.031)         (0.222)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                [0.848]         [0.005]              [0.931]         [0.022]               [0.961]         [0.025]

Elasticity                                  0.02            1.24                  0.01            1.48                 0.00            1.43

R-Squared                                   0.191             --                 0.192             --                  0.192             --

N                                           1062            1062                 1062             1062                 1062            1062

First-Stage Regression

Notch Indicator - Effect of                   --            1.202                  --            1.000                   --            1.072
benefits notch on household                                (0.236)                              (0.246)                               (0.261)
Social Security income                                     [0.000]                              [0.002]                               [0.002]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                     --            26.00                  --            16.49                   --            16.89

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. All regressions
include the controls listed at the bottom of Table 3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for
clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                       33
                                                    Table 8. Synthetic Benefits Instrument

                                                Linear Age                           Quadratic Age                           Cubic Age
                                               Specification                          Specification                         Specification
                                             OLS            IV                      OLS            IV                     OLS            IV

Household Social Security                    0.012           0.487                 0.003            0.659                 0.003            0.686
Income                                      (0.026)         (0.197)               (0.024)          (0.341)               (0.024)          (0.370)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                 [0.653]         [0.020]               [0.903]          [0.064]               [0.904]          [0.075]

Elasticity                                    0.03            1.17                  0.01             1.58                  0.01            1.65

R-Squared                                    0.138              --                 0.142              --                  0.142              --

N                                            1753             1753                  1753            1753                  1753             1753

First-Stage Regression

Effect of synthetic benefit on                 --            0.488                    --            0.325                   --             0.315
household Social Security                                   (0.082)                                (0.085)                                (0.094)
income (both in thousands of                                [0.000]                                [0.001]                                [0.002]
1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                      --            35.79                    --            14.56                   --            11.27

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. The
instrumental variable is an imputed Social Security benefit constructed by applying all changes in the Social Security law that affect a given birth
cohort to a fixed earnings history (the average earnings of someone born in 1916). All regressions include the controls listed at the bottom of Table
3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses;
p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                         34
                                          Table 9. Count Model / Log-Linear Specification

                                               Linear Age                           Quadratic Age                          Cubic Age
                                              Specification                         Specification                        Specification
                                          Poisson     Log-Linear                Poisson     Log-Linear               Poisson     Log-Linear
                                                           IV                                    IV                                   IV

Household Social Security                   0.003           0.105                0.001           0.114                 0.001           0.118
Income                                     (0.006)         (0.025)              (0.005)         (0.034)               (0.005)         (0.040)
(thousands of 1993 dollars)                [0.623]         [0.000]              [0.933]         [0.002]               [0.935]         [0.006]

Elasticity                                  0.03            0.97                  0.01            1.06                 0.01            1.09

N                                           1755            1695                 1755             1695                 1755            1695

First-Stage Regression

Notch Indicator - Effect of                   --            1.450                  --            1.122                   --            1.109
benefits notch on household                                (0.241)                              (0.236)                               (0.255)
Social Security income                                     [0.000]                              [0.000]                               [0.000]
(thousands of 1993dollars)

F-Statistic on Instrument                     --            36.10                  --            22.67                   --            18.95

Notes: The dependent variable is the usual number of prescription medications taken per month by the respondent and their spouse. All regressions
include the controls listed at the bottom of Table 3 and are weighted using the AHEAD household weights. Robust standard errors, adjusted for
clustering on birth year, are displayed in parentheses; p-values are displayed in brackets.




                                                                       35
Figure 1
1
 The fraction is higher for low-income seniors, with health spending accounting for almost one third of income
among retirees in the lowest quintile of the income distribution (Crystal et al., 2000).
2
  Future reductions in Social Security benefits, or large increases in Medicare premiums, could exacerbate the
difficulties seniors face in obtaining prescription medications, or in adhering to costly drug regimens. A consensus
has emerged that the impending retirement of the “baby-boom” cohorts will pose a significant challenge to the
actuarial integrity of the Social Security system. This recognition has led to many reform proposals, a number of
which advocate benefit reductions as a means of repairing the imbalance between revenues and benefit payments
that will exist if payroll taxes are maintained at current levels. In remarks made at a central bank conference in
Jackson Hole, Wyoming last August, Alan Greenspan asserted that, “If we have promised more than our economy
has the ability to deliver to retirees without unduly diminishing real income gains of workers, as I fear we may have,
we must recalibrate our public programs so that pending retirees have time to adjust through other channels.”
 (http://quote.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000006&sid=aisrnMByOf4A&refer=home). Recently, President
Bush ruled out any increase in payroll taxes in discussing options for reforming the Social Security system.
 (http://money.cnn.com/2004/12/09/news/bush_socsec/index.htm?cnn=yes).
3
  Concerns about the affordability of prescription drugs will be addressed, in part, by the recently enacted Medicare
Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (scheduled to take effect in 2006), but income will
still be an important factor in determining drug utilization for many Americans due to the incomplete nature of the
coverage provided by the Medicare drug benefit. Most retirees will face a $250 annual deductible, a 25%
coinsurance rate on their first $2250 of drug expenses, and no coverage for prescription expenses between $2250
and $5100 (corresponding to $3600 in out-of-pocket spending), with a 5% coinsurance rate being applied to
expenditures above $5100. Factoring in premiums of $420 per year, the total costs of acquiring prescription
medicines through the drug benefit will, for many, be quite large, leaving considerable scope for income effects.
          A series of examples, taken from Altman (2004), are illustrative: “Under the new law, a relatively healthy
65-year-old man with hypertension who now spends $730 per year filling his brand-name prescription at his local
pharmacy would spend a total of $790 per year, including premiums ($420), the deductible ($250), and coinsurance.
Thus, he would spend more in premiums and cost sharing than his drugs actually cost. During the same year, a 79-
year-old woman with multiple chronic (but common) conditions, including a history of congestive heart failure,
hypertension, chronic arthritic pain, and Parkinson'   s disease, who takes nine different generic and brand-name
medicines costing about $4,600 per year would pay $3,520 in premiums, deductibles, and cost sharing; she would
fall into the doughnut hole. At the high end, a beneficiary with drug costs of $8,000 would end up paying just over
$4,100 in premiums, deductibles, and cost sharing. The new benefit is structured to provide substantial relief to
persons with catastrophic expenses of $5,100 or more. Nearly one fifth of beneficiaries are projected to have costs at
this level or higher in 2006.”
          An additional feature of the MMA, which has received little attention to date, is the indexing of the cost-
sharing thresholds, many of which are expected to rise more rapidly than inflation. For example, the initial $3600
stop-loss is scheduled to rise to $6400 in the year 2013, a cumulative increase of 78 percent over seven years (see
Altman, 2004 for details). And, although assistance will be available for people with “low incomes and limited
assets,” calculations reported later in the paper suggest that a substantial fraction of the lower-income households
that we focus on would be exposed to these cost-sharing provisions.
          There is also considerable uncertainty regarding the extent to which the Act’s employer subsidies will
prevent the new drug benefit from crowding out coverage provided through employer-sponsored retiree health
insurance plans. If significant crowd-out were to occur, many retirees may not experience a meaningful increase in
the generosity of their drug coverage. Finally, given that Medicare is on an even weaker fiscal footing than Social
Security (2004 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and
Disability Insurance Trust Funds, available online at:
 http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/TR/TR04/index.html), it is possible that the drug benefit will eventually be scaled back,
or that Medicare premiums will be increased. Thus, understanding the extent to which the drug benefit shields
elderly households from income-induced changes in medication use will be important for assessing the desirability
of this costly addition to the Medicare program.
4
  This hypothesis has been advanced by Fuchs (1982) and has received support from a large literature that
documents higher mortality rates and worse health habits among those with low educational attainment (Kenkel,
1991; Evans, Ringel and Stech, 1999).
5
 The positive relationship between job risk and earnings has been documented in numerous studies that use hedonic
wage regressions to estimate the value of a statistical life. Viscusi (1993) and Viscusi and Aldy (2003) provide
comprehensive reviews of this literature.
6
  We use Social Security income in our analysis, rather than total income, for two reasons. First, a substantial
number of respondents in the AHEAD were unable to accurately report their total income. This was much less of a
problem for Social Security income, which respondents were able to report on a monthly basis (i.e., the amount they
receive in their monthly check). Second, the notch may have led to other behavioral changes that affected total
income, e.g. a change in post-retirement work (Snyder and Evans, 2002), that would appear to offset the permanent
increase in wealth created by the notch if total income were used in our regressions.
7
  For reasons discussed later, the increase in Social Security benefits associated with the notch was significantly
larger for lower-income workers than for higher-income workers, yielding a better first-stage relationship for the
former than for the latter. Following Engelhardt, Gruber and Perry (forthcoming), we split the sample based on
educational attainment, rather than income, because income is directly affected by the notch. Using a similar split
based on education, they did not find a statistically significant relationship between notch-induced changes in Social
Security income and elderly living arrangements for more-educated retirees but, like us, did find a significant effect
for retirees with less education.
8
    Our summary borrows heavily from these articles.
9
 Workers who had already retired had their Social Security payments indexed to the CPI, but did not benefit from
double indexation because no adjustment was made to their AME.
10
   A set of transition rules was established to blunt the sharp reduction in payments to those born after 1916, but
these “transitional guarantees” were not sufficient to prevent large differences in real benefits from developing
across the affected cohorts.
11
   As noted by Snyder and Evans (2002), it is probably more natural to view those who received abnormally high
benefits due to double indexation as being the “treatment” group, with those whose benefits were reduced back to a
level in line with longer-run trends as being the “control” group.
12
   Figure 1 is from the Congressional Research Services Final Report on the Social Security “Notch” Issue. The
Commission on the Social Security “Notch” Issue, December 31, 1994. The report is available online at:
http://www.ssa.gov/history/notchbase.html.
13
  Given their ad hoc character, the legislated changes in benefits prior to 1972 were largely unpredictable, as must
have been the error which led to double indexation. One might argue that the ensuing reduction in benefits created
by the 1977 Amendments could have been anticipated, but this does not seem to have been the case. As Snyder and
Evans (2002) note, it was actually the interaction between double indexation and the accelerating inflation of the
1970s that made the initial mistake so costly, and which led Congress to abruptly modify the law in 1977 - a change
which most accounts suggest went unnoticed until after the affected cohorts began to retire.
14
  Engelhardt and Gruber (2004) utilize a similar approach in studying the impact of Social Security on elderly
poverty rates.
15
  The Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey satisfies these criteria as well, but must be purchased from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).




                                                         38
16
   Because we only have a single source of exogenous variation in Social Security income to work with, we are
unable to examine the relative contributions of supplemental health insurance and directly-purchased prescriptions
to overall consumption.
17
   This group is comprised of a small number of married or cohabiting women whose partner wasn’t interviewed,
either directly or by proxy.
18
  The vast majority of married women in these birth cohorts qualified for benefits based on their husband’s earnings
history. See Snyder and Evans (2002) for a discussion and additional references.
19
  Three years is the median difference in spousal ages for widowed/divorced elderly as calculated by Engelhardt,
Gruber and Perry (forthcoming) using the 1982 New Beneficiary Survey published by the Social Security
Administration. As we demonstrate later, our estimates are largely unchanged if these households are excluded from
the analysis.
20
  Results are very similar if households receiving less than $200 per month in Social Security benefits are dropped,
or if no households are dropped.
21
   The head-of-household designation we use is based on our own definition. The head of each household is the
primary Social Security beneficiary for all households except those headed by a widowed or divorced female. In
these cases, the primary Social Security beneficiary is the former husband, while the head of the household is the
widowed or divorced female surveyed by the AHEAD.
22
  We include controls for the type of household for the sole purpose of mechanically adjusting for differences in
prescription use across households of different sizes.
23
  Nonetheless, we have re-estimated our baseline specifications including controls for health and insurance status,
with little change in the results.
24
  Although the AHEAD does not provide information on the birth year of deceased or former husbands, it does
provide data on their level of education. We use this variable to form the sample split depicted in Table 1.
25
   Results were also generally unchanged when age was entered as a quartic. Unfortunately, allowing this level of
flexibility in the age variable induced a near singularity in the X matrix due to the high degree of collinearity among
the age terms. This led the coefficient estimates to become unstable in some cases.
26
  Not surprisingly, the standard errors on the second-stage estimates for the high-education group are too large to
permit any reasonable inference concerning the magnitude of the income effect for this group.
27
   To get a rough feel for how many households in our low-education (lower-income) sample would likely be
subject to full cost-sharing under the new Medicare prescription drug benefit, we calculated total household income
separately for single (55.7 percent) and married households (44.3 percent) in our estimation sample (relying on
imputations in cases where respondents were unable to report their total income), and inflated the dollar amounts to
2004 dollars using the CPI inflation calculator from the BLS website (http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm). Although
the income and asset limits for waiving the premium and cost-sharing provisions of the drug benefit are not
scheduled to be announced until 2005, some groups have projected that the income thresholds for full and partial
waivers are likely to be set at 135 percent and 150 percent of the federal poverty line (FPL)
 (http://www.medicareadvocacy.org/PrescDrugs_LowIncomeProvisionsof2003Act.htm).
 In 2004, the federal poverty guidelines for one- and two-person households were $9,310 and $12,490, respectively,
yielding 150% FPL figures of $13,965 and $18,735 (http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/04poverty.shtml). Approximately
52 percent of the single households and 67 percent of the married households in our low-education sample have
incomes that place them above the 150% FPL thresholds, suggesting that roughly 59 percent of the low-education
(lower-income) households in our sample would be exposed to the cost-sharing provisions cited in the Introduction,
with a larger percentage, those with incomes between 135 percent and 150 percent of the FPL, facing partial cost
sharing. In contrast to the federal poverty guidelines used by the department of Health and Human Services (HHS),



                                                          39
the Census Bureau specifies lower FPL thresholds for those aged 65 and over, but has not updated their figures for
2004. If the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services use the Census Bureau thresholds, the percentage of
households exposed to cost sharing will be slightly higher.
28
  Note that the Social Security income figure reported in Table 1 must be converted into thousands of dollars before
performing the elasticity calculation.
29
   We also re-estimated equation (1) for the high-education sample to determine if the additional variation provided
by the EGP instrument would allow us to obtain estimates for the high-education group. Unfortunately, the first-
stage relationship was again too weak to generate credible estimates for this group.
30
     Available online at: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm .
31
  Assuming the drug benefit does not lead to significant crowd out of currently-available retiree health benefits or is
not scaled back as Medicare’s fiscal problems become more urgent.




                                                          40
