                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ON THE RELEVANCE OR IRRELEVANCE OF PUBLIC
          FINANCIAL POLICY: INDEXATION, PRICE RIGIDITIES
                    AND OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY




                         Joseph E. Stiglitz




                       Working Paper No. 1106




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            April 1983




 Paper prepared for presentation at the Conference on Indexation and
Economic Stability in the World Econonr, Fundacao Getulio Vargas,
Rio de Janiero, Brazil, December 16—1T, 1981. Research support
from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
have benefited greatly from conversations with John Taylor, Alan
Blinder, J.M. Grandmont, Stan Fischer, Rudiger Dornbusch, Frank
Hahn, Dilip Abreu, and Lennie Nakamura. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1106
                                                    April 1983


                                 ABSTRACT

       ON THE RELEVANCE OR IRRELEVANCE OF PUBLIC FINANCIAL POLICY:

       INDEXATION, PRICE RIGIDITIES AND OPTIMAL ?IONETARY POLICIES




     This paper is concerned with   delineating conditions under which public

financial   policies have no real and/or   price effects. In the   absence of
intergenerational   distribution effects, public financial policy is irrelevant:

an increase in government debt (whether indexed or not), an exchange of an

indexed bond for a non—indexed bond, or an exchange of a short term bond for

a long term bond has neither real nor financial effects. We also describe

changes in financial policy in which the supply of bonds are increased and

the nominal interest rate increases, which have an effect on the rate of

inflation, but no real effects. We examine the implications of price and

wage rigidities and the existence of a non—interest bearing financial asset

used for transactions purposes for the validity of these irrelevance theorems.

     In general, public financial policies have effects on intergenerational

distribution; alternative financial policies have implications for the pattern

of capital accumulation (an effect which was the center of the literature on

money and growth) and on the sharing of risks among members of different

generations. We examine the consequences of three alternative financial

policies,a fixed supply of financial assets, a fixed price level, and a fixed

real supply of government indebtedness; under some plausible conditions, the

latter policy may provide for the least intergenerational variability in

consumption.                                                       .

                                                     Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                                     Department of Economics
                                                     Dickinson Hall
                                                     Princeton University
                                                     Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                     (609) 452—4014
I.   Introduction

     Does it make any difference whether or not the government issues indexed

bonds? Few governments have, in fact, issued such bonds, in spite of repeated

calls from distinguished economists for them to do so. Is the failure to

issue these bonds an example of lack of innovativeness of government officials?

What difference would such bonds make to the equilibrium of the economy?

     This question is part of a much broader question, of the effect of

alternative public financial policies. The effect of any single policy,

such as the issuance of indexed bonds, cannot be analyzed in isolation from

the other aspects of public financial policy. Moreover, the effect of any

change in government policy today cannot be assessed without specifying, at

the same time, future governmental policies (or perhaps more accurately,

specifying the beliefs of economic agents concerning those future govern—

ment policies). Finally, it is our contention that a central aspect of

public financial policy is the intertemporal (intergenerational) distribu—

tion of income and   risk   bearing which it generates.

     In the absence of these intergenerational distribution effects, public

financial policy is irrelevant. In Section I, we show that an increase in

government debt (whether indexed or not), an exchange of an indexed bond for

a non—indexed bond, or an exchange of a short-term bond for a long—term bond

(which corresponds in our model to an open market operation), has neither

real nor financial effects. The first result——on the irrelevance of govern-

ment deficits——we have referred to (Stiglitz (1982)) as Say's law of

government deficits: an increase in the supply of government bonds gives

rise to an equal increase in the demand for government bonds.
                                     2




     These results are in marked contrast to those suggested, for instance,

by the standard portfolio theories. In those models, an increase in the

supply of one kind of financial asset and a decrease in the supply of another

will have real effects: the risk properties of these different financial

assets are different, and because of risk aversion, individuals will want to

diversify their portfolios among the different assets. A change in the supply

of different assets necessitates a change in the equilibrium prices, and

these changes in equilibrium prices have real consequences (say, for the

pattern and level of investment). Our analysis differs from these models in

that they fail to take into account the implicit liability associated with

government bonds, and the change in that liability with a change in the level

or form of government bonds. When there are no intergenerational distribution

effects of public financial policy, and when individuals do take their future

tax liabilities into account, then it turns out that public financial poliçy

including the issuance of indexed bonds, is irrelevant.1

     The more relevant case, however, is that where public financial policy

has an effect on the intergenerational distribution of income. The litera-

ture on money and growth in the late 1960s emphasized this role of debt

policy.2 As such, the effects of debt policy cannot be analyzed separately



1. Our result can thus be viewed as extending the well known Barro—Ricardo
   results to an explicitly stochastic environment, in tne absence of tin—
   certainty, all assets are perfect substitutes, and thus the question of
   the effect of public financial policy on the relative prices of different
   assets does not arise.

2. The original papers by Tobin (1965) and Johnson (1966) gave rise to a
   large literature; see, for instance, Shell, Sidrauski, and Stiglitz (1967).
   Although much of this literature employed ad hoc savings assumptions, the
   work of Sidrauski (1967) and the life cycle models of Diamond (1965) and
   Cass—Yaari (1967) showed how the results could be extended to models with
   explicit intertemporal utility maximizing individuals.
                                      3




 from those of social security and tax policy, as noted by Atkinson-Stiglitz

 (1980). These studies, however, analyzed public financial policy in a

completely non—stochastic framework. When there is uncertainty, when there

is a variability in the productivity of labor and capital, then public finan—

cial policy has an additional role: it is concerned not only with control—

ling the optimal rate of capital accumulation, but also with the sharing of

risks among members of different generations. This notion appears in earlier

discussions of the burden of the debt. Could the generation alive at the

time of World War II manage to shift the burden of paying for that war to

future generations, by financing the war by means of debt? For a period,

the consensus, at least of textbook writers, was no: the resources foregone

during the war were spent at that time. As long as we "owe the debt to

ourselves" (i.e., we do not finance the war through borrowing abroad), how

we finance it cannot make a difference. The view taken here is that the

burden of the war can indeed be shared with succeeding generations,' and

this sharing is implemented through public financial policies, including

socIal security and debt policy. Though we will not address the question of

how the costs of a particular event, such as a major war, should be shared

among different generations, we will address the question of how public

financial policy can be used to smooth out the variability in intergenera-.

tional welfare induced by variability in the productivity of labor and capital.

     In the context of a life cycle model, where public financial policy

affects the intertemporal distribution of welfare, public financial policy




1. For instance, by increasing current consumption at the cost of investment
   in the war period, and transferring wealth from young to old in the peace—
   time periods that follow.
                                     4




does, in general, matter. Some kinds of public financial policies have finan-

cial effects (i.e., affect price levels) but have no real effects. We discuss

two important instances. First, an increase in the rate of interest paid on

government bonds, with the ensuing deficits financed by the issuance of addi-

tional bonds, has no real effects. Secondly, if all members alive in one

generation were identical, any intertemporal distribution of welfare that was

desired could be attained through the use of a single financial asset; thus,

adding additional financial assets——such as indexed bonds—-makes no difference.

Again, indexed bonds serve no function.

    More generally, changes in public financial policies have real effects.

For instance, when there is more than one type of individual alive in a given

generation, then issuing indexed bonds can have a real effect, even if there

is a complete set of intragenerational risk markets.

     Once it is recognized that public financial policy matters, it becomes

important to ascertain the effects of alternative policies. Although the

characterization of the first—best policies, for any stochastic structure of

general interest, Is beyond the scope of this paper, we present some preliminary

results comparing the welfare effects of three simple rules. The first attempts

to keep prices constant, the second attempts to keep the value of real debt

constant, and the third keeps the level of debt constant (this corresponds,

in our model, to the Friedman rule of a constant growth in the money supply,

since, in our model, we have no exogenous sources of growth).

     Our analysis suggests that a policy of holding the value of the out-

standing debt constant may be preferable to the other two. An outsider, not

knowing that the government was following a policy aimed at maintaining a

constant value of the outstanding debt, might be misled by the empirical
                                     5




observation that in such an economy the price level moves in proportion to

debt, into believing that the level of debt determines the price level; in

fact, both are responding to the exogenous shocks which the economy is

experiencing.

     For reasons that we detail below, for most of the analysis we assume

a single short—term government financial asset, which normally is interest

bearing. We focus on the role of government debt as a store of value,

ignoring its potential role as a medium of exchange. In Section IV we show

how the analysis can easily be modified to incorporate explicitly non—

interest bearing government debt (money); if anything, the transactions

demand for money strengthens our earlier results on the relevance of public

financial policy.

     Up to this point, the models we use are all neoclassical, assuming

full employment of labor and capital. Yet one of the more important func-

tions of public financial policy, as it is usually conceived, is to affect

the level of national income and employment. Recent theoretical work using

models of rational expectations has questioned the ability of the government

to use financial policy to affect the level of national income (other than

by adding noise, making it more difficult for economic agents to distinguish

real shocks from monetary shocks, and as a result, making it more difficult

for economic agents to respond efficiently to changed circumstances).' In




1. Obviously, if the government has an informational advantage over the
   private sector, it could base its public financial policy on that inf or—
   mation; public financial policy would thus convey information from the
   government to the private sector. But this is a peculiarly inefficient
   way of conveying information, and there is little evidence that the
   monetary authorities are privy to information that is not publicly
   available.
                                     6




our neoclassical models, we assume rational expectations and symmetric in---

formation; yet alternative financial policies do have an effect, both on the

level of capital accumulation and on the labor supply (through the income

effects associated with the intertemporal distribution of income).1

     In Section V, we show that public financial policy may be even more

effective if wages and prices are not perfectly flexible, so that there is

not full employment. Again, we postulate rational expectations. This result

reemphasizes the result noted by others (see, e.g., Taylor (1980), Neary—

Stiglitz (1982)) that the conclusion of the rational expectations models

concerning the inefficacy of government policy does not depend so much on

the expectational assumptions as on other features of the model; in particular,

the assumptions concerning wage and price flexibility.

     Before beginning the formal analysis, two remarks may be helpful.

First, we limit ourselves throughout to public financial policies; real

government expenditures are assumed to remain constant (at each date and

in each state). Second, the question is sometimes posed, what can the gov—

ernment do that the private sector cannot do—-or at least undo? There is

a simple answer here: the government can enforce intergenerational redis—

tributions. And there is, in the life cycle model, an implicit market

failure. Individuals in one generation cannot trade with those of another

generation; in particular, they cannot engage in the sharing of risks.. (Of

necessity, then, the set of Arrow—Debreu contingent claims markets must be




1. We assume throughout that the only taxes imposed are lump sum taxes;
   if, more realistically, we had assumed a distortionary Income or wage
   tax, then there would be further supply effects.
                                          7




 incomplete).       The government provides a mechanism by which this kind of

 risk sharing can occur.'

        For most of the analysis, we focus our attention on a model in which

 all individuals within a generation are identical; for those who are alive

 and can trade with each other, we assume that there are perfect markets.


 II. Three General Irrelevance Theorems

        In this section, we prove three very general theorems, establishing

 the irrelevance of a wide class of government financial policies. We

establish the results in the context of a simple model of an economy with

overlapping generations and a constant population.      Following the proof of
the first irrelevance theorem, we comment on the implications of this result

for an economy with a single, infinitely lived generation.


2.1 The Model

       Each generation lives for three periods; individuals work in the first

two, and live off their savings in the third. (Later, we shall consider a

simplification where individuals live for only two periods.) We thus write

the utility function of an individual born at time t



1.   Similar   remarks canbe made about the role of the government in redis-
     tribution in  general. If, behind the veil of ignorance, before indi-
     viduals knew the endowments with which they were to be born they could
     sell enforceable Insurance policies to each other, with the payoffs a
     function of what endowments they were presented with, or of observable
     variables which were a function of those endowments, then it might be
     argued that there would be no need for the government to take a role in
     redistribution. But such insurance markets do not exist, and hence the
     role of the government in redistribution. (This way of looking at
     matters has, of course, its problems: should we assume that, in the
     original state, the individual knows what preferences he is to be en-
     dowed with? How can we reasonably describe his behavior
                                                               prior to being
     endowed with preferences?)
                                            8




(1)          Ut =   U(ci,     c2, c3, Lit, L2)


where


             c1 = the       tth generation's consumption in the th period

                     of their life;

                     the tth generation's labor supply in the th period
             Lit
                     of their life.


For simplicity, we assume that the wage that an old individual receives is

the same as the wage that a young person receives; both are random variables

which are exogenously determined.'

       We assume that the government can impose age—specific lump sum taxes,2

but that all individuals within a generation must be treated the same. For

the moment, we assume that all individuals within a generation are identical;

and hence this constraint is of no consequence; later, when we assume that

there are different individuals within a generation, this constraint will

have some real consequences. We denote the lump sum tax imposed on the
                     • th
generation in the i         period of its life by Tit .
                                                          (Tj   may be negative,

i.e., the government may provide a lump sum subsidy; thus a social security

payment   corresponds to T3 <      0   .)



1. It would be easy to extend the model to allow the wage to depend, for
      instance, on the capital stock.

2. The assumption that taxes are non—distortionary is      important; it implies,
   in particular, that what individuals are concerned      about is only the
   present discounted value of their tax liabilities,      not the timing of
   those liabilities. With distortionary taxes, say,       on wage income, the
   time of the imposition of the tax is critical.
                                                   9




       Individuals take their after—tax income and either consume it or invest

 it. There are three classes of securities in which they can invest:

       (1) Capital (equity), the return to which is a random variable,       i9


       (ii)    Government securities. We shall distinguish several government

 securities:

              a. A short-term bond: In this model, we shall assume that there

 is a single non—indexed short—term government bond, and that it is (or at

 least may be) interest bearing: it may be thought of as interest bearing

money. The price of this bond in terms of consumption goods is denoted by

v ,   and   p =   1/v    is the price level. The real return on holding a short—

term bond purchased at time t               with   a nominal rate of i is'



(2)           _________         -=
                                     Pt


Even though the nominal interest is known, the real return on short—term

bonds is risky, because the price level next period is unknown.

              b. Short—term indexed bonds: These specIfy a real rate of

return, ri .        In   other words, the nominal payment I is whatever it must
be so that2



              v1 (l-i-i)
                           —1 =      r it



1. At the time the individual buys a short—term bond, he knows i , but he
   does not know vt+1 . We follow the convention of denoting a random var-
   iable with a tilde, but will drop the tilde when the context makes clear
   the fact that the variable in question is stochastic.

2. If we denote the state of nature at time t by O , then while the
   interest on short—term (unindexed) bonds is a function of O , and the
   real return a function of 0t and 0t , for indexed bonds, the real
   return Is only a function of O
                                       10




where          is the price, in terms of consumption goods, of a short—term

indexed bond at date t

          c.    Long—term bonds: For simplicity, we shall only consider here

perpetuities, with a fixed interest payment i per bond. (Other long—term

bonds may be easily introduced into the model.) The real return on long—

term bonds is a random variable, because the price at which the bond can be

sold is uncertain. We denote the real rate of return by 2t


                  + Vt÷ll
                            —1   =




     The aggregate supply of the short—term bonds is denoted by B .      The

aggregate supply of short—term indexed bonds is denoted by D1 ,    of   long—

term bonds by D2      and the price of short—term indexed bonds in terms of

consumption goods is denoted by q1 , and that of long—term bonds q2

The holdings of the young of the th security are denoted by       Dii , and
those of the old by D2.

   (iii) Exchange securities. These are trades between individuals both

living over two periods (thus in our model, in which all individuals within

a generation are identical, they are trades between the young and the middle

aged);2 the th exchange security promises to pay e.(O) the second

period if state 0 occurs, and costs Z. the first period. Because the

payment is state dependent, and because prices are state dependent, it makes




1. The notation is chosen to make it clear how the analysis can be extended
   to additional government securities.

2. In a life cycle model with individuals living only two periods and all
   individuals within a generation being identical, there is no scope for
   exchange securities.
                                          ii




 no difference at this level of generality whether we denominate the payments

 in consumption goods or in dollars (short—term bonds). It is more convenient

 to denominate them in terms of consumption goods. An exchange security which

 pays        e(O) in terms of consumption goods pays e(O)p(O) in terms of

 dollars. (An Arrow—Debreu security is one which pays in only one state of

 nature; in all other states e(O) =      0.)   An indexed loan (ignoring the possi-

 bility of default) has the property that e(O) =       constant for all 0 .     An

unindexed loan has the property that e(O) varies inversely with p(0)

Nl.t is the quantity of the th security purchased by the young at time

t ; N2, is the quantity purchased by the middle aged.


        The individual's budget constraints. The individual maximizes his ex-

pected utility subject to his budget constraints:

        a.     His wage income the first year of his life is either consumed,

invested, or paid to the government in lump sum taxes.


(3a)           wLi =    ci + Alt + Tit
where w is the real wage rate at t and where Ai is his asset holdings

the first period of his life, which consist of capital, government securities,

or exchange securities.


(3b)          Alt =   Ki +   vtBi +
                                                +Z.tNi.

where Bit is the holdings of short—term bonds by the young, and Kit is

their holdings of capital.
                                             12




       b.     At the beginning of the second period, his portfolio is worth

                                                          2
                                    + v(l+pt)Bi +
(3c)          W2 E       (l+n)Ki                         3—
                                                              (l+r.)q.D1. +
                                                                              3



This, plus his wage income, is either consumed, invested, or paid out in

taxes:


                                         + A2t +
(3d)          W2 + w+iL2t =         c2             T2t


where again, his asset holdings consist of capital (K2+i), government

securities (B2+i) ,         or   exchange securities:



(3e)                 =           + v+iB2t+1 + Eq.÷1D2.1 +



       c.     In the third period of his life, he consumes his savings less any

taxes (plus any social security receipts):



                     =                   +
                         (l+n+1)K2t+1

                                                                                  —
              +                              +Ee+iN2÷i — T3                           T3

We can      thus   derive the individual's consumption functions and demand for

asset equations. These are of the form


              y1 =       yi(w,   Tin; X, X+1; t+l T2, T3)

                    =
                         y2(w+i,   T2; W2; X+1; T3)

where
                                        13




            y1     {ci, Lit, Kit, vtBt,



                          L, K2t+l, v+iB2+i,

and


            X E {Fj, nt,         r2t, fe}}

and where         is defined by (3d), and c3 is given by (3f). Consumption,

labor and portfolio decisions depend on wealth and the joint probability

distribution of future wages, returns on assets, and taxes.'


       The government's budget constraint and the national income identities.

Each period, the government makes decisions concerning its expenditure (G)      ,


the   supply of bonds of various sorts, the interest rate which it will pay,

and the taxes it will impose. It must do this within its budget constraint,

which says that its expenditures (including Interest payments) must be equal

to its receipts (taxes plus issue of new debt).

      It is easiest if we first express the budget constraint in terms of

dollars, and then rewrite it using our consumption numeraire. Since govern-

ment expenditures, G , and taxes


            T = T,       + T2t1 + T32


are both expressed in real terms, the dollar deficit of the government is


                     —           +
                         Tt+i]         + iDi + iD2



1. If utility functions are not intertemporaily separable, then past con-
   sumption and labor decisions also are relevant.
                                                 14




which must be financed by new debt,



            Bt÷l     Bt +                              D.)


Dividing through by p1 and rearranging terms, we arrive at the 'real"

budget constraint



(4)         G+i — Tt+l =           vt+iB+i
                                             -
                                                 (l+it)v+iB +q.÷1(D.÷1 —

            — v+j(iD1         +

            =             —
                vt+iB+i       (l+p)vB + E (q.÷1D.1 — (l+r.)q.D.)

where we have made use of (2).


       Market   Equilibrium
       Market equilibrium requires that the demand for each kind of government
security add up to its supply, and that the net demand for exchange sacurites
be zero:'

(Sa)        Bi + B2 =         Bt

(5b)        Di.t + D2 = D.                            j   = 1,2


(5c)               + N2.t =       0




1. In addition, we require, of course, that the demand fo.r labor equals the
   supply.
                                        15




       Wairas' law assures us that if each individual's budget constraint is

 satisfied, and the government's budget constraint is also satisfied, then

 the national income constraint is satisfied:


 (6)          c1 + c21 + c32 + Kt_K 1 w(L1+ T2t—l +
                                                                  fliK
                                             \      ________1 '
                  consumption     investment wage income return to capital


where Kt is the aggregate capital stock,


(7)
             Kit +K2t =

       In   formulating their consumption—investment strategy, individuals must

form expectations concerning the joint probability distribution of future

wage rates, taxes, and returns on different securities. A rational expec-

tations equilibrium is one in which those subjective probability distributions

(conditional on whatever is observable at the time the expectations are

formed) correspond to the conditional probability distributions actually

generated in the equilibrium.


2.2 Neutrality Propositions

       There are two classes of neutrality propositions: those which establish

that a particular perturbation in the financial policy of the government has

no real affects and no effects on the level of prices, and those which es-

tablish that a particular perturbation in the financial policy of the gov-

ernment has no real effects, but has effects on the level of prices. (The

classical proposition concerning the neutrality of money was of the second

kind; it asserted that doubling the money supplied doubled the price level,

but had no further real effects on the economy.)
                                        16




 2.3 The First Irrelevance Theorem (Say's Law of Government Deficits)

        An increase in short—term government debt, with the proceeds used to

finance a reduction in lump sum taxes on the young or middle aged, followed

by a decrease in the government debt, financed by an increase in taxes of

the middle aged and the aged (in proportion to the reduction in taxes which

they experienced the previous period) has neither real nor financial effects.

An increase in the supply of government bonds gives rise to an exactly equal

and offsetting increase in the demand for government bonds, provided that

there    are no intergenerational distributional consequences of the government
policy.
        Assume we are initially in an equilibrium, denoted by


              lt' 2t—l' *
                    *              *
                        3t—2' !' t


where       E (vt, {q.},[z.}) is the vector of prices, and
                                                                         (Br, {D.}
Ttt,                    {N.}) is the corresponding vector of government debt and

taxes and private securities. Then the first irrelevance theorem is concerned

with the following change in government policy: at t      ,   the   government

increases B by an amount LB , and generates thereby a surplus vAB
which it distributes to the young and the middle aged, so that

(8)              + 2-l       =



where    iT denotes the change in the lump sum tax liability.

       Then, next period it returns the debt to its original level. To do

this, it must raise additional taxes, in the amount of (measured in consump-

tion good numeraire)
                                          17




              (l+i)vA1AB

 It does this by levying lump sum taxes on the middle aged and the aged in
 proportion to      their previous tax reduction, so


               it    —
                          LT
                           2t—l
               2t             3t—l


Thus, if a fraction o of the tax revenues the first period went to the young


 (lOa)               =
                          —avAB'


then later they pay the same fraction of the subsequent increase in taxes


(lob)        2t = —a(l+i")v'1AB"

        To establish the result, we first will show that if prices remain un-

changed, then the feasible consumption sets remain unchanged. If the feasible

consumption sets remain unchanged, then clearly each individual will choose

the same consumption plan as in the initial situation. We will then estab-

lish that when they do this, the demand for all assets (including the demand

for short—term government bonds) equals the supply of all assets, and all

markets clear.

       To see that if prices remain unchanged the set of feasible consumption

plans remain unchanged, denote by a single caret a feasible consumption

investment strategy in the initial situation, and by a double caret one in

the new situation. Let


(ha)             =
                         it   £it =                    all   i,t
                                              18




                            A
(lib)        N. =           N..                         all i,j,t
                 iJt


(lic)        D.,.
                 lJt
                       =
                            A

                                lJt                     all i ' j ' t
             A
(lid)        Blt =         Blt    (l+AT./v)


             B2t        B2t (l+T21/v2)


             Bit =                                     all   i,t except I =   1,2 and t =   t
        Individuals     do exactly what they would have done in the initial situation,

except that those whose tax liability is reduced spend their extra income to

purchase short—term (unindexed) government bonds.

        Direct substitution into the budget constraints (3a) —           (3f)   makes it

clear that if the first set of consumption—investment plans is feasible in

the initial situation, the second set of consumption—investment plans is

feasible in the new situation.

        The reason for this can be easily seen. The bonds which the young have

purchased with the extra revenues they receive the first period increase

their assets the next period by the amount


            v÷i(1+i+i)Ti =              v÷i(l+i+1)ct   LB



But this is exactly equal to their increased tax liability (given by (lob)).

        This establishes that individuals can do as well under the new public

financial policy as under the old. Exactly the same arguments can be used

to establish that any consumption sequence which is feasible under the new
                                     19




public financial policy is feasible in the original situation. Thus, the

two consumption opportunity sets are identical.

      Since the consumption opportunity sets are identical, it is clear that

if individuals chose the single—careted values of variables in the initial

situation, they will choose the double—careted values in the new situation.

We now need only check that all markets clear.

     Since the demand for all securities except short—term bonds has remained

unchanged, if the demand for each kind of security equals the supply in the

initial situation, it does in the new situation.

     Similarly for all consumption and capital goods. By Wairas' law, if

all but one market clears, the last market must clear, thus establishing that

the double—careted values do represent an equilibrium.

     It may be useful, however, to examine in somewhat greater detail the

market for short—term bonds.

     From (lid), the total increase in the demand for short—term bonds the

first period is


              +
                   2t-l
              Vt



1. In this analysis we have assumed that there are no borrowing limitations.
  More generally, since the real position of the individual is unaffected,
  one might argue that if in the new situation the individual is called upon
  to borrow more (to replicate the same pattern of consumption), he should
  be able to do so at the same terms as he borrowed previously. But this
  argument is not quite correct if there is any possibility of bankruptcy
  (in any of the relevant points in the consumption opportunity set). Full
  equivalence would require, for instance, that an individual could sell a
  claim on a (contingent) future lump sum payment. This is presently not
  possible. More generally, the considerations which are relevant here are
  analogous to those which arise in the case of the Corporate Irrelevance
  Theorems (Stiglitz (1969, 1974)).
                                        20




which is just equal to the increase in the supply of bonds (using (8)).

Hence,   the demand for short—term bonds is equal to the supply of short—term
bonds: the increase in government debt has given rise to an exactly equal
and offsetting increase in the demand for bonds.
      Several comments are in order. First, if all of the proceeds of the

increased debt went to reduce the tax liabilities of the young, the reduction

in the debt could have occurred either the next or the    following period; the
reduction in the debt would    have to be financed, of course, by a levy on the

same generation (the middle aged, if done     the period immediately following
the   increased deficit; the aged, if done the following period). More gen-

erally, if each generation lives for n periods, the deficit need not be

reduced until n periods later. All that is required for the validity of

the   irrelevance theorem is   that there be no intergenerational redistribution;

that is, those who benefit from the increased deficit, through lower taxes,

must be the same ones who pay for the subsequent reduction in the government

debt (and who pay for the interest in the intervening periods). By the same

token, as we shall emphasize in the next section, whenever there are inter-

generational redistributions effected through the deficit policy, then public

financial policy is not irrelevant; it has real effects.

      It is important to observe that the individual, when he decides to buy

the additional short—term bonds, does not know the real return on these bonds;

there is uncertainty concerning the price level. He does not spend the in-

crease in his purchasing power, made possible by the reduction in his lump

sum taxes, in a "balanced" way, keeping, say, the relative proportions of

safe and risky assets (capital, indexed bonds, long—term bonds, short—term

unindexed bonds) unchanged. The individual knows that there is risk asso—
                                            21




ciated with his tax liabilities in the future, and he chooses his portfolio

to take this risk into account. When he does this, it turns out that he

increases his demand for the securities which have increased in supply by

exactly the amount that they have increased in supply.                                -




       Arguments analogous to those presented for changes in the short-term

bond supply can be made for changes in the supply of other bonds. Rather

than repeat the argument, we consider, in the next section, the consequences

of a change in the structure of the public debt.


2.4 The Second Irrelevance Theorem

       A temporary change in the structure of the government debt has no real

or financial effects, provided it is accompanied with the appropriate lump

sum taxes/subsidies to avoid the change having any distributive effects.

The change in the structure of the debt this period means, of course, that

its interest obligations next period will be altered; and this necessitates

some change, either in taxes or in debt.

       The perturbation in public financial policy considered in the second

irrelevance theorem can be easily described. We increase, say, the supply

of indexed bonds and decrease the supply of short—term (unindexed) bonds in

such a way as to leave the government budget constraint still satisfied.

Thus, denoting the change in the supply of indexed bonds by LD and the

change in the supply of short-term (unindexed) bonds by AB , we require


(12)                        =       0,           > 0       <0
            q1tD1 + vAB                                ,




       The next period, the increase in indexed bonds gives rise to additional

interest payments of            ,   while   the decrease in (unindexed) short—term.
                                      22




 bonds reduces interest payments by iB .      Since we are concerned with tem-

porary changes in the structure of the government debt, we assume that the

next period the government decides to reduce the indexed bonds by the axaount

that it had increased them the previous period, and increase the (unindexed)

short—term bonds by the amount it had reduced them the previous period.

 (The analysis for the case where the return to the ex ante structure of the

government debt is postponed follows along similar lines.)

       This gives rise to a deficit (or surplus) in the government budget.

To finance this deficit, we impose a lump sum tax on the middle aged and the

aged. The exact pattern of the imposition of this tax makes no difference.

All that is required is that the individuals know the preceding period what

fraction of the tax burden they will bear, i.e.:


(13)              =
                       [(1+i)v" lLBF + q111 + jv1tD1]


(14)        32—l = (l—a)[(l+i)v1tB + q111 + iv1,D1]

       To see that such a perturbation in public financial policy has no

effects, we again assume that all prices remain unchanged. We then show

that individuals' consumption opportunity sets are completely unaffected.

Hence, they will choose the same point in the consumption opportunity set

as they chose in the initial equilibrium. We then show that, when this

point in the consumption opportunity set is chosen, the demand for all

securities——including those whose supply has changed——equals the supply.

The change in the structure of the government debt has given rise to an

exactly offsetting change in the demand for different financial instruments.
                                                          23




        To see that the consumption opportunity set remains unchanged, we again

use a single caret to denote values of variables in the initial situation,

and double carets to denote values of variables in the new situation.                    Let


             A
(15a)        a.    =
                           it   ,       L.it   =   L.it         all i,t
              it



(15b)        ijt =         ijt                                  all   i,j,t



(15c)        ijt =         ijt                                  all i,j,t except j=l, and t=t


                       A
(15d)              =                +
                       B1               cttB
                       A
                   =                + (l_ct)B
             B2        B2
                       A
                   = D1+cttD

                   =
                       D2           + (1—ct) z'D



        To check that such a policy is feasible, first observe that at time t ,

the   increased expenditures on indexed bonds, less the decreased expenditures

on (unindexed) short—term bonds adds up, for the young, to


                       +


which, by (12) is identically zero. Similarly for the middle aged. Second,

notice that with the perturbation in their portfolios "corrected" next period,

the change in the wealth of the young the second period of their life is


                                          +                + iv1tDj]
                                          24




exactly enough to pay off the extra tax liabilities which they will face

(equation (14a)). (Similarly for the middle aged—turned—aged.) It is thus

immediate that this change in portfolio leaves them in a position to pay

their extra tax liabilities and have their consumption completely unaffected

(in every state of nature).

        To complete the argument that the consumption opportunity sets are

identical, we must     again show that   any point which is feasible with the new

public    financial   policy was feasible under the original public financial

policy. This follows by exactly parallel arguments. (Again, we need to

point out that the two consumption opportunity sets will be equivalent if

there are no binding non—negativity constraints. Since it may be more

difficult for individuals to issue indexed bonds or perpetuities than to

issue short—term bonds, non—negativity constraints may be more relevant

here than in the previous case.)

        Since the consumption opportunity sets are the same, if the individual

chooses the careted values of variables in the original situation, he will

choose the double—careted values in the new situation.
                                                                 A
       The total increase in the demand for indexed bonds at time t is


            cxLD1 + (l-c)          =



the    increase in the supply of indexed bonds, while the total decrease in the

demand for short—term (unindexed) bonds is


                               =
            ctB + (l—c)LB


just   equal to the decrease in the supply. Since the demand     for   all other

securities (and for all commodities) remains unchanged, if in the initial
                                          25




    situation all securities and goods markets cleared, they do in the new

    Situation.

           This result has an important implication. It means that changes in the

    number of indexed bonds have no consequences, either real or financial.

    Only   if the issuance of indexed bonds opens up trading opportunities for
    individuals   who are alive contemporaneously over two periods to exchange

    risks which they otherwise could not can the provision of indexed bonds by

    the government have any real effects. It is obvious that a sufficient con-

    dition for the government provision of indexed bonds to have, no real effects

    is that there be a complete set of securities at date t whose payoffs are

    contingent on the state at t+l (a condition which is far weaker than a

    complete set of Arrow—Debreu securities markets). An alternative sufficient

    condition is that the private market provide an indexed bond (or that there

    exists a linear combination of securities which provides a safe real return).

           A third set of circumstances in which the public provision of indexed

    bonds does not matter, even when such bonds are not provided in the private

market, are those in which, were there an exchange market f or indexed bonds,

    there would be no trade in them; in such situations, we say that   an indexed
    bond   market is redurLdant) A sufficient condition for the redundancy of the
    indexed bond market is that individuals be risk neutral.2


    1. Newbery and Stiglitz (1982) introduce the concept of redundant markets    in
       their analysis of the constrained Pareto optimality of markets with
       rational expectations but an incomplete set of risk markets.

2.    That is, individuals' utility functions are of the form c1 + c2 + c3
      If the indirect utility function corresponding to u(c1, c2, c3) can be
      written as v(I, g1, g2) , where       is the intertemporal price between
      the first and second period, and g is the intertemporal price between
      the first and third period, and I is (the present discounted value of)
      lifetime income, income risk neutrality implies that v = I1)(g1, g2)
      In general, this is not sufficient to ensure the redundancy of indexed
•




      bond markets.  (Cf. Newbery—Stiglitz (1982), Stiglitz (1982).)
                                              26




       It should be equally obvious that, in general, if for some inexplicable

reason an indexed bond (or its equivalent) were not provided in the exchange

market, and such a security is not redundant, then the government provision

of this security will have real effects. Provided the government has suffi-

cient flexibility in its imposition of lump sum taxes and subsidies, the

provision of these indexed bonds will be a Pareto improvement.


2.5 The Third Irrelevance Theorem

       An increase in the nominal interest rate on short—term (unindexed)

ernment bonds financed by an increase in the supply of short—term bonds has

financial effects, but no real effects. The price level (v) changes, and

consequently   the price of other securities relative to the short—term bond
changes; but the price of these other securities relative to consumption
goods remains unchanged.
       Assume the government increases the interest rate on short—term bonds

outstanding   at date     t       from i to        .   This   generates a deficit the
next period of (Ai)B ,             where


                =



       Now we assume that the real return on all securities remains unchanged,

        (j = 1,2) , all       T    is   unchanged, v remains unchanged, and the real

value of government debt at all subsequent dates is unchanged, i.e.:

                        A
(16)        vB vB
It is immediate from (4) that under these conditions the government's budget

constraint is satisfied now if it was satisfied originally. Since from the
                                          27




 structure   of the demand functions individuals' real demands for securities

 at all dates (e.g., vTBiT) is a function only of real returns, taxes and

wages (all of which remain unchanged), real demands are unchanged.. Since by

hypothesis   real supplies are unchanged, if demand equalled supply initially,
 it still does. Note that for            to remain unchanged requires (from (2))
that


(17)
             V+l


remain unchanged, for T > t+l . This,          together with our earlier result

((16)—(17)), implies that an increase in the interest rate at time t increases

prices (decreases v )    at   all subsequent dates proportionately, and increases

the supply of bonds in proportion to the decrease in the price of short—term

bonds (v)

       It immediately follows that any sequence of changes in the interest

rate paid on short—term bonds has no real effects.


2.6 Combinations of Policies

       The three irrelevance propositions can be combined to consider a variety

of financial policies of the government which can be viewed as combinations

of the three particular policies considered. Thus, if the government decides

to issue indexed bonds at time t     ,   to be retired at time t+l   ,   then,
provided the appropriate lump sum taxes are imposed to offset any distribu-

tional consequences, the policy has neither real nor financial (price) effects.1




1. We can also make a direct argument for the irrelevance of this financial
   policy, as we noted earlier.
                                       28




Such a change can be decomposed into two steps. The government issues short—

term   unindexed   bonds, with the proceeds used to reduce lump sum taxes on the

young or middle aged. By the first irrelevance theorem, such a change has

neither real nor financial consequences. Then the government temporarily

exchanges the increase in the short—term uniridexed bonds for short—term

indexed bonds, again imposing taxes (the next period) on the (then) middle

aged and old to finance the deficit which will then result.. By the second

irrelevance theorem, such a change has no real or financial consequences.

       As a second example, suppose that the government simultaneously in-

creases the supply of short—term bonds and increases the interest rate it

pays on these bonds (perhaps because it mistakenly believes that it must in

order to sell the increased supply of these bonds). Assume that at the same

time it increases the supply of bonds it announces that it will shortly

retire the additional bonds, in such a way as to have no intergenerational

distributional effects. Then, such a change can be thought of as a combina-

tion of a temporary increase in the supply of short—term bonds (which, by

the first irrelevance theorem, has no effects) and an increase in the interest

rate (which, by the third irrelevance theorem, has no real effects but does

increase the rate of inflation).


2.7 An Alternative Interpretation

       Note that if individuals believe that the rate of inflation is going to

be higher as a result of the increase in the supply of short—term bonds, then

equilibrium can be restored (and their beliefs confirmed) if the interest

rate which the government pays rises in accord with their expectations.
                                    29




     To put it another way, though we have presented the analysis as if the

government sets the interest rate on government bonds, we could have phrased

the analysis in a slightly different way; rather than announcing interest

rates which the government will pay at different dates in different contin-

gencies, we could have announced the corresponding bond supplies, and let

the market determine the interest rates which are consistent with equilibrium.

(This way of looking at the matter has a slightly greater sense of realism,

since the interest rates on short—term bonds are determined in competitive

auction markets, in response to government announcements concerning the

supply of bonds.)


III. The Relevance of Public Financial Policy

     In general, any financial policy other than those presented in the pre-

ceding section will have both real and financial effects. Public financial

policy is not irrelevant. Since public financial policy matters, it is im-

portant to ask what are the relative merits of alternative financial policies.

The objective of this and the next section is to show that financial policy

is relevant and to provide some insights into the consequences of alternative

policies.

     To do this, we simplify the general model presented in the preceding

section. We assume individuals live for only two periods (which eliminates

the possibility of exchange securities), working only in the first.'

     We illustrate our general proposition concerning the relevance of public

financial policy by considering the kind of financial policy discussed in the




1. Thus, the model which we analyze here is a slight extension of that
   presented in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).
                                       30




first irrelevance theorem. The government increases its debt at one date)

t1 ,   with   the proceeds distributed as lump sum payments (either to the young

or the old); and at some later date, t2 , reduces the debt. To do this, it

again raises taxes. The dates t1 and t2 are sufficiently far apart that

quite different generations are involved; there are intertemporal redistribu-

tion effects. (In intervening periods it increases the short—term bond supply

to pay the additional interest Costs.) The question is, under what conditions

will the change in debt policy have no real effects, e.g., on the rate of

capital accumulation?'

       There is one special case that may be helpful in developing our intuition

as to why public financial policy is, in general, relevant. Assume that there

is no risk, and bonds and capital are thus perfect substitutes. Clearly, they

must yield the same return. This in turn implies that if the change in debt

policy is to have no effect, the price level in the new equilibrium must be

the same as the price level in the old equilibrium at every date t .      But

this implies that the real supply of bonds must have increased in the period

   < t < t2 .     But for those generations between t1 and t2      neither their

taxes2 nor wages are changed, and thus their savings must remain unchanged at

each date. But if savings are unchanged, while real debt is increased,

capital accumulation must be decreased. It is impossible for financial policy

not to matter.




1. There is a prima facie case that such a change will have a real effect on
   the intergenerational distribution of welfare, except if there are exactly
   offsetting changes in private bequests, as Barro has argued. For several
   theoretical objections to Barro's conclusions, see Stiglitz (1982).

2. Except to the slight extent necessary to finance the interest on the
   additional bonds.
                                       31




       Similarly,   if the real debt remained unchanged (so v changes inversely

to Bt ),1 at t1—l individuals would recognize that the return to holding

bonds will be lower for the next period as a result of the increased debt.

But this would decrease their demand for bonds. Market equilibrium at t1—l

would then require that bond prices change at that date; but then the real

bond supply at that date is altered, and this would have real effects, e.g.,

on capital accumulation.

       Exactly parallel arguments hold if there is uncertainty, so that debt

and capital are not perfect substitutes. To see this most vividly, we re-

strict ourselves to policies which leave i unchanged, and leave the mean

real return to short—term bonds unchanged (so that the mean rate of inflation

also   remains unchanged)      The government announces that at some date t+1

in the future it will alter the financial policy from what it had previously

planned. It will increase the short—term debt in some state, and decrease

it in another. (In all other states and dates, financial policy is unchanged.)

Moreover, the surplus (deficit) thus generated will be distributed to the

young of the      t+l generation. We show that, unless the marginal utility

of   income in   the two states is identical (the individual is risk neutral),

such   a policy has   real effects.

       If   we simplify our general model and assume that the individual has a
separable utility function of the form


1.   This corresponds (for our model) to the quantity theory, i.e., the price
     level is inversely proportional to the supply of outside short—term bonds
     (money).

2.   It should be clear that our analysis extends to more general changes in
     public financial policy.
                                        32




             U1(c1, L) + U2(c2)



 and for notational simplicity we assume the government only issues short—

 term bonds (there are no long—term or indexed bonds), then we can write the

tth generation's first—order condition for the optimal investment portfolio


 (18)
             EIJ [(1+n)K + (l+pt)B —    T2](p       —   r) = 0
(where, it will be recalled,      fl is the real return on capital).

        We shall consider two cases. In the first, the price of bonds at t+l

changes in the two states, SO          changes. Then, the individual's portfolio
                                  Pt
condition (18) will still be satisfied if and only if


(19)
             tfU[c] (p -    n)}   + U[c] (p -            n))   =   0


(where the superscripts a and b denote the two states with altered prices).

Recalling our hypothesis that the mean return is the same, this implies for a

small change in p , that2


(20)         Bu[P —     a+    ,a =
                                       Bu1'[p   —
                                                    bj +
This will not, in general, be satisfied, except if U" = 0          ,   i.e.,   the mdi—
vidual is risk neutral.

        Assume, on the other hand, that the price of bonds at t±l does not

change. The increase in the supply of bonds results in an increase in the

demand for bonds by the young (because of the lump sum transfer payment made




1. Assuming the two cases are equally likely. The modification for the
   more general case is straightforward.

2. We are making use of the assumption that the mean rate of inflation
   remains unaltered.
to the young with the proceeds of the bonds), but the increase in the demand

for bonds will be less than the increase in supply provided only that first

period consumption and equities are normal. (That is, we require that a

decrease in the lump sum taxes by AT1+1 '+1 leads to an increase in

the real demand for short—term bonds by an amount less than AT1+i ,   a

natural assumption.)

     Hence, except under the strong and unrealistic hypothesis of risk

neutrality, a mean inflation preserving change in financial policy has real

effects.


3.1 Financial Policy and Intergenerational Risk Sharing

     In the preceding section we established that, except under the special

conditions specified in theorems 1 through 3, public financial policy has

important redistributive consequences, and whenever public financial policy

has intergenerational redistributive consequences, public financial policy

matters. The level of capital accumulation, for instance, will depend on

public financial policy.

     Different public financial policies will have different implications

for how the risks faced by society are shared among different generations.

The intergenerational redistributions to which variations in debt policy

give rise can be used to provide a kind of insurance which the market cannot

provide (since members of one generation cannot make contracts with members

of another generation, except through the government). The intertemporal

distribution of risk is presumably one of the objectives of a well designed

social security program; as we have asserted before, it is impossible to

separate out debt policy from social security. All public financial policies

must be examined together.
                                          34




       Thus, if   the   present generation is lucky, and experiences, say, a high

wage   or a high return on capital, it can share this "luck" with succeeding
generations. In return, generations which have particularly bad luck (say,
a low wage), can be partially compensated by an increase in social security
payments   to the elder individuals in that generation.        (It should be clear

that this insurance argument involves no altruism, and thus is distinctly

different from the considerations which motivate intergenerational transfers

of income based on children's welfare entering parents' utility functions.)

       In this section we shall show how different financial policies give

rise to different stochastic processes for prices (and the other relevant

variables in the economy), and how, as a result, different financial policies

affect the extent to which intertemporal risks are shared among different

generations.

       We shall consider three polar policies: the first and simplest keeps

the real value of debt (vB) fixed; the second keeps the price level (v)

fixed and has the debt supply change by whatever amount is necessary to en-

sure that; and    the   third keeps the debt fixed (and corresponds to the

Friedman rule for this economy, where there is no growth).

       There is a widespread belief that the last rule    is   the best rule.

Variations in the debt (money supply) lead to variability in the level of

economic activity, and make it difficult for firms to distinguish variations

in demand arising from variations in, say, tastes (real changes in the

economy) from variations in demand arising from monetary disturbances. In

the simple model which we have developed in this paper, these beliefs are

shown to be incorrect. A constant supply of government debt (or money)
                                             35




forces individuals to absorb a considerable amount of risk which could be

shared better (among different generations) by alternative financial poli-

cies. Thus, if the next generation has a high wage, this leads to a high

demand for assets in general, including financial assets; as a result, the

value of government bonds (relative to goods) increases; but conversely, if

the next generation has a low wage, the demand for financial assets is

reduced, and the price of bonds (relative to consumption goods) is reduced;

some of the consequences of variations in the t+l generation's wages are

effectively borne by the members of the th generation. This, we will see,

is also true of the other financial policies which we consider. The issue

is thus not whether one policy or another eliminates risk; rather, the issue

is, which of the simple policies being considered is most effective in sharing

the risks among different generations. We shall show that for the model in-

vestigated here, the policy of a constant real debt is preferable to the

other two policies.

       a.      Constant real money supply. This is the easiest policy to analyze.

To generate a constant real money supply, the government imposes a lump sum

tax on the young, used to retire the government debt, whenever the wage exceeds

w ,    the   mean wage, and conversely when the wage is less than             For sim-

plicity, we set i = 0            for all   t.     Thus, the government sets


               —bIB =        —
(21)
                        (w
As a result, the net income (after paying lump sum taxes) of each generation

is constant, at w .           Notice   that this implies that the debt follows a random

walk. Since By          k



1. For simplicity, throughout this section we assume that labor supply is
   fixed.
                                                    ib



                --    —       wt_w
                              vB
                                      -
                                      —    —
                                               wt__w
                                                k


Moreover



                v1        -   v+iB    -
                                      —   vt+iBt+1
                                                         -
                                                             v+iB    -
                                                                     -     +
                                                                               w1 -
                                                                                 k
                                                                                      w

                v             vtBt                  vB
The probability distribution of the return to debt is the same every period,

and    hence,   since income (after tax) is the same, the real demand for gov—

ernment debt is indeed fixed.

        One   might    be tempted, in this situation, to say that the change in debt

(government deficits) causes the change in                    prices;    but this would be mis-

leading. The exogenous event in the model is the level of wages; government

policy adjusts to the change in wages in such a way as to result in prices

moving proportionately to the debt; but prices would change, as we have em-

phasized, even in the absence of a change in the debt supply.

       The variability of consumption may be easily calculated. Since real

income is fixed the first period, there is no variability In a1 .                         A given

fraction of income, s ,              will be   saved,' and      of   this, a particular fraction

a will be invested in capital and the remainder in government bonds. Thus,


(22)            c = s[a(1+fl)             + (l_a)(l+p)]


                =
                    s[a(l+fl)   + (1—a)




1. Since    net income, after taxes, is constant, and since the rate of return
      to bonds and equities is constant, savings rates and portfolio alloca—
      tions do not change over time.
                                                   37




                                                        t+i
                                                              -
                  =                + (1-a)
                      s[ci(l+n)                 (1 +
                                                                  w)
 Note that consumption in the second period of the th generation individual

 depends not on his own wages, but on the wages of those working when he is

 old. The higher their wages, the greater his consumption. We can now cal—

 cul ate


                                2—2 2
 (23)            var c =       s w [ci var r + (1—ci) 2varw I
                                                                  k'

                 =sw2—2
                      ci2   varfl+varw
 (since By =          (l-a)s = k    ).    There is an alternative way of calculating the

variance of c2t .           Since        c1 and K are fixed, the variance of c2 is
simply the variance of national income.


                                            2
(24)             var c2      var w + K var i


        b.       Constant price level. Assume the government adjusts the deficit

every period in such a way as to keep the price level constant; it uses the

proceeds (finances the deficit) with a lump sum distribution to (tax upon)

the aged. The individual saves a fraction s of his first period income,

and of this he invests a fraction ci               in capital and the remaining in debt.1
We allow s to be a function of w, s(w)                  .     Without loss of generality, let
p =    v=    1   for all t .       For the demand for government bonds to equal the

supply, we require that


(25)             s()(l_ci) =



1. In contrast to the previous case, where we proved a and
                                                           s constant,
   here we simply assume that ci is constant and s a function of w
  But see fn. 2, p. 40.
                                                  38




It immediately follows from the government's budget constraint that if the

changes in debt are offset by changes in payments to the aged,


(26)        _T2t =             —B   —
                                        iB        =
                                                       (l_ct)[s(w+1)w÷1
                                                                          —   s(w)w]   —
                                                                                           itB
and hence


(27a)       ci = (l—s)y

(27b)       c2 =        s a(l+)     + (l_ct)s+iw+1


                K(l+nt) + w+1s+1(l_cL)


(from the national income identities). Now, there is variability in the

individual's income in both the first and second periods of his life, and

his consumption the second period depends both on his wage and the wage the

next period. For small variances, we can calculate the variance of

and c2 in a straightforward manner:


            var c1 = var
                                             -.
(28a)                            (1-s (w))w -      (1-s   — s w) var w



(28b)       var c2 =        (1—ct)2(s + ?)2 var w + 2 var r + (l+)2 var K


            =   (s
                        ,—2 2 —2 + (l-o)2)
                     + s w) (o (l-1-)                   var w + (ctsw) 2 var r

Suppose the government chooses i (the rate of return on government debt)

in   such a way as to make the average value of K the same as it                 is in the

situation   with     a constant real debt. Since K is the same, and average

income of the young is the same in this regime as in the previous, sa
                                               39




must be the same. We postulate that a is the same, implying that the

average values of c1 and c2 are the same. But while the variance of

c1 is higher with the constant price rule, the variance of c2 may be

higher or lower with the constant real debt rule. (Compare (23) and (28).)

        Consider first the limiting case with s = 1            .    Then straightforward

calculations show that the variance of c2 is lower with the constant real

debt policy provided only that



                       -(1-a)2
            l+

If government debt constitutes 15% of individuals' savings, this implies

that when the mean real return on capital exceeds 16%, the policy of a

constant real debt is unambiguously preferable.

     More general comparisons require a specification of the utility function.

Assume we have a utility function of the form

                             U(c2)
            U =
                    U(c1)+    1+6


Then, the loss in welfare from the consumption variability can be approxi-

mated by, assuming U"(c1)/U'(c1)               U"(c2)/U'(c2) (which will be true if

    6 and var i        is   small)


            a
                var c1 +
                            1          —a var w (1—s —
                                var c2 —                           s w)



            +   (s + s w) ((1—ct)
                                     2
                                         + a2(1—n)
                                               —2
                                                   )}
                                                        —2
                                                        K var r
                                1+6                      1+6


where
                                             40




            a = — -j- ,       the Arrow—Pratt measure of absolute risk aversion.


This should be contrasted with the loss of welfare in the preceding case.

The loss of welfare is greater with a policy of a constant price level than

with a policy of a constant real debt, under even weaker conditions than

those derived for s = 1         1,2,3




1. We require

            (1—s -     s')2(l-1-)   + (s + s')2((l-c)2 a2(1+)2) > 1
                       2
   i.e, (s + s' (l+5)

        + (s + s'w)2(l—2a + c2 + ct2(i+2 +rì2)) —     2(s + s') —   2(s   + s'w)

        +ô         0

2. While in the previous analysis of the constant real debt policy the result
   that the savings rate was a constant held for all utility functions, here
   we have simply assumed a savings function, without deriving it. The dif-
   ficulty in deriving the optimal savings behavior arises from the random
   lump sum tax imposed on the individual in the second period of his life.
   Still, it is easy to show that if the distribution of wt+l is either in-
   dependent     of wt or a function
                                   only of wt , that St and c will
   simply be functions of wt .          It
                                    is possible to analyze some special cases.
      Ci)   If
             individuals obtain utility only from consumption ifl the second
  period, s = 1  .     will then be a constant if the individual has constant
  relative risk aversion, and the distribution of Wt+l/wt is independent of
  t .  (We thus need to assume that wt is a random walk, in contrast to the
  rest of this paper, where we have assumed that Wt are independently and
  identically distributed random variables.) Alternatively, if there is
  constant absolute risk aversion, then the demand for risky assets is a
  constant, so that instead of (25) we obtain

            we_k = B
     In this limiting case, the variance associated with the constant price
  rule and that associated with the constant real debt rule are identical.
    (ii) If there is no capital——a pure consumption—loans model——then
  a = 0 . Then if individuals have a quadratic utility function, consump-
  tion will be a linear function of w so that, instead of (25) we obtain
                                                 40a




                                 =


   and

           c1 = (l_b)w                   —

               2t
           c            =
                            bw+i+
3. We have limited our discussions to the case where the proceeds of the in-
   crease in the government debt are used to finance a lump sum subsidy to
   the aged. It is possible to show that with the alternative financial
   policy, of distributing the proceeds of the increased government debt to
   the young, it is not possible to maintain (forever) a constant price level,
   under plausible utility functions.
      Assume first that all individuals have constant absolute risk aversion.
   Then the.demand for capital is fixed, independent of income. Thus, the
   variations in the debt must be large enough to accommodate the variations
   in income, i.e., if v = 1 ,     = 0       I
                    =


           Bi           =
                             wt_K
  But since there is no way, at t—l to know w , this policy is not imple—
  mentable: there is no policy of the form considered here which can maintain
  a constant price level. The reason for this is simple. Increases in the
  supply of debt generate an increase in demand on a dollar—for—dollar basis.
     Assume, in contrast, that all individuals have constant relative risk
  aversion. Then
                    =            + B —
                            {w
           _(l—a)(
           —                         B
                    c                t—i

  and

           Kt   —
                     l—c     t
 so
                    =
           zK               i:ABt
  Define                Bt — (l—ct)w
                                 40b




Then

              (l—ct)(w — w) —
(29)   B* =          t
        t                a
   The process (29) can best be studied by taking a continuous time approx-
imation, which generates a process of the familiar Ornstein—Uhlenbeck form.

In steady state, AB has zero mean and variance                    This
ignores, of course, the non—negativity constraints on K and on c
Taking these into account, it is apparent that a policy of keeping price
constant is not, in the stipulated circumstances, feasible. Even before
the policy breaks down, however, the variance in income to which it gives
rise is likely to be greater than for the policy of constant real money
supply.
                                            41




       (c) Constant nominal money supply. Though this is purportedly the

"simplest" policy, it is not the simplest policy to analyze. The probability

distribution of the return to bonds will not be the same at each date, and

hence, even if the utility functions have constant elasticity, the demand for

bonds will not be a constant proportion of savings. To see this most simply,

assume there are two equally likely states with wages w1 and w2. For sim—

plicity, assume the probability distribution of the return to capital is the

same in both. For simplicity, let us assume s = 1 (individuals get no en-

joyment out of consumption the first period of their lives). Equilibrium

is characterized by a value of a Ka,                      ,   and   Kb satisfying


            EU(Ka(l÷fl) + VaB)((l+l) —            (l+))   ÷ EU'(K8(i+)
                              b
            + v'B ((l+i)! —         (l+))        0



                 (Kb(l+) + VaB) ((l+i) -             (l+n))   + EU' (Kb(l+n)

(30)
            + vbBl+j) -           (l+))   = 0


            K
             a     a =
                 +vB      w
                           a


            Kb +vB
                 b
                   =      b
                          w

Where we have assumed interest payments are financed by lump sum taxes on the aged.
In the good state, the demand for bonds is high because savings are high.
However, if the    economy moves to a poor state next period, there will be a
fall   in the value of bonds. Hence, although individuals normally invest

more in bonds in the good state, as a proportion of savings, they invest

less. Thus K is more          variable than w , e.g.,               c takes on four values,

depending   on the "state":
                                                     42




                 aa   =     (Wa   - VB)(l+fl)      + BVa


                            (Wa   —
                                      VaB) (l+) + vbB

(31)                                                      b
             c
                 bb   =     (w
                              b   —   vbB)(l+fl)   + By


                 ba   =     (Wb -     vbB (l+) +    vB

Since


             var c            (1+)2(var w + B2 var v — 2B coy (w,v))


             + B2 var v +               var (l+)




  and   it   is clear that the policy of a constant debt (B) induces a greater

 variance in consumption than does the policy of constant real money supply,

 provided n        is     large enough.

        In this section, we have compared three alternative, simple financial

policies. None of these policies are, however, optimal. In Stiglitz (1982),

I show how the optimal intertemporal distribution of welfare can, in fact,

be implemented through the appropriate set of public financial policies. I

show, moreover, that to implement the optimal financial policy, one needs

only to have sufficient flexibility in the structure of social security pay-

ments and a single public financial instrument; additional bonds (including

indexed government securities) make no difference. However, if there are

restrictions on the extent to which social security payments (taxes) may
                                    43




vary from year to year, then additional financial instruments are necessary

in order to implement the optimal intertemporal distribution of welfare1


IV. Monetary and Debt Policy

     In this paper, I have assumed that there is a single, interest bearing

financial asset, which presumably can be used for transactions purposes as

well as a store of value. Recent developments in monetary institutions

(interest bearing checking accounts) makes this assumption not as unreason-

able as it might have seemed a decade or so ago. How important is it that

(until recently) demand deposits did not earn interest? Will the widespread

use of CMA accounts have a fundamental effect on the structure of the

economy? It is plausible that what remains of non--interest bearing financial

assets-—cash and currency used to pay those taxi cabs who still do not take

VISA cards or checks——will be the driving force in the determination of

economic behavior that monetarists have claimed in the past?

     These questions cannot be settled by theoretical arguments. Theoretical

analyses can establish whether the presence of a non—interest bearing financial

asset which is used to facilitate transactions has qualitative effects; they

cannot, however, assess the quantitative importance of any effects noted.




1. The characterization of the optimal intergenerational scheme for risk
   sharing is not an easy matter. In one case, we can borrow results from
   the theory of optimal buffer stocks to provide a fairly complete charac-
   terization. Assume that the return to capital is not random, that indi-
   viduals have an inelastic labor supply, and that they only consume the
   second period of their lives. Assume, moreover, that wt is i.i.d.
   Then the stock of resources available for consumption or investment at
   date t is S = wt + Kt_i(l+ii) , where Kt =    S   —
                                                      c    .  The optimal in—
   tertemporal consumption plan entails a nile which maximizes E'EU(ct)(l7l4S)t
   s.t. Kt > 0 .It  is known that the optimal savings rule is highly non—linear.
  Note that none of the financial rules we have considered are of the required
   form. See Newbery—Stiglitz (1981).
                                         44




       If there were only one financial asset, non-interest bearing money, our

analysis would be completely unaffected. We established earlier that corre-

sponding to any equilibrium, with a particular interest rate at each date,

and a particular level of prices at each date, there were an infinity of

equivalent (in a real sense) equilibria, which djffered in the interest rate

they paid and in the price level. Among the set of equilibria is one with

the nominal interest rate equal to zero.

       However, if there are two financial assets, one of which is non—interest

bearing while the other yields a return, it is obvious that, if the former

asset is to be held by anyone, it must have some property which makes it more

attractive (at the same yield) than the interest bearing asset. It is con—

ventionally postulated that the non—interest bearing financial asset can be

more readily used for transactions purposes. We write the demand function

for money as


(32)           =
                   M(p,          ..; w,           ...;
                                                         1'     ...;

           flfl           :11
                          - V t+1......:T.T
                                       t'   ...)
                                              -
                                                  t+1'



The demand for money is a function of prices at date t and at all subse-

quent dates, the yield on interest bearing assets at date t and at all sub-

sequent dates; the yield on equities at date t and at all subsequent dates;

taxes and transfers at date t and at all subsequent dates; and the levels

of real income at date t ,
                             I   ,   and at all subsequent dates.

       Two properties of this demand function should be noted. First, the

level of income appears explicitly to remind us of the transactions motive

for holding money, but it should be emphasized that this is probably not an
                                   45




adequate reduced form representation; for instance, changes in tax or debt

policy may induce changes in the sets of transactions that occur; these

generate changes in the demand for money which are quite distinct from the

change that they might induce in real income; similarly, changes in risk

will not only have a direct effect on portfolio composition, but also may

have an effect on the transactions demand for money. Since our main objective

is to argue that the introduction of a second, non—interest bearing asset

implies that government financial policy will not be neutral, the oversimpli-

fied version of the demand for money which we will employ will suffice for

our present purposes.

     Second, we postulate that the demand for money is homogeneous of degree

one In all prices. Increasing prices at all dates leaves unchanged the return

on money, and is simply a change in units. This is, of course, well known.

But it should also be noted that the demand for money is not homogeneous of

degree one in the current price. Changing the current price does increase

the transactions demand for money; but if subsequent prices remain unchanged,

the real return on money is reduced, and the ttassetI demand for money will,

in general, decrease. There may, of course, be some special specifications

of utility functions and transactions technology for which the return on money

does not affect its demand, but for which the only determinant of the demand

for money (besides the level of income) is the opportunity cost associated

with holding the non—interest bearing asset (money) rather than the interest

bearing financial asset

     Under further restrictions, we might be able to derive a demand function

for money in which the entire impact of future events (taxes, interest rates,
                                          46




yields on equities) on the demand for money could be summarized in, say, a

wealth variable. We could then write down a demand function for money


            Md
                 =
(33)
                     Md(I,   i;Wt)


which is of the kind conventionally seen in undergraduate texts. It is impor-

tant to emphasize, however, that a large number of not clearly articulated

assumptions had to be introduced into the analysis to reduce the general

demand function for money down to the simple form postulated above.

       Consider now the impact of an open market operation which entails the

government exchanging a bond at t1 for money, which it will subsequently

undo at a later date t2 .       We   focus our attention on an economy with infin-

itely lived individuals, to avoid the intertemporal distribution issues

raised earlier. We wish to show that such a change will, in general, have

real effects on the economy.

       Assume that it has no real impact, i.e., real incomes and real returns

are unchanged. This necessitates that the price level at time t increases

proportionately (so real holdings of money remain unchanged; otherwise, real

expenditures on transactions would change). The price level needs to change

proportionately not only at t1 ,       but at all dates between t1 and t2
This, in turn, implies that if the real return to holding bonds is to be un-

changed at t1 and t2, i and i must change to offset the change in
                                1          2

the rate of change in prices. But a change in i and i will, in general,
                                                       1         2
generate a change in the demand for money. Only if the demand for money is invar-

iant to the financial opportunity cost of holding money (i.e., the demand for
                                       47




money is interest inelastic) will it be neutral. This is, of course, what

monetarists have assumed all along. The question is, is there any reasonable

specification of utility functions and transactions technologies which gen-

erates this? One can, of course, write down models with the individual needing

a fixed amount of money to engage in each transaction; but such models really

do little more than assume what is to be proved. The recent innovations in

financial institutions (CMA accounts) suggest that significant changes in the

opportunity cost of holding money will indeed result in significant changes

in the amount of non—interest bearing financial assets which individuals are

willing to hold for transactions purposes.'

     We have ignored so far the possibility that there is another financial

asset, produced in the private sector, which can be a substitute, for trans—

actions purposes, for the non—interest bearing government financial asset.

For simplicity, let us assume it is a perfect substitute. For both of these

assets to be held, it must yield a return of zero. The return to the suppliers

of this asset is thus i .    Assume they have a horizontal supply schedule,

at i .    Then, for an interior solution, the market equilibrium rate of
interest must initially be at 1*   ,   and must remain so after the perturbation.

Assume the change in the private supply of money just offsets the change in

the public supply of money, so that the price level remains unchanged. But

now, the supply of bonds is reduced. In our earlier analysis, corresponding

to any change in the supply of bonds, there was a corresponding change in the




1. Some of these changes may not be completely reversible: even if the oppor-
   tunity cost declines, individuals will have discovered that they "need"
   less non—interest bearing money than they had previously thought.
                                     48




demand for bonds. This will be the case here only if money and bonds are

perfect substitutes, for asset purposes, in individuals' portfolios, i.e.,

if individuals are indifferent about whether they receive the return on their

assets directly or through savings in transactions costs. In any case, there

will be a real effect on the economy through the increase in resources spent

on transactions costs (the private money supply). Only if the private money

supply is costless to produce (so i* is zero), will there be no impact,

but then the equilibrium return on bonds will be zero. 1

     We can similarly show that an ___________
                                   anticipated money rain (a lump sum dis-

tribution of money to individuals in the economy) will, in general, have

real effects. For again, assume it does not. Then, at      t1 ,   the   date of

the money rain, prices must rise above what they would have been otherwise;

hence the return to money has been altered. For the real return to bonds to

remain unchanged, the rate of interest (1) must change; but unless the

demand for money is completely interest inelastic, this will change the
                                     2
demand for (real) money at time

     If the private money supply acts as a perfect substitute for the public

money supply, then it is possible that the price of money remains unchanged,

and since the supply of bonds has not been altered, the bond market is still

in equilibrium. Under these extreme assumptions, again the only real effect




1. Neutrality can be restored if costs of the government supplying money are
   identical to the costs of the private sector producing money. If we
   assume, in contrast, that the private money supply remains unchanged, but
   the price level changes to keep the real money supply fixed, then we are
   back to our earlier analysis with no private money supply.

2. A similar observation has been made by Stanley Fischer in his excellent
   paper, "Anticipations and the Nonneutrality of Money," where he details
   the effects of a change in the money supply for a particular parameter—
   ization of the economy.
                                         49




of   a money rain is on the expenditures of resources on the production of

private.money. Ignoring this effect, it       should   again be noted that in this

instance, the change in the money supply has had neither an inflationary

effect nor a real effect.

        The skeptical reader may well have misgivings about the quantitative

significance of all of this. Is it not a good enough approximation to ignore

the costs associated with producing money?

        In macro—economics (as in any other branch of economics) we make simpli—

fications, idealizations, approximations. It is not always obvious what are

the most appropriate simplifications. Macro—economics is replete with models

where attention is centered on qualitative effects of phenomena whose quanti-

tative importance is at best dubious. There are, obviously, transactions

costs' and, in certain situations they are significant. There have been times,

such as in some recent    years in   Italy, where the shortage of small denomination

coins caused minor inconvenience. It may      have   had   some real   effects on the

economy: the consumptIon of small      candies (given in change) may have      risen.

Here,    as elsewhere, resourceful firms and individuals     should be——and are——

able    to find effective substitutes or to adapt their behavior to make       a given

money   supply "go further." It seems implausible that individuals, who are
presumed to be so flexible and rational in some dimensions, should be as rigid
and irrational with respect to their demand for money as some naive monetarist
theories seem to suggest.    The   adaptations of behavior may indeed not      be in—




1. Transactions costs, for instance, are often cited as explaining why the
  private sector (the non—banking institutions) cannot provide a set of ex-
  change media which are close substitutes to money. But the empirical
  evidence on the transactions costs associated with CNA accounts and other
  mutual funds suggests that this is not a plausible explanation. See, also,
  Bryant and Wallace (1980).
                                    50




stantaneous; and the institutional changes which facilitate the changes in

behavior may take even longer. But if the discrepancy between the return to

holding money and to bonds becomes significant enough, the economy will adapt,

to reduce the holdings of money or to enable "money" to become interest
           1
bearing.

     I am thus dubious whether the real effects of monetary policy that I

have analyzed in this section are of any quantitative significance. This is

not to say, however, that monetary policy may not have an important effect on

the economy (particularly in the short run, in the presence of short—run indi-

vidual and institutional rigidities); but the major mechanism by which this

may work arises not from a transactions or asset demand for money, but rather

from the central role of the banking system in supplying credit, and the link-

ages between monetary policy and credit availability.2


V.   Fixed Prices and Public Financial Policy

     The models considered throughout this paper have assumed that prices are

completely flexible and that, as a consequence, there is always full employ-

ment. Each generation faces risks——there is variability in the productivity

of labor and of capital—-but there is no risk of unemployment. Much of the




1. I made this prediction a decade ago, before the advent of NOW and CMA
   accounts; recent events have borne this theory out. Thus, although money
   and bonds are clearly not perfect substitutes (otherwise, no one would be
   willing to hold non—interest bearing currency), the approximation I have
   employed seems at least as plausible as the alternative polar assumption
   that individuals' demand for money is invariant to the difference between
   the return to money and the return to bonds.

2. A preliminary version of this "credit" theory of monetary policy, based on
   considerations of imperfect information in the credit market, is set forth
   in Lecture 3 of Stiglitz (1977). See, also, Stiglitz—Weiss (1981, 1982).
                                            51




earlier literature on public financial policy focused on the effect of monetary

and debt policy on aggregate demand and the level of employment. We can use

a slight modification of the model we developed earlier to show how debt policy

can be used to affect the variability in employment.

       We assume that the price level is fixed; it is well known that price

rigidities can give rise to unemployment equilibria. For simplicity, we

specialize our model, assuming a logarithmic utility function. This implies

that the savings rate is fixed at s                Moreover, since with fixed prices

financial assets are perfectly safe, the proportion of his savings that the

individual invests in government debt (l-c*)           is a function only of the

nominal rate of interest: a*(i) is the solution to

                         1)1            —   o
            E
(34)            ct(l+) + (l—ct)(l+i)


We assume that the interest payments are financed by a lump sum tax on the

young. Hence, if the debt supply is fixed at B ,            the   demand for debt is

given by



(35)        s*(l_a)) [wN —     iB]     =



when   N is the level of employment.             If we assume that in equilibrium the

demand for bonds must be equal to the supply (but equilibrium is consistent

with the demand for labor not equaling supply), then the level of employment

is given by




1. In the absence of variability in taxes the second period.
                                               52




(36)        Nt = B[l+is*(l_a)]
                        s*(l_ct)wt

In this highly simplified model, if the government fails to vary either the

debt supply or the interest rate, then variations in the level of productivity

of labor, w , lead to exactly offsetting variations in the level of employ-
ment.

        Variations in B can be used to stabilize the level of employment.

Consider the extreme case where i               0 .       If    the government varies its debt

according to the difference equation


                  =                  + Bt —
(37)                   s*(l_a*)[wN              Bt1]

where N is full employment, then there will be full employment; for the

demand for bonds will then be


(38)         s*(l_a*)(wN + B —       Bi)
which will just equal the supply. This implies that


                       s(l—cz)(w — w)N     —
                                               (B         —    B*)
                                                      1
(39)       A Bt =
                                l—s(l—c)


where

             w =
                       Ewt


and


             B*    =    s(l-ct)w N
                                     53




the equilibrium level of debt, in the absence of wage variability. This is,

of course, exactly the difference equation we analyzed earlier (fn. 3, p. 40)

in our discussion of the financial policy which would sustain a constant

price level (with the variations in government revenue being used to finance

lump sum distributions to the young). When wages are high, the government

expands the debt (an accommodating public financial policy). There is, how-

ever, a force returning the debt to its long—run equilibrium level B*


     Concluding Remarks

     In this paper, we have attempted to set the question of the effect of

government indexed bonds into the much broader context of the effect of

alternative public financial policies. Whether a change in public financial

policy has any effect depends simply on whether the change has an effect on

the intertemporal distribution of income. We have shown that there are some

important classes of public financial policies which, when appropriately

implemented, have no effect on the intergenerational distribution of welfare.

Some of these policies——such as an increase in the supply of government debt

or a change in the maturity structure of the government debt——have neither

real nor financial effects; while others, such as an increase in the interest

paid on government bonds, have financial effects but no. real .effects. On




1. Note that by lowering i it may not be possible to lower the demand for
   financial assets enough to restore full employment. If individuals believe
   that there is a significant probability that r < 0 (they will make a
   loss on their investment in capital), then even at i = 0 , (l—a)wN < B
   (This is analogous to Keynes' liquidity trap.)
      Recall in our earlier discussion of the difference equation (39) that
   the relevant non—negativity constraints will eventually be violated. This
   suggests that to maintain full employment may require combining interest
   rate policies with policies of debt expansion.
                                      54




the other hand, if the public financial policy has an effect on the inter-

generational distribution of welfare—-and virtually all changes in public

financial policy other than those spelled out in our three basic irrelevance

propositions will have an effect on the intergenerational distribution of

welfare——the change in public financial policy will have important effects

on the economy, e.g., on the pattern of capital accumulation.

       Thus, the question of the effect of the provision of government in-

dexed bonds comes down to whether a switch from, say, unindexed to indexed

government securities would have any redistributional effect. We have shown

how, under certain circumstances, an increase in the supply of indexed bonds

will have neither real nor financial effects on the economy.

       Once it is recognized that government public financial policy can have

important effects on the intergenerational distribution of welfare and the

sharing of risks among generations, it becomes important to ascertain the

consequences of alternative policies. We have shown that while none of the

simple    rules commonly discussed-—keeping the money supply or debt fixed;
keeping   the price level fixed; or keeping the real value of the government

debt   fixed——is optimal, the policy of keeping the real value of the govern-
ment fixed appears to provide for the least intergenerational variability in
consumption.
       Although most of our analysis has been conducted under the assumption

that   prices are perfectly flexible, and    that   there is a single,   interest


bearing    short—term security (which can   be   used for transactions purposes),
we have    shown that when these assumptions are removed, the case for the rele-

vance    of public financial policy is even stronger. For instance, only in
the limiting cases where the demand for money is perfectly interest inelastic
can an open market operation have no real effects if there is no          inside money;
 and if there is inside money, an open market operation can have no real effects

only if the costs of the government supplying money are identical to the costs

of the private sector producing money.

      If prices are rigid, then financial policy can serve the additional

function of reducing the variability in employment, a role which was tradi—

tionally ascribed to public financial policy but which it has lost in the con-

text of the currently fashionable neoclassical models.

     Two important questions still need to be addressed. First, we need to

formulate a model synthesizing the two roles of public financial policy, of

intergenerational risk sharing and income and employment stabilization.

Second, we have assumed throughout that only lump sum taxes are imposed. In

that case, the timing of taxes affects the intergenerational distribution of

welfare, but nothing more. But when taxes are distortionary, the timing of

taxes also affects the total dead weight loss imposed by the tax system. Thus,

whenever the changes in financial policy which we analyzed in our basic

irrelevance propositions entail a change in the lump sum taxes imposed at

different times, then, in general, those changes in financial policy will

have real effects. The implication of this for the optimal debt—tax struc-

ture is an important question which we hope to address on another occasion.
                               REFERENCES


Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz, Lectures iri Public Economics, McGraw—
     Hill, 1980.

Barro, R., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal of Political Econoniy,
     December 1974, pp. 1095—1118.

Bryant, J. and N. Wallace, "A Suggestion for Further Simplifying the Theory
     of Money," mimeo, December 1980.

Cass, D. and M. E. Yaari, "Individual Saving, Aggregate Capital Accumulation,
     and Efficient Growth," in Chapter 13, K. Shell, ed., Essays on the Theory
     of Optimal Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1967.

Diamond, P. A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American
     Economic Review, December 1965, 55, pp. 1125—1150.

Fischer, S., "Anticipations and the Nonneutrality of Money," Journal of
     Political Economy, April 1979, pp. 225—352.

Johnson, H., "The Neo—Classical One—Sector Growth Model: A Geometrical
     Exposition and Extension to a Monetary Economy," Economica, August 1966,
     33, pp. 265—287.

Neary, J. P. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Towards a Reconstruction of Keynesian
     Economics: Expectations and Constrained Equilibria," Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, forthcoming.

Newbery, D. and J. E. Stiglitz, "The Choice of Techniques and the Optimality
     of Market Equilibrium with Rational Expectations," Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 90, April 1982, pp. 223—246.

Newbery, D. and J. E. Stiglitz, The Theory of Commodity Price Stabilization,
     Oxford University Press, 1981.

Shell, K., M. Sidrauski and J. E. Stiglitz, "Capital Gains, Income, and
     Saving," Review of Economic Studies, 1969, 36, pp. 15—26.

Sidrauski, M., "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,"
     American Economic Review, May 1967, 58, pp. 534—544.

Stlglitz, J. E., "On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Theory," American
     Economic Review, December 1974, pp. 853—866.

Stiglitz, J. E., "Lectures in Macro—Economics," Oxford University, mimeo,
     1977.

Stiglitz, J. E., "On the Almost Neutrality of Inflation," in M. J. Flanders
     and A. Razin, eds., Development in an Inflationary World, Academic Press,
     1981.
Stiglitz, J. E., lion the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy,"
     mimeo, 1982.

Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
     Information," American Economic Review, June 1981, 71, PP. 393—410.

Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss, "Cutting off Credit: An Application of
     Constraints as Incentive Devices," American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Taylor, J. B.,, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of
     Political Economy, February 1980, 88, pp. 1—23

Tobia, T., "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica, October 1965, 33,
     pp. 671—684.

Wallace, N., "A Modigliani—Miller Theorem for Open Market Operations,"
     American Economic Review, June 1981, pp. 267—274.
