                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE GLOBAL HISTORY OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE –
                                AN INTRODUCTION

                                            Randall K. Morck
                                              Lloyd Steier

                                          Working Paper 11062
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11062


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




We are grateful for helpful comments, insights, and suggestions from Philippe Aghion, Lucien Bebchuk,
Daniel Berkowitz, Brian Cheffins, Stijn Claessens, Paul Frentrop, Brad DeLong, Alexander Dyck, Barry
Eichengreen, Lucas Enriques, Merritt Fox, Rafael LaPorta, Ross Levine, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Marco
Pagano, Enrico Perotti, Katharina Pistor, Mark Rameseyer, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Sylla, and Bernard
Yeung; as well as participants at the University of Alberta/NBER conference at Lake Louise, Alberta and
the CBPR/ECGN/INSEAD/University of Alberta/NBER conference in Fontainebleau, France, the Corporate
Governance Forum of Turkey in Istanbul, the Academy of International Business conference in Stockholm.
This research was supported by the University of Alberta School of Business and the University of Alberta
Centre for Entrepreneurship and Family Enterprise in cooperation with the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Randall K. Morck and Lloyd Steier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Global History of Corporate Governance: An Introduction
Randall K. Morck and Lloyd Steier
NBER Working Paper No. 11062
January 2005
JEL No. G3, N2

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents a synopsis of recent NBER studies of the history of corporate governance in

Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom,

and the United States. Together, the studies underscore the importance of path dependence, often as

far back into preindustrial period; legal system origin, though in a more nuanced form than mere

statutory shareholder rights; and wealthy families. They also clarify the roles of ideologies, business

groups, trust, institutional transplants, and politics in institutional evolution and financial

development. Other themes are the universality of business insiders’ investments in, entrenchment,

and a possible behavioral basis for this.

Randall K. Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca


Lloyd Steier
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB CANADA T6G 2R6
lloyd.steier@ualberta.ca
The Global History of Corporate Governance – An Introduction
                                Randall Morck and Lloyd Steier

This paper presents a synopsis of recent NBER studies of the history of corporate governance in
Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. Together, the studies underscore the importance of path
dependence, often as far back into preindustrial period; legal system origin, though in a more
nuanced form than mere statutory shareholder rights; and wealthy families. They also clarify the
roles of ideologies, business groups, trust, institutional transplants, and politics in institutional
evolution and financial development. Other themes are the universality of business insiders’
investments in, entrenchment, and a possible behavioral basis for this.

1. To Whom Dare We Entrust Corporate Governance?
Capitalism at the beginning of the 21st century is a variegated collection of economic systems. In
America, capitalism is a system where a huge number of independent corporations compete with
each other for customers. Monopolies are illegal, though the courts are sometimes an imperfect
safeguard against them. Each corporation has a CEO who dictates corporate policies and
strategies to a largely passive board of directors. The true owners of America’s great
corporations, millions of middle class shareholders, each owning a few hundred or a few
thousand shares, are disorganized and generally powerless. Only a handful of institutional
investors accumulate large stakes – three or even five percent of an occasional large firm’s stock
– that give them voices loud enough to carry into corporate boardrooms. Corporate CEOs use or
abuse their considerable powers in accordance with their individual political, social, and
economic beliefs. In much of the rest of the world, capitalism is a system where a handful of
immensely wealthy families control almost all of a country’s great corporations, and often its
government to boot. Competition is largely a mirage, for few firms are genuinely independent.
Professional managers are hired help, subservient to oligarchic family dynasties that jealously
safeguard their power, sometimes at great cost to their host economies.
         The purpose of this volume is to explore how capitalism came to mean, and to be, such
different things in different parts of the world. How did some economies come to entrust the
governance of their great corporations to a handful of old moneyed families, while others place
their faith in professional CEOs?
         Such different usages of the word capitalism make for difficult communication.
American economists are often baffled by the reluctance of seemingly well-educated foreigners to
embrace the tenets of free enterprise, and foreign economists marvel at the naive simplicity of
their American colleagues. In fact, each would do well to take the other more seriously. The rest
of the world is not simply unlike America, but usually poorer to varying degrees. Different
countries’ economies are organized in very different ways, and corporate governance – that is,
decisions about how capital is allocated, both across and within firms – is entrusted to very
different sorts of people and constrained by very different institutions.
         A key study that forces this point upon the economics profession is by La Porta et al.
(1999), who contrast the ownership of large and medium sized companies across countries.
Figure 1 illustrates their findings.1 The central message of Figure 1 is how very different

1
  La Porta et al. (1999) list several large German and Japanese firms as having no controlling shareholder.
However, because German banks typically vote the shares of small investors, Baums (1995) shows that
these firms are actually controlled by banks. All the large Japanese firms La Porta et al. (1999) list as
having no controlling shareholder are members of corporate groups called keiretsu, in which each firm is
controlled collectively by other firms in the group. Although each group firm’s stake in every other group


                                                    1
different countries are. The large corporate sector of Mexico is entirely controlled by a few
enormously wealthy families, whereas all the largest British companies get by with no controlling
shareholders at all. Most Argentine firms are controlled by wealthy families, but most great
American corporations are not. Wealthy family domination of great corporations is not restricted
to poor countries, but also characterizes relatively rich economies like Israel, Hong Kong, and
Sweden.

[Figure 1 about here]

         Nonetheless, Claessens et al. (2000), Khanna and Rivkin (2001), and many others
document the ubiquity of family controlled corporate groups in poor countries. In general, poor
economies have corporate sectors controlled by some mixture of state organs and wealthy
families. The variety illustrated in Figure 1 is primarily a feature of the developed world.
         The fact that most large United Kingdom and United States firms are widely held, while
most large firms elsewhere are controlled by a few wealthy families, is perhaps insufficient to
explain the different perceptions of capitalism that hold force in different countries, for
independent firms that compete with each other still lead to economic efficiency regardless of
who controls them. However, a second feature of corporate governance in most countries, the
pyramidal business group or pyramid for short, magnifies the economic importance of this
difference enough to create genuinely different economic systems, all of which go by the name of
capitalism.
         A pyramid is a structure in which an apex shareholder, usually a very wealthy family,
controls a single company, which may or may not be listed. This company then holds control
blocks in other listed companies. Each of these holds control blocks in yet more listed
companies, and each of these controls yet more listed companies. Structures such as these are
ubiquitous outside the United Kingdom and United States. They can contain dozens or hundreds
of firms, listed and private, and put vast sweeps of a nation’s economy under the control of a
single family. These are the structures that permit tiny elites to control the greater parts of the
corporate sectors of many countries.
         Berle and Means (1932), Bebchuk et al. (2000), Morck et al. (2000), Claessens et al.
(2000), and many others demonstrate the severe corporate governance problems that can occur in
pyramidal business groups. However, these problems are only of interest in this volume to the
extent that they motivate the formation of business groups, or their dissolution. Our focus is on
how the differences in corporate control illustrated in Figure 1 came to be.
         The remainder of this chapter is laid out as follows: Section 2 explains why the
differences outlined in Figure 1 matter. Indeed, they are the key distinguishing features that
define different forms of capitalism. Section 3 then briefly describes the key arguments and
findings of each chapter. Section 4 then sorts through these findings, highlighting common
threads that connect to current thinking about corporate governance. Section 4 considers the
implications of these threads, and Section 5 provides a summary.

2. Does It Matter?
Capitalism is so-called because it is an economic system organized around the production and
allocation of capital. The savings of individuals are the basis of all capital. Yet the ways in
which economies accumulate and allocate capital are quite different in different countries, and
seem closely related to how each handles corporate governance issues.


firm can be small, these stakes accumulate to control blocks. Figure 1 is based on La Porta et al. (1999) for
all other countries. We are grateful to Raphael La Porta for making the names of the top firms in each
country available to us.


                                                     2
         Individuals can save by investing in corporate stocks and bonds. Companies they view as
good bets can raise huge amounts of money by issuing securities – as when Google raised $1.67
billion by selling new shares to the public in 2004.2 A company that investors feel is a poor bet
has difficulty raising any substantial amount by issuing securities. For instance, the internet
based sales intermediary deja.com withdrew from its proposed share issue in 2000, after it
became clear investors were not likely to pay the sort of price management hoped for.3
         If investors know what they are doing, capital is allocated to firms that can use it well and
kept away from firms that are likely to waste it. This process underlies shareholder capitalism, as
practiced in the United Kingdom and United States. Firms in those countries that can issue stock
and bonds to investors acquire funds to build factories, buy machinery, and develop technologies.
         For investors to trust a company enough to buy its securities, they need reassurance that
the company will be run both honestly and cleverly. This is where corporate governance is
critical. The corporate governance of large corporations in these countries is entrusted to CEOs
and other professional managers. Investors collectively monitor the quality of governance of
each listed firm, and its share price reflects their consensus.
         This system has costs. Monitoring the quality of corporate governance in every firm in
the economy eats up resources. American and British capital markets and regulators try to shift
this cost away from investors by mandating that firms disclose detailed financial reports, insider
share holdings, management pay, and any conflicts of interest. Other rules proscribe stock
manipulation, certain trading, and other self dealing by corporate insiders. Shareholders can sue
the directors and officers of any company that violates these rules. These prohibitions aim to help
investors by adding regulatory and judicial oversight to the mix. And raiders and institutional
investors stand ready to toss out managers who seem either inept or dishonest. These deep
pocketed investors can afford to bear a disproportionate share of the cost of monitoring corporate
governance, and of cleaning up governance problems when they arise.
         This system is certainly imperfect. Good managers are penalized and poor ones rewarded
if investors get things wrong, and this seems to happen with some regularity, as during the
dot.com boom of 1999 when investors bought Internet related company shares with apparently
irrational enthusiasm. But over the longer term, through the ebbs and rises of the business cycle,
Anglo-American capitalism seems to deliver high standards of living.
         But Anglo-American shareholder capitalism is exceptional. Other systems predominate,
and La Porta et al. (1999) find that the most common system of corporate governance in the
world is family capitalism, in which the governance of a country’s large corporations is entrusted
to its wealthiest few families. This situation might arise if investors are deeply mistrustful of
most companies, and prefer to invest by entrusting their savings to persons of good reputation.
Family firms constitute larger fractions of the stock markets of countries that provide investors
with fewer legal rights. Respected business families can leverage their reputations by controlling
many listed companies, and by having listed companies they hold control blocks of other listed
companies, in successive tiers of intercorporate ownership. Such pyramidal business groups are
also more common where investors’ legal rights are weaker.
         Yet family capitalism also has its problems. Corporate governance in many countries is
remarkably concentrated in the hands of a few wealthy families. Governance can deteriorate over
a wide swathe of the economy if the patriarch, or heir, controlling a large business group grows
inept, excessively conservative, or overly protective of the status quo. Since the status quo
clearly has advantages to these families, the last possibility is especially disquieting. For
example, they might lobby to keep shareholder rights weak so that upstarts cannot compete for
public investors’ savings.

2
 See “Google's Stock Offering Didn't Follow Script”, The Billings Gazette, August 20th 2004.
3
 See “After failed IPO, Deja.Com Attempts to Reanimate”, by Jason Chervokas, atNewYork.com, February
4th 2000.


                                                  3
         Another way investors can save is by putting money in a bank or other financial
institution. The bank then lends the money to companies to buy factories, machinery, and
technologies. Or sometimes the bank actually invests in other companies by buying their shares
or bonds. This constitutes another way in which economies can accumulate and allocate capital.
Banks play much greater capital allocation roles in German and Japanese capitalism than in the
Anglo-American variant, although, as Morck and Nakamura (1999) and Fohlin (2004) show, their
role may have been somewhat overstated in both countries.
         In bank capitalism, oversight by bankers substitutes for shareholder diligence. Bankers
monitor the governance of other firms, and intervene to correct governance mistakes. If errant
managers refuse to change their ways, banks withhold credit, starving the misgoverned firm of
capital. As long as the bankers are altruistic and competent, this system can allocate capital
efficiently. However, if a few key banks are themselves misgoverned, the ramifications are much
worse, and can create problems across all the firms that depend on that bank for capital. Bank
capitalism delivered solid growth in postwar Germany and Japan, and in emerging economies like
Korea. But in all three, overenthusiastic lending by a few top bankers to misgoverned firms
created financial problems that continue to hinder macroeconomic growth.
         Yet another way investors can save is by paying taxes and letting the State provide
capital to businesses. In its extreme form, this is the guiding principle of socialism. But
industrial policies – State-guided capital accumulation and allocation – are important in many
free market economies as well, especially historically. For example, the Fascist governments of
Germany, Italy and Japan all imposed this form of corporate governance upon virtually all their
large corporations. More democratically formulated industrial policies played large roles in the
economies of Canada, Japan, India, and all major continental European economies, as well as in
many emerging market economies. Nationalized industries in mid 20th century Britain and
massive defense and public works investments in the United States also count as industrial
policies.
         In state capitalism, public officials supervise corporate managers, and intervene to
correct any governance problems. If the bureaucratic overseers are able and altruistic, they can
direct corporate decision-making down paths that promote the general good. But intractable
governance problems arise if the public officials have inadequate ability or knowledge to make
such decisions, or skew decisions to benefit politically favored persons or groups. State
capitalism delivered brief periods of high growth in many countries, but seems prone to serious
governance problems of these sorts over the longer run.
         Finally, investors can save by hoarding gold and silver coins. If people mistrust financial
markets, wealthy families, bankers, and politicians, this may be the only option left. Murphy
(2004) argues that a series of financial scandals and crises in France actually did reduce
generations of Frenchmen to burying coins in their yards to provide for their futures, and that this
mistrust retarded French financial development severely. When the savings of the broader public
are unavailable to business, each company must grow using its earnings alone. This
automatically allocates additional capital to those who already control companies, which is
unlikely to be economically efficient. It also makes getting started very difficult for impecunious
entrepreneurs.
         Of course, no country is a pure example of any of these flavors of capitalism. Each
variant of capitalism accounts for part of the capital formation in all the countries covered in this
book. But the different variants clearly have different relative importance – both across countries
and over time; and these differences are of great moment. Entrusting corporate governance to
wealthy families, a few powerful bankers, or a cadre of bureaucrats might seem profoundly
undemocratic to some. Entrusting it to anyone but civil servants, chosen by elected officials,
might seem undemocratic to others. And entrusting corporate governance to anyone but
reputable leading families might seem rashly irresponsible to still others. Moreover, as the
chapters of this book show, impersonal stock markets, banks, wealthy families, and government


                                                 4
bureaucrats each arise from different circumstances, operate in different ways, and bring different
sets of issues to the fore.

3. Why Did Different Countries Follow Different Paths?
This volume contains one chapter describing the history of corporate governance in each country
in the G7 group of leading industrialized nations: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. To these we add a chapter on the Netherlands, because it
is the oldest capitalist economy, and many of the institutions which determine corporate control
elsewhere originated there. We also add a chapter on Sweden because it is the standard bearer of
an alternative Swedish model of capitalism tempered by social democracy. Finally, we add a
chapter on each of India and China – the world’s two largest developing economies. This list is
incomplete – omitting such important countries as Australia, Russia, Spain, and Switzerland, not
to mention much of Asia and all of Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East. It is our hope
that other students of corporate finance or economic history will fill in these gaps.
         Early stages of the research that led to this volume showed that the first large
corporations almost everywhere were family businesses; and that family firms predominate in
most countries whose industrial histories are short. We therefore chose the countries enumerated
above not because we believe they are more important, but because they all have reasonably long
histories as industrial economies. Countries whose industrial histories go back only a generation
or two, such as Korea, Malaysia, and Singapore, provide insufficient time for the forces that
change corporate governance to act. While these countries are profoundly interesting from many
perspectives, they are less able to provide insight into the evolution of corporate control than
older industrial economies.
         The authors of each study were invited to write a historical account of the evolution of
control over their assigned country’s large firms. The focus is primarily on large firms, for small
firms everywhere tend to have controlling shareholders. Mom and pop stores in India, Italy and
the United States all tend to be owned by mom and pop. The different connotations of capitalism
that spice political debates in different countries so differently are mainly due to differences in
who controls countries’ large corporations.
         This section now summarizes the key results of each chapter. The next section condenses
these findings into a general account of how corporate governance diverged as it did.

Canada
Morck, Percy, Tian and Yeung (2004) describe Canada’s preindustrial history – first as a French
colony of resource extraction built around the fur trade, and then as first a French and then a
British colony of settlement. Their theme is how the institutions built up during these colonial
periods affected Canada’s subsequent industrial development.
         This study has two key points. The first is that Canada was a remarkably corrupt country
until a few generations ago. Canada inherited from her French colonial history a disposition to
mercantilist policies that invite official abuse. Indeed, the country was a veritable laboratory for
Jean Baptiste Colbert, the father of French mercantilism. Subsequent British and Canadian elites
preserved this disposition in the Canadian government, economy, and culture.
         Their second key point is a remarkable pattern in Canadian corporate control. A full
century ago, the large corporate sector looked much as it does now: a slight predominance of
family controlled pyramidal business groups supplemented by a large phalanx of freestanding
widely-held firms. However, half a century ago, the Canadian large corporate sector was
composed mainly of freestanding widely held firms.
         Through the first half of the 20th century, wealthy Canadian families sold out into stock
market booms, went bankrupt during recessions, diluted their stakes by issuing stock to fund
takeovers, and liquidated corporate empires to pay estate taxes. The net effect was a marked



                                                 5
eclipse of family control and pyramids. By the mid-20th century, Canada looked much like the
United States does in Figure 1. Then, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, pyramidal groups
resurged, and regained their gilded age proportions by the century’s end. The reasons for this are
not fully clear. The authors speculate that an emasculation of the estate tax and a dramatic
expansion of state intervention in the economy may have been factors. The erosion of the estate
tax permitted large fortunes to survive and grow. Government intervention made political
connections more valuable corporate assets than in the past, and pyramidal business groups may
have been better than freestanding, widely held, and professionally managed firms at building and
exploiting such connections.
         Siegal’s discussion of this chapter introduces an especially insightful division of
institutional development into three stages. First come institutions, such as universal education,
necessary for the production of entrepreneurial ideas. Then come institutions, such as financial
systems, necessary to realize these ideas. Finally come institutions, such as public policy
regarding inheritances, that prevent ones period’s entrepreneurs from entrenching themselves and
blocking entrepreneurship by others.

China
The chapter by Goetzmann and Köll (2004) examines Chinese corporate governance in the late
19th and early 20th centuries. This period is of interest because it corresponds to the beginning of
China’s industrialization and sees the attempted transplanting of Western institutions into a non-
western economy. Pre-communist China’s industrial development may thus offer more
interesting lessons for modern emerging economies than does post-communist China, scraped
clean of its non-Western traditions by decades of totalitarian Marxism. Certainly, for China
herself, pre-revolutionary capitalism also provides a model of “a market economy with Chinese
characteristics”.
         Late 19th century China’s first generation of industrial firms floated equity, yet remained
under state control. Modeled on the Imperial salt monopoly, these ventures were financed and
operated by private merchants, but ultimately controlled by Imperial bureaucrats. Intended to
reassert China’s pride and prestige, they sought to free China of foreign arms makers, shippers,
and manufacturers. Industrialization was a means to this end, and to restoring China’s traditional
economic balance, but not an end in itself.
         Imperial bureaucrats were accustomed to buying and selling offices and favors.
Profitable businesses thus attracted more intensive bureaucratic oversight and their earnings were
quickly bled away. Although bureaucratic intervention protected these firms from competition,
their merchant investors and managers became increasingly dissatisfied with the fees and bribes
their civil service overlords demanded.
         Having lost the Sino-Japanese War in 1895, the Imperial government was forced to
permit private foreign industry in treaty ports, which were subject to foreign law, and so could no
longer prevent Chinese from establishing private industrial firms. New industrial businesses
proliferated rapidly.
         To regulate these, the Imperial Government enacted a new Corporations Law in 1904.
An abbreviated version of contemporary English and Japanese law, it permitted limited liability
and mandated shareholder meetings, elected boards, auditors, and detailed annual reports. Shares
had traded in Shanghai since the 1860s, and equity participation was a long established business
principle. The 1904 code was thus a top-down revision of established practices, not a de novo
introduction of business corporations. Its main innovation was the replacement of official
patronage by a rules-based code of conduct designed to attract investment by public shareholders.
         It was remarkably ineffective. Goetzmann and Köll examine a large industrial concern,
Dasheng No. 1 Cotton Mill, to see how the 1904 law altered its governance and find virtually no
effect. The founder and general manager, Zhang Jian, continued intermingling company and
personal funds, ignored shareholder criticism of his donations of company money to political


                                                 6
causes, and could not be removed because the corporate charter contained numerous provisions
protecting his power. The absence of standard accounting rules made the disclosed financial
accounts of minimal use.
         The reasons beneath this failure are not fully clear. Perhaps cultural inertia prevented
real change, and China’s long culture of family business paying for the patronage of Imperial
bureaucrats proved too deeply ingrained. But the top down reformers also saw capital markets
only as sources of funds, overlooking their use as mechanisms for disciplining errant corporate
insiders. Portfolio investors, unable to influence corporate governance after the fact, stayed out
of stocks. This kept the Chinese stock market illiquid and subject to severe boom and bust
cycles. This, in turn, kept insiders from selling out and diversifying, underscoring the value of
their private benefits of control.
         In his discussion of this chapter, Perkins argues that China’s traditional legal system was
also an important factor. By empowering each county’s magistrates as representative of the
central government, judge, and prosecutor, this system prevented the disinterested enforcement of
any laws, no matter how well written. Perkins stresses that the real lesson modern emerging
economies should take from precommunist Chinese economic history is the critical importance of
an independent and trustworthy judiciary.

France
The chapter on France by Murphy (2004) stresses the importance of history. Its theme is that
historical trauma generates strong aftershocks that affect the economy for generations, shaping
the collective psyche to constrain the course of subsequent events. This chapter is an eloquent
restatement of “path dependence” – the thesis that simple historical accident can set the economy
on one of many previously equally probable paths.
         The shock that set the course of future French corporate governance was the implosion of
the Mississippi Company in 1720. John Law (1671-1729), a Scottish convicted murderer, rescued
France from the financial ruin wrought by the wars and court extravagance of Louis XIV. Law’s
Compagnie de l’Occident took on all French government debt in return for a monopoly on trade
with Louisiana. Law’s company issued shares and hyped their value, stimulating investment
demand, which pushed their value up further, stimulating even more demand.
         This bubble imploded in 1720, ruining the finances not only of the French kingdom, but
of much of her aristocracy and merchant elite. Joint stock companies were banned, and wise
Frenchmen shunned financial markets and passed this wisdom on to their children.
         The South Sea Company, a deliberate imitation of Law’s French experiment in Britain,
burst at about the same time and to somewhat the same effect. The Bubble Act of 1722 banned
joint stock companies in Britain unless they secured a parliamentary charter. This meant that
establishing each new joint stock company required an Act of Parliament. The London stock
exchange survived because preexisting sound British companies, such as the British East India
Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company were grandfathered.
         The reaction in France was much more severe – a profound rejection of banks, credit, and
financial innovation and a retreat to the traditional French financial system, regulated by religious
directives, controlling methods of borrowing and lending with the state constituting the main
borrower. Religious prohibitions against interest meant that contracts had to separate the
ownership of savings from the streams of revenue they produced. The notaries who drew up
these contracts became surrogate bankers, but only in a very limited sense. While they arranged
for the state to borrow by issuing annuities, Murphy argues that their role in financing the private
sector was mainly limited to mortgages for real estate purchases. While they had some leeway
around the usury laws, the notaries were unable to arrange the sorts of high interest speculative
debt appropriate to finance an industrial revolution. British companies needed parliamentary
approval to issue shares, but French businesses had even more difficulty issuing shares, had no
access to debt in the ordinary sense, and had to get by without a formal banking system.


                                                 7
         In October 1789, the Revolutionary Government repealed the usury laws and resurrected
Law’s economic system, now issuing assignats. The only real difference was that these securities
were backed by seized church estates, rather than a monopoly on trade with Louisiana. John Law
was a central topic in the National Assembly debates. Murphy describes how the Abbé Maury
produced a fistful of Law’s banknotes, denouncing them as “fictive pledges of an immense and
illusory capital, which I drew from a huge depot where they have been held for the instruction of
posterity. With sorrow I look at these paper instruments of so many crimes, I see them still
covered with the tears and blood of our fathers and I offer them today to the representatives of the
French nation as beacons placed on the reefs so as to perpetuate the memory of this massive
shipwreck.”
         Maury was ignored and the Revolutionary government issued ever more assignats to
cover its escalating expenses. France soon experienced a full blown hyperinflation and financial
collapse. Kindleberger (1984, p.99) writes that assignats “embedded paranoia about paper money
and banks more deeply in the French subconscious.”
         The hyperinflation nourished the popular distrust of finance that Law had sown, and the
French public took to hoarding gold and silver. Through most of the 19th century, most
transactions were in specie and coins still composed more than half of the money supply in 1885.
         The French banking system was reinvigorated with the rise of the Crédit Mobilier, a
universal bank established by Emile and Isaac Pereire, inspired by the utopian socialist ideals of
Claude-Henri, Count de Saint-Simon, who saw banks as irrigation systems to bring capital from
areas of overabundance to areas of drought. Hobbled by a portfolio of disastrous investments, the
Crédit Mobilier collapsed in 1867 taking much of the French and European banking system down
with it, and wise Frenchmen continued hoarding gold and silver coins.
         The Paris bourse would occasionally achieve brief periods of activity in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, but would never again rival the economic importance of the London Stock
Exchange. Kindleberger (1984, p. 113) estimates that “France lagged behind Britain in financial
institutions and experience by a hundred years or so…”
         French businesses expanded, using the retained earnings of one company to build others,
and the founding families of these business groups remained in control generation after
generation. French Civil Law facilitated this course by making it virtually impossible for the
owner of a business to bequeath it to anyone but his children. French tycoons with families
cannot leave their fortunes to charitable foundations. Landes (1949) argues that France fell
behind Britain because a preponderance of family control made large French corporations more
conservative and reliant on government connections.
         Severe financial trauma thus set France on a course of economic development that left
wealthy families controlling her corporate sector under the watchful guidance of the State.
Psychologists have only the vaguest understanding of why a similar trauma shatters some
individuals’ lives and barely affects others. Economists, likewise, need a deeper understanding of
how economic trauma shapes institutional development. Murphy’s chapter is a first step in that
direction.
         Daniel Raff, in his discussion of this chapter, raises a series of penetrating questions
arising from Murphy’s central ideas, and argues that we need much additional work along these
lines.

Germany
Fohlin (2004) argues that Germany’s large universal banks were less important to its history of
corporate governance than is commonly believed. German industrialization advanced rapidly in
the late 19th century, financed by wealthy merchant families, foreign investors, small shareholders
and private banks. Industrial firms with bankers on their boards did not perform better than other
firms.



                                                 8
         German corporate governance appears thoughtfully developed in this era. The Company
Law of 1870 created the current dual board structure explicitly to protect small shareholders and
the public from self-serving insiders. It also required greater uniformity and consistency in
accounting, reporting, and governance. The Company Law of 1884 proscribed sitting on the
same company’s supervisory and management boards and thrust a “duty to become informed” on
supervisory board directors. In the two decades before World War I, managerial turnover was
highly sensitive to firm performance, suggesting that some form of disciplinary governance
mechanism was functioning. Firms listed in Berlin stock exchange, which were most likely to be
owned mainly by public shareholders, rather than founding families or other block-holders,
replaced management even more readily in response to poor performance.
         German universal banks’ proxy voting powers arose from their role in placing new
securities and in lending with shares as collateral. The Company Law of 1884 required a
minimum turnout at a company’s first shareholders meeting, and banks could accomplish this by
holding proxies for small shareholders. Banks thus ended up voting the shares of companies that
used their underwriting services. The Company Law of 1897 made exchange trading
cumbersome, and this apparently moved share trading inside the big banks.
         Under the Weimar Republic, ownership seems to have grown more dispersed, instilling
fears of corporate takeovers in both founding families and their hired managers. To prevent such
events, multiple voting shares and voting caps came into widespread usage.4 Multiple voting
shares were often bestowed on family members serving on supervisory boards and on the
family’s bank. Voting caps cap non-family shareholders’ voting rights regardless of their actual
ownership. Pyramids do not seem to have gained prominence, perhaps because these other
devices permitted firms to tap public equity markets for capital without risking takeovers.
         The National Socialist government established much of the modern foundations of
German corporate governance. Invoking the Führerprinzip or leader principle, the Nazis’
Shareholder Law of 1937 freed corporate managers and directors of their specific fiduciary duty
to shareholders and substituted a general duty to all stakeholders – especially to the Reich. It
banned voting by mail, and forced shareholders who could not vote in person to register their
holdings with banks and entrust banks with proxy voting rights. This bestowed the large banks
with voting control over much of the German large corporate sector. The Reich then took control
of the banks.
         Following the war, the banks were privatized, but the Nazi innovations of stakeholder
rights and proxy voting by banks remained. Codetermination gave workers half the supervisory
board, though Roe (2002) argues that companies simply shifted decisions out of the supervisory
boards. Reforms in 1965 abolished the Führerprinzip, required banks to have written permission
to vote proxies, and required that banks inform shareholders of how they voted. Shareholders
could be anonymous again. Reforms in 1998 abolished voting caps, and the stock prices of
affected companies rose sharply. Multiple voting shares remained unimportant.
         Pyramiding apparently arose mainly after WWII. German households’ ownership of
shares declined sharply, from 48.6% of all shares in 1950 to 17% in 1996. Meanwhile,
intercorporate equity blocks rose from 18% in 1950 to 41% in 1996. The use of pyramids is far
more extensive in the last few decades of the 20th century than before. With multiple voting
shares banned, pyramids may have become the preferred mechanism for retaining control while
also using public shareholders’ money.
         The modern German economy thus consists primarily of family controlled pyramidal
groups and nominally widely held firms that are actually controlled by the top few banks via
proxies. The leading banks collectively also control dominant blocks of their own shares. Bank
voting control is less evident in smaller firms, which tend to have family control blocks. Recent


4
    Though Dunlavy (2004) argues for a much earlier provenance.


                                                    9
reforms require banks to inform shareholders of their right to vote their own shares annually; and
to erect Chinese Walls around staff who decide how to vote at shareholder meetings.
         Fohlin argues that patterns of corporate control in Germany are best explained by “a
string of disastrous political institutions and movements in the aftermath of World War I,
culminating in the Nazi regime, dismantled the rich, highly functioning, hybrid financial system
of the Second Reich. The post-war political and legal climate, one that continues to suppress the
liberal tradition of the pre-World War I era, seemingly prevents the old dual system from
reemerging.”
         Dyck’s discussion commends Fohlin for documenting the aborted dispersion of German
shareholdings, but argues that a complete explanation needs further work. Dyck is unswayed by
arguments diminishing the role of banks in German corporate governance, and argues that
Germany’s economic success warrants further study of how German firms avoid classic
governance traps.

India
The chapter by Khanna and Palepu (2004) highlights India’s long business history. Large-scale
trading networks of merchants belonging to particular ethnic and sectarian groups go back
centuries, and modern Indian business groups often correspond to these same groupings. When
India began industrializing under the British Raj, these groups had the capital both to compete
and to cooperate with Indian subsidiaries of the great British business groups of the era.
         The Tata family, of priestly Parsi origin, controlled the largest business group in India for
the past sixty years. The group grew to prominence under the Raj, nurtured by colonial
government contracts and protected by Imperial tariffs. The Tatas were neutral on independence,
and so lost favor when the Congress party took charge.
         The Birla family, of the prosperous Marwari community, financed Mohandas Gandhi and
the Congress Party generously. Khanna and Palepu quote Sarojini Naidu, a Congress activist and
poet, quipping “it took all Birla’s millions to enable Gandhi to live in poverty. And he gave for
free.” The Birla group expanded dramatically in the post-independence period; and by 1969 was
the second largest Indian business group.
         Thus, the early histories of India’s two greatest business groups align with two theses of
Ghemawat and Khanna (1998) and Khanna (2000): that such groups excel at doing deals with
politicians and attain their position through political connections, and that they confer genuine
economic advantage. Khanna and Palepu’s finding that group firms are typically older and larger
than independent firms is consistent with both.
         Khanna and Palepu’s key point is that the rankings of smaller Indian business groups are
quite volatile, with groups appearing, rising, falling, and disappearing. Turnover around
independence doubtless reflects the withdrawal from India of British business groups such as
Martin Burn, Andrew Yule, and Inchcape. But volatility actually increases after independence,
clearly showing that business groups did not always entrench their owners’ economic positions.
Such volatility speaks of a more entrepreneurial economy than is generally credited to post-
independence India.
         Thus, business groups as an organizational form persisted, but many individual business
groups, especially smaller ones, did not. In the 1960s, Prime Minister Jawarharlal Nehru led
India down a distinctly socialist path, building a dense thicket of regulation and bureaucratic
oversight that came to be called the License Raj. Nehru’s original motive seems to have been a
desire to curb the power of India’s large business groups following a series of official reports that
documented evidence of big business houses exerting significant influence over the economy and
exploiting growth opportunities through favorable access to finance and government permits.
Nehru’s daughter, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, asserted even greater state control over private
sector firms’ pursuit of growth opportunities, access to finance, and collaboration with foreign
partners and forced many multinational companies out of the country. This policy proved


                                                 10
economically disastrous, and a period of slow deregulation began in the mid 1980s. A financial
crisis spurred a much more radical liberalization in the 1990s.
          Turnover among smaller business groups during all of this might indicate an
entrepreneurial economy, in which innovative new businesses arise and old ones die out. Khanna
and Palepu argue that business groups retained an advantage over individual firms throughout
because they could better bridge institutional gaps – like dysfunctional capital, labor, and product
markets. But these benefits certainly accrue mostly to very large business groups. Smaller ones,
containing only a few firms cannot avoid markets as well as huge groups containing larger
reservoirs of capital, labor, and products of all kinds that can be allocated internally.
          But the larger groups also devoted huge resources, establishing de facto embassies in
New Delhi staffed by legions of experts in all manner of bureaucratic red tape. The License Raj
was clearly constructed to tie down the great business groups, but its actual effect may have been
the opposite. Only the largest groups could absorb the huge fixed cost of retaining the
bureaucratic expertise needed to navigate the maze.
          Under Indira Gandhi, the Birla group was accused of manipulating the licensing system.
Stung by this unexpected criticism, the Birla shifted their expansion plans overseas. Given India’s
strict foreign exchange controls at the time, this surely required official acquiescence. A string of
profitable overseas subsidiaries put substantial group cash flows well beyond the reach of the
minions of New Delhi, enabling the group to expand rapidly within India once the License Raj
was dismantled. One interpretation of all this is that the size and prominence of the Birla group
reflects their entrepreneurial tendencies in handling the licensing restrictions, rather than simple
political rent-seeking.
          The Tata felt discriminated against under the License Raj, and this may well have been
so. Nonetheless, they survived and prospered and grew increasingly entrepreneurial and
innovative to compensate for their relative lack of political influence. By remaining
economically dominant, the Tata group confirms that government connections are but one factor
underlying the success of Indian businesses.
          Ultimately, the chapter argues that large family business groups likely persisted because
they bridged institutional voids created by dysfunctional markets and weak economic institutions.
But even beyond this, the chapter argues that the Tata group in particular survives and prospers
because of genuine entrepreneurship. They stress the role of the Tata in developing India’s
software industry. This industry is thought to prosper precisely because it is less dependent on
India’s creaking domestic institutions and markets, so groups’ advantage in this sector should be
minimal. Perhaps the Tata supply entrepreneurial activity, and prosper because this is in short
supply in emerging economies like India.
          Mody’s discussion of this chapter begins with a comparison of Korea, whose
development depended on large family controlled business groups, and Taiwan, whose
development was mainly due to smaller firms. He points out that both countries grew rapidly, but
suggests that Korean groups eventually became a problem because they made entrepreneurship
by outsiders difficult. Mody recounts the Bombay Plan, in which the leaders of India’s most
powerful business families “called on government support for industrialization, including a direct
role for the government in the production of capital goods, foreshadowing post-independence
Indian planning, typically considered an outgrowth of socialist ideas drawn either from the Soviet
Union or the so-called Fabian socialists.” He argues that this plan, proposed just before
independence, shows that its sponsors, including the Tata and Birla families, did actively seek
partnership with the Congress party government they saw approaching.

Italy
Aganin and Volpin’s chapter (2004) shows that family controlled business groups were more
powerful in the middle of the century than at either end of it, and that the stock market was more
important at either end of the century than at its midpoint.


                                                 11
         Laws and politics clearly have some explanatory power. At the beginning of the century,
the Italian government had little interest in direct intervention in the economy. However, all three
major Italian investment banks collapsed in 1931, and the Fascist government took on their
holdings of industrial shares and imposed a legal separation of investment from commercial
banking. The shares were turned over to the Istituto per la Riconstruzione Italiana (IRI), which
would persist as a large state controlled pyramidal group. After the Second World War, Italy’s
governments maintained a direct role in the economy, propping up financially troubled
companies and using its corporate governance power to direct economic growth, especially in
capital-intensive sectors. Postwar governments founded the Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi (ENI) in
1952 to control firms in the chemical, oil and mining sectors; the Ente Partecippazioni e
Finanziamento Industrial Manifatturiera (EFIM) in 1962 to control electric and other companies;
and the Società di Gestioni e Partecipazioni Industriali (GEPI) in 1972 to intervene in the
Southern Italian economy. Each of these business groups controlled numerous listed companies,
and was directed by a forceful CEO.
         Aganin and Volpin thus argue that, since postwar Italian politicians opted to allocate
capital via an industrial policy, rather than via the financial system, they saw no great need for
investor protection. Investors opted for government bonds, rather than shares, and the Italian
stock market shrank steadily through the middle of the century. New entrants found public share
issues very expensive, while politicians assisted established large business groups with cheap
capital. New publicly traded family groups emerged rarely, and always with strong political
support. Most Italian firms remained unlisted, and were operated by founding families in small
scale niche markets.
         This locked in a sort of State and family capitalism. Listed firms were mostly organized
into pyramidal groups controlled either by the State or old families. The corporate governance of
Italy’s large listed firms was thus entrusted either to politically appointed bureaucrats or to
wealthy old families who transmitted power from generation to generation.
         Italy’s industrial policies directed subsidized capital to both sorts of business groups,
which raised public debt and taxes to unsustainable levels by the 1990s. A sweeping privatization
program and improved legal protection for public shareholders reinvigorated the stock market.
Formerly unlisted companies opted to go public, and the stock market grew further. Investors,
increasingly conscious of the need for good corporate governance, continue to demand stronger
property rights protection.

Japan
The history of corporate governance in Japan is more complicated and variegated than in any
other major country. Consequently, the chapter by Morck and Nakamura (2004) takes more the
form of a narrative history than do many of the other contributions to this volume.
         Prior to 1868, Japan was a deeply conservative and isolationist country. Business families
were at the bottom of an hereditary caste system – beneath priests, warriors, peasants, and
craftsmen. Unsurprisingly, this moral inversion led to stagnation. Yet the necessity of running a
densely populous country forced Japan’s feudal shoguns to give prominent mercantile families,
like the Mistui and Sumitomo, steadily greater influence.
         When Admiral Perry, in an early example of American unilateralism, bombarded Tokyo
until Japan opened her markets to American traders, the Shogun acquiesced and a cadre of rash
young samurai warriors seized power, justifying their coup as the restoration of the Meiji
emperor, who nonetheless remained a figurehead. The Meiji Restoration leaders planned to
defeat the foreigners and restore Japan’s splendid isolation, but soon realized that beating the
foreigners meant learning their ways. The Meiji leadership sent Japan’s best students to
universities throughout the world to learn about foreign technology, business, and governments,
and to report back. The result was a cultural, economic, and political reinvention of Japan, in
which the reformers cobbled together a new system based on what they saw as global best


                                                12
practice in legal, economic, and social institutions. The government founded state-owned
enterprises to bring all manner of Western industry to Japan, and built up huge debts in the
process. To extricate itself, the Meiji government conducted a mass privatization, in which most
of these enterprises were sold to the Mitsui and Sumitomo families, and to a few other family
controlled business groups that were gaining prominence, such as Mitsubishi. These groups,
called zaibatsu, were family controlled pyramids of listed corporations, much like those found
elsewhere in the world. Later, other groups like Nissan, a pyramidal business group with a
widely held firm at its apex, joined in as Japan’s economy roared into the 20th century. Thus
Japan began its industrialization with a mixture of family and state capitalism. Shareholders
eagerly bought shares, especially in numerous subsidiaries floated by these great business groups.
         The 1920s and early 1930s were depressionary periods, and exposed the weaknesses and
strengths of different pyramidal structures. Groups like the Mitsui, Sumitomo, and Mitsubishi
pyramids, whose banks (or de facto banks) were located near their apexes, survived. Groups like
the Suzuki pyramid, whose bank was controlled, but not owned by the Suzuki family, failed. It
seems likely that the Suzuki structure disposed the controlling family to transfer funds out of the
bank and into firms whose financial fate affected family wealth, and that this rendered such
groups financially unstable during downturns. The prolonged economic stagnation eroded the
public’s appreciation of family capitalism, and economic reformers lambasted the wealthy
families for putting their rights as shareholders ahead of the public interest, and for their fixation
on short-term earnings and dividends rather than long-term investment.
         In the 1930s, the military slowly consolidated power by strategically assassinating
civilian government leaders, and replacing them with military officers. Although Japan’s military
government was decidedly fascist, its economic policies borrowed unblushingly from Soviet
practices. The government freed corporate boards of their duty to shareholders – meaning the
families and corporate large shareholders, and banned dividends. Military representatives sat on
all major boards and supervised the implementation of centrally directed production quotas.
Prices and wages were also determined by central planners. Although the de jure ownership
rights of Japanese shareholders were never formally annulled, the 1945 American occupation
force took charge of an economy not greatly different from the post-socialist economies of
Eastern Europe in the early 1990s.
         The American occupation government, though led by General MacArthur, was staffed
with Roosevelt “New Dealers”. As the chapter by Becht and De Long (2004) shows, the
Roosevelt administration had successfully forced the dismantlement of America’s zaibatsu, the
great family controlled pyramidal groups that had previously dominated its economy. The New
Dealers resolved to do the same in Japan. Family and intercorporate equity blocks were
confiscated and sold to the public. The families received nominal compensation in bonds and the
proceeds from the equity sales accrued to the government. By 1952, Japan’s great corporations
were almost all freestanding and widely held, just as those of the United Kingdom and United
States are at present. Corporate raiders soon emerged and launched two major waves of hostile
takeovers of firms they viewed as misgoverned. As in the United Kingdom and United States
today, hostile takeovers were only a small fraction of total merger activity, but affected large
firms and drew disproportionate publicity. As Morck et al. (1988) stress, the threat of a hostile
takeover is probably more important to promoting good governance than its occurrence.
         But takeovers did not lead to the improved governance the raiders desired. The
professional managers now governing Japan’s great corporations were not constrained by
regulations, laws or customs to protect the property rights of public shareholders. Initially, a
popular takeover defense was greenmail – the target firm’s managers would pay the raider (with
shareholders’ money) to back off. These payments likely only emphasized the target firms’ poor
governance to other potential raiders.
         Ultimately, a more effective takeover defense was devised – the keiretsu. In the United
States, target firms sometimes obstruct a raider by placing a block of stock with a friendly


                                                 13
shareholder, called a white squire, or by bringing in a rival acquirer, a white knight, whose
management is friendly to the target’s managers. The keiretsu defense, a variant along the same
lines, involves a group of firms run by mutually friendly managers exchanging small blocks of
stock with each other. Even though each firm holds only a tiny stake in every other firm, these
stakes collectively sum to effective control blocks. Every firm in the keiretsu group is thus
controlled collectively by all the other firms in the group. Keiretsu groups arose in two waves,
first in the 1950s and then in the 1960s. Japan’s experiment with Anglo-American shareholder
capitalism was short-lived, and the keiretsu system remains in place today.
          Although their primary functions were to lock in corporate control rights, both zaibatsu
and keiretsu were probably also rational responses to a variety of institutional failings.
Successful zaibatsu and keiretsu were enthusiastic political rent-seekers, raising the possibility
that large corporate groups are better at influencing government than free standing firms. In the
case of some zaibatsu and many keiretsu, this rent seeking probably retarded financial
development. This, and the probable misallocation of substantial amounts of capital by poorly
governed keiretsu firms appear to have created long-term economic problems that slowed Japan’s
growth through the 1990s.
          Sheldon Garon’s discussion argues that more attention should be paid to precisely who
made which decisions in importing Western institutions. He also points out that little is said in
the chapter about small and medium sized firms, despite their importance. He also takes issue
with the view that Tokugawa Japan isolated itself from the rest of the world, and that Japan’s
wartime economy resembled Soviet central planning. He points out that recent thinking stresses
Tokugawa Japan’s contacts via foreigners in Nagasaki, and rightly argues that wartime Japan
imitated National Socialist central planning, which is described in detail in the chapter by Fohlin.
We recognize this, but remain impressed by the remarkable similarity of National Socialist,
fascist, and Soviet socialist central planning, as described by Silverman (1998), Guerin (1945),
and Hosking (1985), respectively, among others.

The Netherlands
The Netherlands has the oldest stock market in the world, and its entrepreneurs largely invested in
the joint stock corporation. The chapter by de Jong and Röell (2004) on the history of corporate
governance in the Netherlands is therefore especially enlightening. The world’s first great limited
liability, widely held, joint stock company, the Dutch East Indies Company, or Vereenigde
Oostindische Compagnie, was founded in 1602. The world’s first great corporate governance
dispute quickly followed in 1622, when the managers, who had floated the stock as participation
in a limited-term partnership with a liquidating dividend in 20 years, decided to keep the
“astonishingly lucrative” enterprise continuing indefinitely. The investors were outraged, but the
government of the Dutch Republic saw the company as a weapon in its conflicts with Spain and
supported management. But the dividend stream was large enough that investors who wanted out
could sell their shares to others. This was perhaps better than a liquidating dividend since the
seller need not wait for the company’s fixed lifetime to expire. Nonetheless, vociferous
shareholder complaints about inadequate disclosure and dividend payouts continued, and are
preserved in the company archives. Other widely held firms followed suit, and the Dutch stock
markets remained Europe’s financial heart for a century.
          Spillovers from the series of French financial crises, which Murphy (2004) discusses,
among other things, undermined Dutch investors’ confidence in financial markets – slowly
through the 18th century, and then quite rapidly during the French occupation (1795-1813). In
1804, the French imposed a version of their Civil Code. This was widely viewed as less
sophisticated than the indigenous legal system. It jettisoned two centuries of Dutch accumulated
legal wisdom and inflicted French investors’ aversion of financial markets upon the Netherlands.
The French Civil Code, along with a public debt (bequeathed by the French administration) of



                                                14
more than four times national income, and a prolonged industrial dislocation caused by the carve-
out of Belgium as a separate state, made the first part of the 19th century a period of slow growth.
         Industrial development in the second half of the 19th century was financed mainly with
retained earnings from family firms that had slowly accumulated wealth over the previous half-
century. Wealthy families often bought into new firms’ commercial paper, or prolongatie, and
were expected to roll these investments over indefinitely. Listed domestic shares played a role
toward the century’s end, but repeated egregious looting of listed companies by insiders limited
public investors’ appetites. Many small Dutch investors, many of whose families lost heavily in
the official defaults of the French revolutionary era, apparently preferred to save by hoarding
coins. Although Dutch markets were energetic throughout the 19th century, their most active
listings were foreign government bonds and American railroad and industrial stocks.
         During the 20th century, a clear trend away from family control and towards professional
management is evident. Public equity issues and long term bank loans played an important role
in an industrialization boom from 1895 to roughly 1920, reinvigorating the stock markets. Unlike
Germany, the Dutch kept bankers to a secondary role in the governance and financing of
industrial firms. Workers’ corporate governance voices grew louder in the final decades of the
20th century, but remains more muted than in Germany.
         Despite the rise of public equity participation in Dutch firms, Jong and Röell (2004)
conclude that real decision-making power remains with self-perpetuating top corporate
executives, entrenched behind formidable takeover defenses. These defenses differ from those in
Anglo-American finance, and so merit mention. Reforms emulating German Co-determination
mandated that companies establish supervisory boards, but gave shareholders no real role in
choosing their members. These self-perpetuating supervisory boards thus severed managers’
responsibility to shareholders. Another entrenchment device is priority shares, to whose owners
are relegated key corporate governance decisions, such as board appointments. Other so-called
oligarchic devices relegate power over key decisions, like payout policies, to organs other than
the management board. Voting caps, restricted voting shares, and super-voting shares are also
widely used. From the end of World War II through the 1970s, another popular entrenchment
device was preference shares, issued to white squire shareholders at deep discounts and often
carrying superior voting rights. Yet another device is to place all voting shares with an income
trust, and then let public investors buy units in that trust. Finally, interlocking directorships are
commonplace, apparently giving the Dutch corporate sector a clubby air.
         Jong and Röell (2004) find that these devices are associated with depressed shareholder
value. Many of these entrenchment devices have come (or are) in conflict with European Union
directives, and they suggest that other entrenchment devices, like pyramidal groups, will grow
more popular in their place.
         Högfeldt’s discussion compares the Netherlands to Sweden, stressing the remarkably
reticent role of Dutch banks compared to Swedish ones, the remarkable array of takeover
defenses in Dutch listed firms, and the apparent acquiescence of Dutch politicians to these
defenses.

Sweden
Swedes are justly proud of their unique model of highly egalitarian social democracy. Yet
Högfeldt’s (2004) chapter shows that Swedes also entrust their wealthiest families with an
extraordinary concentration of corporate governance power.
         Högfeldt argues that this concentration occurs because of persistent Social Democratic
political influence, not despite it. The Social Democrats became de facto guarantors of family
capitalism because of a surprising commonality of interests. Social Democratic politicians wanted
a stable large corporate sector controlled by Swedes, who were thought more susceptible than
foreign owners to political pressure and hence more likely to buy into social democracy
eventually. Sweden’s wealthy families, who used small blocks of super-voting shares to hold


                                                 15
together their vast pyramidal business groups, wanted to preserve the status quo. Buying into
social democracy apparently seemed a reasonable price for policies that locked in their corporate
governance powers.
         Högfeldt argues that the extensive separation of ownership from control in these
pyramidal structures makes external financing expensive relative to retained earnings, and so
encourages existing firms to expand and discourages new firms from listing. He calls this a
political pecking order theory of financing. To this, the social democrats added tax subsidies for
firms that finance expansions with retained earnings and heavy taxation of returns to public
shareholders.
         These entrenched mutually supportive political and corporate elites provided Swedes
solid growth until the 1970s, when the economy proved unexpectedly inflexible in dealing with
external shocks. Institutions designed to stabilize the largest firms and prevent upstarts from
arising to challenge them were ill suited to dealing with a rapidly shifting comparative advantage
in the global economy. Social democracy had redistributed income dramatically, but could not
manage the necessary redistribution of property rights and wealth.
         The result, according to Högfeldt, is an increasingly frail economic dominated by elderly
and infirm companies, still controlled by the same wealthy families that bought into the social
democratic experiment more than half a century ago.
         Röell’s discussion stresses the differences between Sweden and the Netherlands—both
small, northern European social democracies. She argues that voting caps and other residues of
Napoleonic civil law entrenched insiders in the Netherlands while dual class shares and pyramids
entrenched Swedish insiders. Both sorts of entrenchment are costly and tallying up these costs is
an important research problem.

The United Kingdom
The chapter on the United Kingdom by Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004) compares a cadre of
firms founded in 1900 to another founded in 1960. They find that ownership grows diffuse in
both sets of firms at roughly the same rate. Based on this, they argue that the forces that made
founding families withdraw from corporate governance in the modern United Kingdom also
operated a century ago.
         They argue that shareholder rights in the United Kingdom were extremely weak until the
latter part of the 20th century, and so dispute the contention of La Porta et al. (1999) that
shareholder legal protection permits diffuse ownership in the United Kingdom. If this were true,
they argue that corporate ownership should have been highly concentrated earlier in the century,
which they do not observe.
         Providing a descriptive summary of United Kingdom corporate governance in greater
generality, they further argue that pyramids gained importance at the middle of the century. They
suggest that improved corporate disclosure, implemented in 1948, made hostile takeovers less
risky for raiders, and that pyramids developed as a defense against hostile takeovers. However,
Franks et al. (2004) argue that institutional investors saw serious governance problems in these
structures and lobbied to have them undone. British institutional investors successfully pressed
the London Stock Exchange to adopt a takeover rule whereby any bid for 30% or more of a listed
firm must be a bid for 100%. Franks et al. propose that this rule made pyramidal business groups
untenable as takeover defenses, and that continued pressure from institutional investors on boards
rapidly rid Britain of these structures.
         Franks et al. (2004) also argue that concentrated corporate control and pyramidal groups
are of more value to insiders elsewhere than in Britain. This is because these ownership
structures permit corporate insiders to extract private benefits of control. However, they propose
that British corporate insiders were and are governed by higher standards of ethical conduct,
which preclude the extraction of such private benefits. Given this, British corporate insiders were
more readily convinced to sell their control blocks and dismantle their pyramids. Thus, the


                                                16
current diffuse ownership of British corporations came to prevail early in the 20th century and still
persists.
          Eichengreen’s discussion raises further questions. The Great Depression was a critical
juncture in the evolution of corporate governance in many countries, yet it is little discussed.
Why were British banks content without the corporate governance powers of their German or
Swedish peers? He notes that Sylla and Smith (1995) emphasize the Directors Liability of Act of
1890, which made company directors liable for statements in prospectuses soliciting buyers for
company shares, and the Companies Act of 1900, which strengthened the principle of compulsory
corporate disclosure, as the explanation for why British financial markets developed so rapidly
around the turn of the century. He speculates that shareholder rights might have been stronger in
early 20th century Britain than Franks et al. admit.

The United States
The chapter on the United States by Becht and DeLong (2004) explore how that country came to
have the atypically diffuse corporate ownership evident in Figure 1. The great corporations of
other countries are usually organized into business groups that are controlled by wealthy, old
families or powerful financial intermediaries. Great corporations in the United States are, for the
most part, managed by career professionals and freestanding – they do not have listed subsidiaries
or parents.
         These differences are developments of the 20th century, for Moody (1904) describes an
America that was more “normal.” Powerful banking houses and plutocratic families controlled
much of the large corporate sector, wielding their corporate governance power robustly,
monitoring, choosing, and replacing managers and setting corporate direction.
         But by the 1930s, all of this had changed. A remarkable democratization of shareholding
took place between World War I and the end of World War II. The benefits of diversification
depend on the depth of the stock market. High-pressure war-bond sales campaigns in 1917-1918,
popular magazines on share-ownership, and popular media coverage of Wall Street celebrities
brought middle American wealth into the stock market, vastly deepening it and thus making the
sacrifice of diversification for control more attractive than elsewhere.
         The burgeoning Progressive Movement deplored both the concentration of economic
power and the way business oligarchs like J.P. Morgan, the Rockefellers, and others ruling vast
pyramidal groups “turned conflict-of-interest into a lifestyle.” Progressive politicians pilloried
the “robber barons” of industry, their heirs, and J.P. Morgan.
         Both to obtain the benefits of diversification and to relieve their pummeling by the
progressive press, many wealthy families sold majorities of their firms’ shares into the stock
markets. Of course, most of these families at first retained control through voting trusts,
staggered boards, larger and more complicated pyramidal holding companies with multiple
classes of stock, and other entrenchment devices.
         But progressive politicians were on a roll, and pressed antitrust regulators into service. In
1911, they succeeded in breaking up the Standard Oil Trust, a huge group of petroleum and
industrial companies formerly controlled by the Rockefeller family. Over the subsequent decades,
these emerged as freestanding, widely held, and professionally managed entities. Becht and
DeLong (2004) track this process in detail for Standard Oil of New Jersey.
         America’s response to the Great Depression then razed much of what family capitalism
remained. Two great pyramids, the Insull and van Sweringen business groups, collapsed after the
1929 crash. These high profile collapses appear to have linked the Depression with highly
concentrated corporate control in the public mind, justifying a barrage of progressive reform. The
Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 pared commercial from investment banking. The Public Utility
Company Holding Companies Act of 1935 forbade pyramidal control of utility companies. A
series of regulatory reforms governing banks, insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension



                                                 17
funds prevented any of these organizations from accumulating any serious corporate governance
influence either.
        The activist US courts intervene further to keep shareholdings dispersed. For example, in
1957 the Supreme Court ordered the DuPont family to sell its equity block in General Motors to
prevent DuPont from obtaining “an illegal preference over its competitors in the sale to General
Motors of its products…”
        Becht and DeLong (2004) then explore 1937 data on blockholdings in the top listed 200
US firms. Of these, 24 are subsidiaries in pyramids and only 34 have no controlling shareholder.
They explore the history of the last, and find that they became widely held when their founding
families sold out, either directly or with trust promoters as intermediaries. Some of this might
have been market timing – selling stocks for more than their fundamental values during bubbles.
Most of it was probably founding families appreciating the value of diversification in a deep
stock market. These wealthy families often retained influence on their boards without holding
control blocks.
        Stung by progressive era condemnation, they often turned to philanthropy, distancing
themselves and their heirs even further from governance issues. Thus, modern Americans
associate the names Rockefeller, Harkness, Carnegie, and Guggenheim with performing arts,
universities, and museums, not with the great business groups that built those fortunes.
        Activist judges and progressive politicians, aided by fortune, thus effectively entrusted
the governance of America’s great corporations to professional managers. The Securities and
Exchanges Act of 1934 relegated to management control over who can stand for election to
boards, and left boards to monitor management. Although the hostile takeovers of the 1980s
disrupted this arrangement for some firms, and some United States institutional investors are
clearing their throats, this situation has kept most American firms freestanding and professionally
run ever since.
        Richard Sylla’s discussion contrasts Becht and Delong’s arguments with those of
Dunlavy (2004), who contends that by 1900 American firms were already exceptional in having
one-vote-per-share voting rights, giving large shareholders more say in corporate affairs than
small shareholders. In Europe, she argues, shareholder voting rights were more “democratic” in
limiting the power of large shareholders, as was the case earlier in the United States. Sylla notes
that Alexander Hamilton proponed such limits on large blockholder votes as necessary to prevent
a few large players from dominating corporate policies. We are impressed that Hamilton was
clearly more concerned about entrenched large blockholders, not professional managers, abusing
small shareholders, as are students of corporate governance in most modern countries other than
the United Kingdom and United States.

4. What Are the Common Factors?
Each chapter highlights the intricate complexity of the financial history. Yet there are common
threads spanning many countries. This section tracks some of the most visible of these threads
and ties them to current thinking about the reasons why corporate governance is so different in
different countries.

Accidents of History
The clearest lesson, evident in every chapter, is things happen, and constrain what can happen
next. The history of corporate governance, like other historical processes, is path dependent.
         Had France had not suffered repeated financial collapses at the hands of John Law, the
Revolutionary Assembly, and the Crédit Mobilier, shareholder rights in that country might have
solidified much earlier and much harder. Murphy argues that the formation of new joint stock
companies and other large enterprises essentially ceased in France until 1840, and thereafter only
very slowly resumed. Other students of European history make similar points – Frentrop (2002,



                                                18
2003, p. 137) writes that “Following the experience of 1720, French public opinion developed a
violent distaste for anything to do with financial markets.” He goes on to argue that “A similar
opinion was expressed in the Netherlands.” Frentrop argues that the Napoleonic Code, which
French armies spread across the continent in the early 19th century, carried that distaste, and was
far less conducive to large business undertakings than was the previous Dutch legal system.
Perhaps accidents of history explain the findings of La Porta et al. (1999) that countries with legal
systems based on the Napoleonic code have stunted financial systems.
         Yet other countries underwent financial crises and responded entirely differently.
Britain’s South Sea bubble closely paralleled Law’s Mississippi bubble, and its response, the
Bubble Act, hampered equity markets for generations afterward. But sound ventures like the
British East India Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company sustained a financial sector that
soon boasted sophisticated merchant banks.5 Psychologists puzzle over why some people are
devastated by emotional traumas that others recover from on their own. Economists, too,
understand little about how crises affect institutional development. The histories in this volume
show this to be an important fault in our discipline.
         China’s stock market, founded in the 1870s, saw the same sorts of manipulation and
insider trading that characterized other markets around the world, and collapsed in 1883 – and
again in the 1922. Perhaps these misfortunes pushed China off a path to free-market democracy
she might otherwise have followed. Chinese capitalism never recovered, shares in Chinese
companies grew illiquid, and the faltering free market economy fell to Mao’s socialist revolution.
         In 1933, a committee of experts, assembled under the Weimar Republic, completed its
deliberations on separating commercial from investment banking. Had it favored this separation,
German banks would have relinquished most of their corporate governance influence over non-
financial firms, and German capitalism would have developed far differently than it did.
However, the committee favored the status quo – possibly because its chairman, Reichsbank
President Hjalmar Horace Greeley Schacht feared setting a berserker like Gottfried Feder loose to
reform the system.6 Feder, a founding member of the National Socialist Party and Hitler’s
banking advisor, was famous for his 1919 Manifesto on Breaking the Shackles of Interest and
advocated the nationalisation of all banks and the total abolishment of interest.
         Perhaps China, Germany, Japan, and Italy might have evolved ingrained cultures of
shareholder capitalism had they avoided prolonged economic collapses in the 1920s and 1930s –
and if fascism and socialism had been less entrancing. Were socialism less in vogue in the mid
20th century, perhaps India, the Netherlands, and Sweden might have gone the route of American
corporate governance. If Colbert were British, the English-speaking had a few more financial
crises, or fascism and socialism had more persuasive English speaking advocates, would America
and Britain be dominated by large family controlled business groups?
         But concluding that everything is a concordance of accidents is too simple. However
satisfying that view to pure historians of individual countries, economic history is about patterns
and regularities amid those accidents. Fortunately, many issues that ought to affect corporate
governance are already highlighted in the literature. Even more fortunately, the chapters in this
volume present a wealth of detail that helps fill in the gaps. It would be wonderful for economists
if we could conclude that one theory is correct and discard the others, but economics is rarely so
simple. All of the major theories that purport to explain historical and cross-country differences
in corporate control find support, though some require modification in passing.

Ideas
Wars, upheavals, and many other catastrophes affected many countries simultaneously, but
triggered different reactions in different countries – perhaps depending on the popularity or

5
    See Kindelberger (1978).
6
    See Kleeberg (1987) for details.


                                                 19
unpopularity of certain ideologies at that point in time. Rarely, as after the English Civil War and
American Revolution, private property rights coalesced. Perhaps more typically, French
economic and political turmoil in the 1720s resurrected traditional Catholic restraints on business.
More turmoil at the end of the 18th century institutionalized a suspicion of all things financial, and
wars exporting the French Revolution spread this to the Netherlands and elsewhere. The chapters
in this book collectively suggest the importance, for good and ill, of ideologies at critical
moments when economies are ripe for institutional transformations.
         One such critical moment was the Great Depression of the 1930s, when different
countries set off in different directions that wrought today’s differences in corporate governance.
Financial catastrophes in many countries in the 1920s and 1930s, and ideological reactions to
them, deeply affected their subsequent evolution of corporate control.
         In the 1930s, the United States was deeply influenced by the progressive ideology of
Louis Brandeis, Thorsten Veblen, and others. Roosevelt’s New Dealers realigned American
institutions to this ideology when the Great Depression undermined popular faith in America’s
older institutions. Dispersing economic power as widely as possible was a key part of this. Thus,
the American government undertook to break up that country’s great pyramidal corporate groups
by banning large pyramidal groups from controlling public utility companies, applying taxes to
intercorporate dividends, and strengthening public shareholders’ property rights over their
investments.7 This fortuitous coincidence of ideology and opportunity to act created America’s
exceptional large corporate sector composed mainly of freestanding widely held firms.
         In Sweden, the same Great Depression had completely different results. The ideology
waiting in the wings in Sweden was social democracy. When Swedish voters lost faith in their
traditional institutions, social democrats took power and radically concentrated economic power
in two ways. First, the State assumed power over the commanding heights of the Swedish
economy. Second, widespread corporate bankruptcies left large banks, like that owned by the
Wallenberg family, holding control blocks in most large Swedish companies. These banks
reorganized these companies into the large pyramidal groups that currently dominate the Swedish
economy. Högfeldt (2004) argues that the social democrats and these powerful families
developed a symbiotic relationship – the families supported the social democrats, who enacted
policies that favored large old firms and hampered upstart firms.
         Mixtures of socialist and nationalist ideologies emerged in Germany, Italy, and Japan
during the Great Depression. Ultimately, radical nationalists won in all three, but not without
adopting many socialist policies. In the 1920s and 1930s, the major German banks had
accumulated huge holdings of their own shares in efforts to stabilize their own stock prices. The
National Socialists confiscated these holdings, effectively nationalizing the banks and imposing
party control over their proxy voting processes. Multiple voting shares were nullified, except of
family firms controlled by Gentiles and voting caps did not apply to banks voting the holdings of
individual shareholders by right of proxy. In this way, the Reich de facto nationalized the greater
part of the German economy while leaving the formalities of private ownership in place. 8 The
fascist government of Italy nationalized the banks, which had seized control blocks in many large
bankrupt companies. Italy’s postwar governments retained many aspects of Mussolini’s
economic system, including large pyramidal groups of listed companies with state holding
companies at their apexes. Japan’s military government likewise placed military representatives
on all boards to ensure that large firms were managed patriotically, and not for mere profit.
         In Canada, socialists and progressives trumpeted opposing visions of reform in the 1930s,
letting old line parties hold the center and retain power. This preserved its prewar system of
pyramidal groups. The corporate governance of large Canadian firms changed only gradually


7
    See Morck (2004).
8
    See Kleeberg (1987, p. 83).


                                                 20
over the subsequent decades. Britain, France, and the Netherlands also seem to have preserved
their pre-Depression systems of corporate governance.
         Another example arises in connection with India and other post-colonial economies. Das
(2002) and others argue that intellectual fashions at the London School of Economics adversely
affected India’s economic policies, including corporate governance. Similar effects elsewhere in
the third world seem highly plausible.

Families
A purpose of this book was to provide a richer rendering of corporate governance systems
throughout the world. The geographic and chronological scope of the project allows us to make
observations as well as raise important questions regarding how enterprise is organized in
different parts of the world. Importantly, the book speaks to the neglect of family enterprise
relative to their role in capitalist economies. Family capitalism contributes to the wealth and or
poverty of a nation, with appreciation to Adam Smith and David Landes.
         A theme throughout this volume is the importance of large family business groups in
most developed economies. This confirms La Porta et al. (1999) and Burkart et al. (2003), who
conclude (p. 2167) that most large businesses throughout the world “are controlled by their
founders, or by the founder’s families and heirs.” Moreover, there is no evidence of a uniform
natural transition from family capitalism to managerial capitalism. Franks et al. (2004) describe
such a transition in the United Kingdom, and De Jong and Röell (2004) describe a form of
managerial capitalism that is perhaps native to the Netherlands. Becht and Delong (2004)
describe the transition from family to managerial capitalism in the United States as a convolution
of accidents and America’s unique progressive ideology. Fohlin (2004) shows that, although
Germany developed a variant of managerial capitalism because of banking laws left in place by
the national Socialists, large family firms and groups remain very important there. Japan’s
variant of managerialism was a forced postwar transplant of American institutions. In Canada,
managerial capitalism displaced family groups through the first part of the century, and then
retreated before a resurgence of family groups. Elsewhere, family business groups were seldom
challenged except by state-owned enterprises. Professional managers, where they exist at all, are
merely hired help employed by enormously wealthy families.
         The studies in this volume provide abundant evidence of family control encompassing
both best and worst practice. How large family groups perform, and how they affect their
economies, seems highly context dependent. Burkart et al. (2003) stress the legal protection of
public shareholders, arguing that heirs relinquish control to better qualified professional managers
and diversify their wealth across many firms only if they trust the corporate governance of those
firms, and conclude (p. 2193) that “The separation of ownership and management is thus an
indication of a superior corporate governance environment. The lack of such separation, and the
prevalence of family firms, is evidence of financial underdevelopment.”
         But La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) show that many highly developed economies provide
few rights to public shareholders. This might occur naturally if family control offers many
advantages. For example, close family bonds might enable a degree of cooperation that is more
difficult to sustain among non-kin. Entrusting control over different firms to blood kin might
facilitate the transfer of knowledge, roles and routines from firm to firm as well as from
generation to generation. In other words large family business groups may represent effective
ways of organizing enterprise that survive the rigors of economic selection. Khanna and Palepu
(2004) stress this naturally cooperative behavior as the glue that holds family groups together;
and attribute the hard-earned reputations of certain families for their relative success.
         But they also show that family business groups rise and fall in India; and other chapters
identify analogous change elsewhere. Schumpeter (1951) makes a similar observation about
European family enterprises. He posits several factors that alter the relative positions of wealthy
families within a ruling class, the breeching of class barriers – upward or downward, and the rise


                                                21
and fall of whole classes. These are: chance; shrewd management of the families’ position,
especially via advantageous arranged marriages; differences in the usefulness of families to their
feudal superiors; and different entrepreneurial ability in successive generations of the family. He
argues for a sort of automatism – a family that simply reinvests a proportion of its profits in its
business is bound to go under sooner or later. Bad luck strikes, competition emerges, politics
shift, and most importantly, entrepreneurs die. Schumpeter (1951, p. 122) stresses that rare
entrepreneurial ability is the foundation of most great family fortunes, but is an individual trait
and does “not coincide with the logical necessity that obtains in the case of family enterprises.”
This, he continues, means “The complete displacement of powerful family positions as typical
phenomenon, not merely the shifting of positions between families.” The entry and exit of
families is thus “individually effected” (p. 123), so that classes survive, but families come and
go.” He concludes (p. 130) that “The persistence of class position is an illusion, created by the
slowness of change and the stability of class character as such and of its social fluid.”
         Ultimately Shumpeter’s (1912) notion of creative destruction is an underlying principle
of capitalism. But innovation and entrepreneurship need to be nurtured. Oligarchic family elites
can use their considerable wealth and connections to maintain their power and control at the
expense of economic development. Haber (1999), Morck et al. (2004a), Olson (1963, 1982),
Rajan and Zingales (2003), Thurow (1989) and others call such entrenched elites oligarchies.
Thurow (1989, p. 405) for example, distinguishes establishments from oligarchies. Both are
well-educated, wealthy, powerful, intermarried elites who “run their countries… [But] the central
goal of an establishment is to insure that the system works so that the country will in the long run
be successful. An establishment is self-confident that if the system works and if their country
does well, they will personally do well… In contrast an oligarchy is a group of insecure
individuals who amass funds in secret Swiss bank accounts. Because they think that they must
always look out for their own immediate self-interest, they aren’t interested in taking time and
effort to improve their country’s long-run prospects.” The studies in this volume provide ample
evidence of powerful family business groups behaving as establishments, oligarchies, or first one
and then the other.

Business Groups
Conceptualizing economic activity in terms of business groups, as opposed to freestanding firms,
is an incompletely understood area – perhaps because groups are rarest in the United States and
United Kingdom, where business research is most active. A literature on business groups is
coalescing, but is probably decades behind that for other issues of similar importance.9 The
literature is probably most developed in connection with Japan, where area studies scholars have
long appreciated business groups’ importance.10 However, Japanese business groups, as Morck
and Nakamura (2004) show, have a history starkly different from groups elsewhere. Most
importantly, large horizontal Japanese keiretsu are controlled by managers, not wealthy families.
         Humans’ tendency to organize activities along patterns of kinship may be biologically
innate, as Axelrod and Hamilton (1981) suggest. But this organizing propensity continues long
after the biological necessity is removed, and often extends to economic activity. Family and
kinship groupings are likely the oldest and most pervasive forms of group behavior. From an
economic perspective, Khanna and Palepu (2000) conceptualize family business groups “as a
mechanism through which intragroup transaction costs are lowered, by encouraging information


9
  See Bae et al. (2002), Bebchuk et al. (2000), Barca and Becht (2001), Bertrand et al. (2002), Claessens et
al. (2000, 2002), Daniels et al. (1995), Faccio and Lang (2003), Faccio et al. (2001), Faccio (2002),
Ghemawat and Khanna (1998), Khanna (2000), Granovetter (in press), Khanna and Palepu (2000), Morck
et al. (2000, 2004), and others.
10
   See e.g. Aoki (1984), Hoshi et al. (1991), and especially Nakatani (1984).


                                                    22
dissemination among group firms, reducing the possibility of contractual disputes, and providing
a low-cost mechanism for dispute resolution” (p.271).
         Economic welfare, in theory, is greatly enhanced if trade extends beyond kinship groups,
and even encompasses anonymous transactions. Firms that raise capital from public shareholders
at low cost can expand more rapidly than those constrained by family wealth. Family controlled
pyramidal groups arose everywhere as devices to tap public equity financing on a huge scale, but
retain family control over all key decisions.
         Groups that do not fit this pattern, such as modern Japanese keiretsu, German bank
groups, and groups with widely held or state-owned enterprises at their apexes, are exceptions,
but important ones. In every case, they too are structured to preserve public equity financing
while locking in control by insiders – professional managers, bankers, or bureaucrats, rather than
wealthy families. The broader theme of concentrated control seems to encompass all business
groups everywhere.
         Why might such concentrated control develop and persist? Why does it most often rest
with a handful of wealthy families? At this point we can only speculate.
         There is safety in numbers, and as Aristotle wrote in The Ethics “Men journey together
with a view to particular advantage.” Sociologists have long recognized that “involvement and
participation in groups can have positive consequences for the individual and the community”
(Portes, 1998, p. 2). Granovetter (in press) speculates that American-style freestanding widely
held firms did not last in postwar Japan because the “Planners had dramatically underestimated
the extent to which the dense web of ties connecting firms within these groups, and the resulting
sense of group identity and patterns of customary cooperation, could persist and regenerate even
without direction from family owners.” Perhaps, but group identity and cooperation need not
require intercorporate equity holdings, which Morck and Nakamura (2004) argue were
established as takeover defenses in the 1950s and 1960s. In their view, Japanese groups were
raised from the dead to protect the positions of top corporate managers.
         Khanna and Palepu (1997, p. 41) note that the “diversified business group remains the
dominant form of enterprise throughout most emerging markets.” They caution economic
planners and executives in those countries against imitating western style freestanding
industrially focused firms. They argue that ties of the sort Granovetter (2004) proposes substitute
for markets and institutions that permit anonymous or arm’s length transactions in developed
countries. Khanna and Palepu (p. 41) argue that if “…a country’s product, capital, and labor
markets; its regulatory system; and its mechanisms for enforcing contracts” are not trusted,
business groups substitute for them. Trust between family members running various group firms
substitutes for trust in business contracts, financial markets, or labor market signals.

Trust
Cooperative behavior with blood kin may well be genetically programmed, making families the
default junctures of high trust behavior for the individuals within them. But wider networks of
high trust behavior appear to be important to the creation of an effective system of governance for
large organizations and of reliable institutions in general.11 Mayer, Davis and Schoorman (1995,
p.712) define trust as “the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party
based on the expectation that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor,
irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that other party.” Arrow (1974, p.23) explains the
advantages it bestows thus, “Trust is an important lubricant of a social system. It is extremely
efficient; it saves people a lot of trouble to have a fair degree of reliance on other people’s word”.
Trust can lower transaction costs and permit effective coordination and control. Macaulay (1963,

11
  Regarding trust in large organizations, see Bradach and Eccles (1989); Coase (1937); La Porta et al.
(1997a), Powell (1990); Sahlman (1990), Steier (1998), Stinchcombe (1965), Williamson (1975; 1985).
Regarding institutions broadly interpreted, see Coleman (1988), Putman (1993), and Fukuyama (1995).


                                                 23
p. 55) makes a strong case that the governance of business transactions has an important
dimension that goes beyond formal agreements and contracts. He argues (p. 58) that formal legal
contracts cover a very small portion of all business conducted, and that business people largely
prefer to rely on mechanisms such as “a man’s word”, a “handshake” or “common honesty and
decency.”
         For Fukuyama (1995) a high level of societal trust improves the performance for all the
society’s institutions. The absence of trust, or more seriously, distrust, makes coordination and
control problematic. In certain situations, such as the grafting of Western capitalism onto a
developing economy with low general levels of trust for non-kin, a “mismatch” of trust occurs
where people take advantage of the erroneous expectations of others. This is a key theme in the
chapter by Goetzmann and Köll (2004), in which Western institutions built on certain
assumptions of trust failed abjectly in pre-Revolutionary China when adjoined to its ancient
entrenched bureaucracy.
         Although readily destroyed, trust in a society’s institutions is not easily built up. Putnam
(1993) describes how economically important networks of trust in Northern Italy were built
through centuries of successful association. The chapter on Canada by Morck et al. (2004)
describes that country’s evolution from a low-trust society in which families were virtually the
only instruments of trust reliable enough to finance business ventures. Murphy’s (2004) chapter
on France describes the destruction of popular trust in the institutions of arm’s-length finance.
         Certain organizational arrangements can substitute to some extent for low trust outside
families, and even increase ambient levels of trust, albeit slowly. Khanna and Palepu’s chapter
on India (2004) describes the importance of ethnic minorities in India’s early large businesses.
The relatively small size of these communities in large markets permitted both relationships of
trust between key decision makers and certain economies of scale. In India and other countries,
small elites developed within which huge deals could be consummated largely on the basis of
trust.
         This view of business groups is underscored by the business histories of many of the
countries surveyed in this volume. The earliest origins of Japan’s family business groups, or
zaibatsu, were to circumvent low trust problems. For example, the Mitsui family expanded into
commodity trading because their silk business depended on barter deals. They later moved into
banking to move Japan beyond barter deals into a real financial system.
         It also helps explain the structures of business groups. The relational approach to
strategy and economics propounded by Dyer and Singh (1998), Landes (1998), and Portes (1998)
suggests that economic success depends on effective network relationships. Burt (1992b, p.11)
thus argues that “Something about the structure of the player’s network and the location of a
player’s contacts in the social structure of the arena provides a competitive advantage….” In this
light, business groups should be structured around critical transactions where trust is important.
Effective networks contain enough members to accomplish the task, but not so many as to be
unmanageable nor unnecessary or redundant.
         Burt (1992a) models effective network ties as links to clusters of resources. The number
of ties matters less than the clusters of resources accessed. A bigger network is only more
effective if it connects to additional pertinent clusters of resources. An effective network thus
contains “structural holes” (Burt, 1992a, p.65), clusters of people who do not overlap. There are
advantages (Burt, 1997, p.343) to “having a contact network rich in structural holes.” Efficient
growth encompasses relevant clusters but avoids redundant relationships by economizing on ties.
Thus, very early Canadian groups began with timber businesses, expanded into ship building,
then shipping, and then insurance.
         Business-government relations are also critical links for business groups in many
countries. Högfeldt’s (2004) chapter on Sweden essentially argues that socialist politicians
viewed family controlled business groups as effective links to the whole of the private sector. By
abetting dynastic family control over wide circles of firms, these politicians established a system


                                                 24
where they could negotiate with the greater part of the large corporate sector over a small table.
He adds this may have stymied the development of arms-length institutions in Sweden. This
logic of business groups as second best solutions impeding movement towards first best solutions
is echoed in several other chapters.
         Franks et al. (2004) argue that fear of losing one’s reputation spread trustworthy behavior
widely across British corporate governance by the early 20th century. But in the rest of this
volume, legal or regulatory sanction as reprisal for unacceptable grasping seems necessary to
elevate ambient levels of trust, though exactly which sanctions mattered historically in which
countries remains unclear.12 In the United States especially, Becht and Delong (2004) see
popular disquiet with concentrated economic power as perhaps more important than economic
inefficiency in advancing tax, securities law, and other regulations that ultimately destabilized
large business groups.13 And Sylla and Smith (1995) argue that law played a greater role in
Britain than Franks et al. allow.

Law
In a fundamental paper, La Porta et al. (1997) argue that stock market development should be
positively correlated with shareholder legal protection. Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) formalize
this argument with a model in which controlling shareholders sell out to diversify if their rights as
portfolio investors are legally protected. Otherwise, they remain undiversified blockholders in
the companies they manage and consume what private benefits they can extract from their public
shareholders. La Porta et al. (1997) measure shareholder rights by focusing on six specific legal
rights shareholders have in the United States, and counting how many of them shareholders have
in other countries.14 They find that in the 1990s countries with stronger shareholder protection
were characterized by larger stock markets and more diffusely held large corporations, and that
these countries tend to have legal systems derived from British Common Law. The Common Law
countries in Figure 1 are Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Ireland, New Zealand, Singapore, the
United Kingdom, and the United States; and clearly do have more widely held large firms that the
other countries, all of which employ civil codes of one form or another. La Porta et al. (1997,
1999) conclude that diffuse ownership and shareholder capitalism require solid legal protection of
public shareholders’ property rights in their investments.
         Several of the chapters in this volume beg to differ. Murphy (2004) remarks that “In a
post Enron, Tyco, WorldCom world, French jurists and financiers might be permitted a wry smile
at the implication that the common law system is linked to a strong system of corporate control.”
Fohlin (2004) argues that her chapter “casts doubt on the notion that civil law traditions per se
consistently undermine market functioning” because German stock markets ebbed and rose at
various points, while its legal system changed little. She also fails to find any temporal
correlation between changes in shareholder protection and ownership diffusion. Franks et al.
(2004) argue that British shareholders had none of the legal rights La Porta et al. (1997)
enumerate until 1948, and only attained their current level of protection in the final third of the
20th century.15 Yet they find that the ownership of new British firms dispersed as quickly early in
the 20th century and in its latter decades. Canadian shareholders had few of these same rights
12
   See La Porta et al. (2003).
13
   See Morck (2004) for detail on these regulatory attacks.
14
   This index adds one point if the country lets shareholders mail in proxy votes; does not require shares to
be deposited prior to a General Shareholders’ Meeting; allows cumulative voting or proportional
representation of minorities in the board; provides an oppressed minority remedy; lets an owner of ten
percent or less of the share capital call an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting; lets shareholders’
preemptive rights be voided only by a shareholders’ vote.
15
   Cheffins (2001) also argues that British legal developments weaken the thesis of La Porta et al. (1997,
1998), though Sylla and Smith (1995) argue that late 19th century developments in British law actually did
strengthen shareholder rights considerably.


                                                     25
until the 1960s, but Morck et al. (2004) find that Canadian corporate ownership grew widely
dispersed by the middle of the 20th century, and that family controlled pyramidal groups staged a
roaring comeback at the century’s end and under unprecedentedly strong shareholder rights laws.
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Sweden all had economically very important
stock markets off and on through their history – especially at the beginning of the 20th century, as
noted by Rajan and Zingales (2003). Becht and DeLong (2004) argue that US shareholders
remain vulnerable to many forms of expropriation by corporate insiders despite their statutory
legal rights, and Aganin and Volpin (2004) argue that shareholder rights in Italy are a dead letter
because of general judicial system inefficiency.
         Three general criticisms of La Porta et al. (1997, 1999) emerge. First, the timing of
improved shareholder rights does not match the timing of ownership dispersion in several
countries. Second, the correlation between large stock markets and shareholder rights is highly
specific to the late 20th century. Third, the La Porta et al. shareholder rights index is an
incomplete proxy for actual shareholder legal protection. The thesis that statutory shareholder
rights cause stock market development and ownership diffusion is hard to square with these
findings. However, the thesis that a country’s legal system, or some other factor highly correlated
with this, predisposes it to a certain form of capitalism, which is really the fundamental point La
Porta et al. (1997, 1999) advance, is harder to challenge. Indeed, the chapters of this book
provide fairly solid evidence in its favor.
         Murphy (2004) does not argue that the French legal code is unimportant, but rather that
French public investors grew skeptical of stock markets because of repeated financial crises. Yet
the response of French politicians and jurists to each crisis was not to strengthen investor rights.
Rather, the response to the Mississippi Company bubble was to reassert Roman Catholic
prohibitions on interest and to all but shut down the financial system. Neither the revolutionary
government’s assignats nor the Credit Mobilier fiasco heralded stronger investor rights.
Likewise, the responses of the Dutch, Italian, Japanese, and Swedish governments to the financial
crises of the 1920s and 1930s were to substitute various mechanisms of state-controlled capital
allocation for their stock markets. In contrast, a not dissimilar succession of financial manias,
panics, and crises in Britain, Canada, and the United States ultimately strengthened shareholder
rights. Clearly something in their legal systems changed. Why did financial crises trigger fuller
disclosure, better regulation, and stronger investor rights in Common law countries, but a
disconnection of the stock market from the economy in countries with Civil Law traditions?
         Aganin and Volpin (2004) shed light on what happened in Italy. After the Crash of 1907,
Fiat’s shareholders sued the Agnelli family for accounting irregularities and stock price
manipulation. The Agnellis were cleared of all wrongdoing, but investor confidence in the stock
market was deeply shaken, and Italy remained in a prolonged financial crisis through 1914.
Aganin and Volpin (2004) argue that “There was a general market perception that universal banks
and corporate insiders like the Agnellia used the investment boom early in the century to pump
and dump their shares.”
         Morck and Nakamura (2004) describe how the American occupation force redesigned the
ownership structures of Japan’s major corporations in the late 1940s to make them widely held.
Yet, Japanese managers, fearful of hostile takeovers, placed blocks of stock with each others’
firms to defend against raiders, forming the current keiretsu groups. Recent work in the United
States and other countries shows that barriers to takeovers are not in the best interests of
shareholders. Yet the Japanese managers acted anyway, for Japanese shareholders had no legal
rights to object.
         One interpretation of the findings in this volume is that both Civil Law and Common
Law countries create large financial markets, but that Common Law countries are better able to
sustain them over the longer run. Perhaps, from time to time, a new generation in a civil law
country discards the advice of their grandparents and invests heavily in stocks. Once it becomes
clear that their rights are ill protected, the values of their portfolios collapse and the next


                                                26
generation or two shuns the market again until collective memory fades and a new generation of
marks is born.
         But what is it about common law systems that sustains large stock markets and makes
sustained diffuse ownership possible? If La Porta et al.’s (1997) shareholder rights are recent
statutory innovations in most Common Law countries, why are investors in those countries
generally more accepting of stocks? One possibility is deeper characteristics distinguishing
Common Law from Civil Law.
         One such difference emerged in the early 17th century, when France was exhausted by its
Wars of Religion (1562–98) and England was devastated by its Civil War (1625-49). Cardinal
Richelieu sought to reunite France by centralizing power in the hands of an absolute monarchy.
Bloodied by years of chaos, the French people accepted this as a sort of salvation. The arbitrary
Revolutionary Tribunals of the late 18th century left the public mistrustful of judicial discretion,
and probably made the French people, and Napoleon in particular, receptive to the rigid
codification of the law, and the subjugation of judges to the executive branch of government.
Thus, Napoleon replaced France’s pre-revolutionary civil code with a new, expanded Napoleonic
Code and his armies exported this across the European continent. Meanwhile, England had
developed a tradition of an independent judiciary – the Courts of Common Law – as alternatives
to the Royal courts – the Exchequer and the Court of Star Chamber. This was a reflection of a
broader struggle for power between the monarch and Parliament that came to a head with
Cromwell’s Commonwealth (1649-60). Parliament won both the English Civil War and the
battle for the courts that followed. English courts became independent of the executive branch
and subject only to Parliament.16
         This gave English and French jurisprudence very different flavors.17 To vastly
oversimplify, the French courts existed to implement the will of the king; while the English courts
existed to protect free Englishmen from abuse by their king. Over time, government came to be
substituted for king, but the difference persists. Common law systems protect the weak from the
strong; civil law systems enforce the edict of the State. This distinction disposes courts in
common law countries to protect public shareholders, even in the absence of explicit statutes.
         A second underlying difference is that civil codes provide detailed instructions to judges
that try to anticipate all possible cases and specify decisions for each. The judge looks to the
letter of the law anew in each case. Merryman (1966, p. 586) describes the resulting dominance
of doctrine, and how judicial decisions read “more like excerpts from treatises or commentaries
on the codes than the reasoning of a court in deciding a concrete case.” Under common law,
judges base rulings upon general principles and previous cases, as well as legislation. This, with
the relative independence of the judiciary from political interference, renders all common law
courts, to some extent, activist courts. Decisions are less responsive to the minutia of a legal code
and more to the perceived viewpoint of a reasonable man, a prudent man, or the like. Corporate
insiders who pilfer from public shareholders in a common law jurisdiction, even if they
fastidiously avoid breaching all written statutes, can never be entirely certain the courts will not
find a precedent or general principle to convict them anyway. This uncertainty might contribute
to better general treatment of public investors in common law countries, even before those
countries enacted the specific statutory rights La Porta et al. (1997) enumerate.
         A third difference, which flows from the first two, is the quality of judicial decisions.
Both common law and civil code systems can be of high quality, but both also have weak
points.18 Three particular vulnerabilities to which civil law systems are prone are of special


16
   See also Hayek (1960) and Glaezer and Shleifer (2002).
17
   See Watson (1981), Pistor et al. (1999), Glaezer and Shleifer (2002), and others.
18
   Berkowitz and Clay (2004) find that US states with Civil Law colonial legal systems (Florida, Louisiana,
and southwestern states taken from Mexico) have more constitutional instability than purely Common Law


                                                    27
concern in cases of corporate governance that pit connected corporate insiders against
impecunious public shareholders. First, because civil law judges are bureaucrats subordinate to
the government, ill functioning courts are malleable to political pressure.19 Second, because
decisions depend on complicated codes, rather than broad principles, a poorly functioning civil
law system can favor litigants better at parsing those codes. Third, because precedent is less a
guiding principle, civil law judges can shrug off how their judgments affect people’s future
behavior in the belief that good bureaucrats should defer to politicians.
         These differences can all be overstated, of course. The United States has codified its
contract law in the Uniform Commercial Code, and its securities laws in the Securities and
Exchanges Act and various sundry legislation. These codes are easily as detailed as many civil
codes.20 Meanwhile, Enriques (2002) documents how civil codes contain “general clauses”
instructing judges to apply certain standards on a case-by-case basis, and civil law judges
sometimes even create new standards or extend existing. Although these clauses theoretically
allow civil law judges latitude to convict wrongdoers who delicately avoid breaking the letter of
the law, they seldom exercise it – perhaps because of their doctrinal training. Finally, the
executive branch of government appoints high court judges in most common law countries, and
some might see this as subjugating the courts. There is even disagreement among legal scholars
about the degree of protection civil law countries actually accord public shareholders. For
example, Ramseyer and Nakazato (1999) argue that Japanese law gives public shareholders fairly
strong legal rights. Many legal scholars thus regard the distinction between civil and common
law as primarily of historical interest.21
         Nonetheless, these three differences might perhaps coalesce into an explanation.22 Many
common law and civil code countries had large stock markets to which numerous small investors
entrusted their savings at various points in their histories. All of these countries experienced
financial panics and crises, but these seem to have devastated shareholder cultures in civil law
countries worse than in common law countries.
         Albeit often with very long lags, financial crises induced stronger shareholder legal rights
in common law countries. Coffee (2001) argues that common law created a better environment
for self-regulation. Moreover, succession of British court decisions and laws, beginning with the
Joint Stock Companies Registration, Incorporation, and Regulation Act of 1844, steadily
expanded investor legal protection. Indeed, the committee that drafted the 1844 act reflected long
on past financial crises and stock market bubbles, and “classified bubble companies into those
naturally unsound, those unsound through bad management, and those clearly fraudulent. For the
first nothing could be done, and for the others the great remedy was publicity.”23 In contrast, civil
law countries typically responded to such crises by using banks or state investment programs to
circumvent the stock market. Thus Aganin and Volpin (2004) write that “In Italy, the
government responded to the Great Depression by becoming a substitute for capital markets.
Post war governments saw no great need to improve capital market regulation.” Most other
continental European countries and Japan adopted similar policies. This reflects the first intrinsic
difference between the two systems. Common law countries’ courts and governments sought to
protect the weak from the strong; civil law countries’ governments sought alternative ways of
implementing the public policy goal of efficient capital allocation. Their courts, ill equipped to
restore faith in capital markets for the reasons outlined above, let matters rest.

states. Whether this reflects inherent problems in Civil Law or in switching legal systems is not fully clear,
though they favor the latter explanation.
19
   See Hayek (1960), Mahoney (2001), and La Porta et al. (2004).
20
   See Weiss (2000).
21
   See e.g. Markesinis (2000); and see also Posner (1996).
22
    See also Weiss (2000) for the argument that differences, though perhaps overstated by some scholars,
exist and are important.
23
   Frentrop (2002, 2003, p. 155).


                                                     28
         Franks et al. (2004) write of higher standards of ethics in British than in foreign
businesses. This might reflect the second intrinsic difference between common law and civil
code systems, the uncertainty intrinsic to common law. Precedent and general principle can
convict wrongdoers who rely overly on the letter of the law. Certainly, Becht and DeLong (2004)
ascribe the diffusion of ownership to shareholder rights created by activist common law courts in
the United States. Perhaps small investors in common law countries factored in the probability of
some property rights protection despite an absence of statutory rights, and this sustained their
stock markets through rough patches. Sylla and Smith (1995) argue that legal reforms in late 19th
century Britain could have permitted this.
         Enriques (2002) tracks Italian corporate judicial rulings through the late 1980s and 1990s,
and finds a bias in favor of corporate insiders and highly formalistic arguments; but no evidence
that judges consider the impact of their rulings on the incentives or behavior of firms and
managers. Aganin and Volpin (2004) refer to these findings, and evidence in La Porta et al.
(1998) of low quality of legal enforcement in Italy, to stress that weak Italian corporate
governance might reflect a poor quality judicial system, rather than an absence of specific
shareholder rights or a civil law system per se. But the third intrinsic difference between common
law and civil codes points to judicial dysfunction in these specific areas of law, which matter
critically to the corporate governance of diffusely owned firms, as special vulnerabilities of an ill
functioning civil code system.
         Overall, the studies in this volume do not undermine the basic argument that differences
in legal systems matter. Indeed, de Jong and Röell (2004) present the only discussion of a
discrete change in legal system, describing how Napoleon’s imposition of his civil code on the
Netherlands undid much of its financial development.24 Frentrop (2002, 2003) confirms much of
this in much more detail. Rather, they make clear the subsidiary importance of lists of statutory
shareholder rights and underscore the need to study more fundamental differences between legal
systems. Effective shareholder legal protection takes more than a complete checklist of statutory
provisions. La Porta et al. (2004, 2005) stress more fundamental legal system differences turning
on judicial independence, disclosure, and securities laws.

Origins
Much recent work posits that the institutional differences between modern countries derive, in
part at least, from differences in their preindustrial economies.25 To some extent, these arguments
are motivated by econometric considerations. A truly exogenous variable is needed to resolve
many of the econometric issues that bedevil empirical economics, and where better to find one
than in the distant past. But beneath these technical motivations, there lies a genuine belief that
centuries’ past events and conditions constrain today’s decision makers and institution builders.
         An extreme thesis of this sort is that economic development is predestined by geography.
This is an uncomfortable philosophy to economists, for it diminishes somewhat their trade. Yet
Diamond (1997) posits precisely this.26 Others, like Weber (1904, 1905) and Stulz and
Williamson (2003), argue, in a parallel vein, that deeply ingrained cultural factors predetermine
economic prosperity. Weber stresses the unique developments surrounding the Protestant
24
   Though Mokyr (2000) argues Dutch laws and institutions needed serious reform at this point anyway
because heirs to its earlier economic success had become entrenched, and blocked further progress.
25
   La Porta et al. (1997) justify the exogeneity of legal origin on this basis.
26
   Diamond (1997) argues that the larger land mass of the Eurasia gave rise to more domesticable plants
and animals; and that its primarily east-to-west orientation permitted their rapid diffusion. This gave its
inhabitants a permanent lead in the process of economic development. Our problem with this thesis is that
most domesticated plants and animals derive from wild species. Ex post, the ancestors of wheat and cows
must have been domesticable. This does not mean New World species, like turkeys and potatoes, could not
have been domesticated earlier and more fully too. Who knows how good a beast of burden might have
been bred from, say, the plains bison?


                                                    29
Reformation in Europe, and argues that these prepared Europe uniquely for free markets and
rapid economic growth. True, the first two economic powerhouses of modern Europe, Britain
and the Netherlands, were resolutely Protestant, as were the principalities that became Germany.
The religious wars that swept Europe funneled educated refugees and capital into the uniquely
tolerant Netherlands as Dutch merchants invented the joint stock company. The English Civil
War, which freed British courts of royal oversight, certainly had a religious side – unfinished
business from the Reformation. But German industrial development occurred long after the
reformation, and not much before similar bursts of growth in Catholic Europe in the 20th century.
Högfeldt’s chapter on Sweden describes decidedly oligarchic institutions given a modern social
democratic sheen. And other Protestant countries, like the Baltic States, remained outside the
modern world until quite recently.
         An alternate approach to predestination, more conducive to economic analysis, is Haber’s
(1999) argument that different countries have different economic institutions – customs, cultures,
and traditions as well as legal systems – and that these institutions determine how people behave,
and hence what sorts of public and private investments are feasible.27 Sound institutions protect
private property rights, encourage the honest payment of taxes, and enforce contractual
agreements and other forms of cooperation. In a sound institutional environment, large-scale
public and private investment are made possible by freedom from the threats of theft, cheating,
and reneging. With varying qualifications, this situation characterizes today’s developed
economies. In particular, sound institutions of corporate governance permit the existence of large
corporations and their ownership by diffuse investors.
         But an absence of sound institutions leads to different arrangements. Where the state and
investors cannot rely on arm’s length arrangements to protect property rights, one must co-opt the
other. To protect their property rights, powerful individuals and families in such countries control
the police powers of the State. Or, those who control the State appropriate what wealth the
economy has, invest it to benefit themselves, and use their police power to protect their
investments. Either solution frees investors from the danger of losing to cheaters, thieves, and
scoundrels. However, unsurprisingly, these oligarchs see little reason to protect the property
rights of others. This leads to oligarchic institutions – the governance of most economic activity
is entrusted to wealthy oligarchs who use the State to protect their interests, and most of the
population lives without meaningful property rights or extensive public goods. Haber (1999)
views Latin America as typifying this form of economic organization.
         Once oligarchic institutions are in place, oligarchs understandably prefer the status quo,
and use the State to prevent institutions change. Olson (1963), Acemoglu and Robinson (2000),
Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002, 2002a), and Morck et al. (2004a) all present mechanisms through
which this can happen, and which give rise to a sort of economic predestination. Once a country
has oligarchic institutions, upending them is not easy.
         Advanced non-Western economies, according to Acemoglu et al. (2002a), had well-
developed indigenous institutions that evolved to exploit natural resources for the benefit of the
local elite. European colonial rulers and post-colonial independence leaders retained these
oligarchic institutions, hampering broad-based economic development. Consequently, the most
advanced non-Western societies – Asia, the Islamic world, Mexico, and Peru – have the most
problems incorporating modern Western Institutions.
         This certainly resonates with the chapter on China by Goetzmann and Köll, which
described how the traditional Chinese Imperial Bureaucracy, acting as it always had, undermined
well-intentioned and carefully written legal reforms aimed at establishing the institutions of good
corporate governance in late 19th century China. In contrast, Japan, a much younger civilization,
whose local institutions were in disrepute at the time of its opening to the West, managed a more
successful transplant of Western institutional arrangements.

27
     This work builds upon Olson (1963, 1982) and others.


                                                     30
         The chapter on India fits less fully with the thesis of Acemoglu et al. (2002). Khanna and
Palepu (2004) point to India’s ancient precolonial mercantile traditions, carried into the modern
world by specific ethnic minorities – especially the Marwari, Gujerati and Parsi. They document
the close ties between India’s leading mercantile families and both the British Raj and Congress
Party, and describe situations similar to Haber’s (1999) depiction of Latin American oligarchic
institutions and in line with Acemoglu et al. (2002). However, Khanna and Palepu go on to
describe how the Tata family, which was politically close to the British colonial government, lost
much of its political influence after independence, and especially after India embraced Nehruvian
socialism. The family’s response was an energetic entrepreneurial strategy that worked around a
mainly hostile License Raj and built up sufficient capital and good will to finance a large part of
India’s new software industry.
         Acemoglu et al. (2001) argue that patterns of European settlement centuries ago
determine modern economic institutions, and patterns of corporate control in the modern world.
They argue that where European settlers could survive, they created institutions that promoted
economic development; but that where they could not survive, they created institutions that
facilitated the fastest possible extraction of valuable resources. Those oligarchic institutions,
once established, were locked in; condemning the latter countries to centuries of poverty and
exploitation by colonial and then local elites.
         The chapters on Canada, India, and the United States – all former colonies – speak to this
thesis. Those on Canada and the United States document early institutions and institutional
development not that different from that of their colonial masters, the British and French. Morck
et al. (2004) make the point that Canada’s longer pre-settlement history as a French, and then
British, fur trade entrepôt gives it some institutional echoes of a colony of resource extraction run
in the interests of a tiny elite. Clearly, colonial and traditional institutions do persist, and
constrain subsequent institutional development.

Evolution
But this argument can be pressed too far. European countries also have their colonial origins.
France was a Roman colony, and French Civil Code is essentially a revised version of the code
Justinian applied to all parts of the Roman Empire, including Gaul. The Romans adopted Greek
ideas, and the Greeks drew from Egypt. Modern European institutions of government, society,
and law still echo ancient antecedents, but they have also clearly evolved.
         Institutions change – occasionally radically – dooming predestination as a complete
explanation of modern institutions. Olson (1982) argues that major institutional changes require
major disruptions, like wars or disasters, which weaken the elite sufficiently to interrupt its
control of the State. This certainly resonates with several of the chapters in this volume and other
work on the history of corporate governance. Frentrop (2002, 2003) argues that the Dutch
developed the first joint stock company, the Dutch East Indies Company, founded in 1602, to
gain leverage against larger European powers that threatened them.28 This company pioneered
the use of share certificates traded on a stock exchange to raise money. This freed the company
from financial dependence on a royal exchequer so that economic logic, rather than court intrigue,
might determine strategies. Its commercial success catapulted the small Dutch Republic from
obscurity to challenging the Spanish Empire, built on New World gold, and the Portuguese
domination of the circum-African spice trade. In the 17th century, the British imported successful
Dutch institutions along with the House of Orange after the Glorious Revolution. In the 19th
century, the French, Germans, Italians, and Swedes – and even the Dutch – could all look to
Britain for model institutions when their own came into disrepute. In the 20th century, Germany,
the Soviet Union, Japan, and the United States each took Britain’s place in different decades, with
decidedly more mixed results.

28
     See Frentrop (2002, 2003) for details.


                                                 31
         The chapters in this book show that institutional change seems to require a crisis in
existing institutions, and a workable role model for new ones. The Tokugawa shoguns lost face
irreparably by capitulating to Admiral Perry and opening Japan to American trade. This loss let
the Meiji leaders stage a coup and undertake wholesale changes to every aspect of Japanese
society. The American Revolution and the liberal rebellions in 1830s Canada also clearly
reshaped institutions. But the financial chaos of the French Revolution, according to Murphy
(2004) helped induce institutions that delayed French financial development. Good intentions are
certainly no guarantee of good results.
         Most importantly to recent developments in corporate governance, the Great Depression
emerges in virtually every chapter as a key formative experience. In the United States, this crisis
activated progressive political forces that broke up America’s great pyramidal groups. But in
Canada, it triggered a return to old mercantilist traditions, as the government cartelized the
economy to fight deflation. In Sweden, the Great Depression left scores of firms bankrupt, and
the Wallenbergs’ bank holding control blocks of their shares in lieu of debt repayments. In
Germany, Italy, and Japan, the Depression brought in extremist political movements, which
subordinated corporate governance to ideology.

Transplants
The histories recounted in this volume contain several instances of one country deliberately
adopting institutions developed in another. Generalizations from these few histories must be
highly tentative. Nonetheless, a few patterns stand out.
         Transplants between Western countries seem healthier than those from Western to non-
Western countries. This might be because none of these institutions was totally foreign to the
importing country. Thus, the Napoleonic code was successfully transplanted to the rest of
continental Europe, including the Netherlands. That most of Europe already used variants of
Roman civil law prepared the ground. Sweden adopted first Scottish and then German banking
with little difficulty, but Swedes were already quite familiar with each system beforehand.
Canada borrowed much of her securities laws from the United States, but many Canadians were
already familiar with American securities laws from doing business in the United States.
         Transplants to non-Western countries seem less robust. The chapter on China describes a
rejected transplant. In the late Qing dynasty, China’s entrenched bureaucrats could not
comprehend the concept of independent firms, as envisioned in its Westernized corporations law.
The bureaucrats’ traditional concepts of patronage and loyalty congealed into endemic corruption
that replaced Chinese capitalism with Soviet institutions. The chapter on India describes how
shoddy Soviet transplants also corroded India’s British institutions after independence, though
less completely. The Japan chapter describes that country’s serial adoption of a sequence of
foreign institutions.
         All of these observations concur well with the transplant effect proposed by Berkowitz et
al. (2003) and Pistor et al. (2003, p. 81), who argues that legal evolution is continuous and
gradual in countries with indigenously developed legal systems; but that transplanted legal
systems stagnate for long periods, with interruptions of radical and even erratic change. Pistor
argues that transplanted legal systems that can adapt are more likely to succeed. Without
disputing this, Goetzmann and Köll (2004) propose that indigenous Chinese institutions
undermined promising transplants. This raises the possibility that operational home-grown
institutions might marginalize or capture transplants, rendering them dysfunctional.

Large Outside Shareholders
Corporate governance is an important determinant of the distribution of economic power, and
thus a key plank of reform in many political ideologies.
        For example, the French Revolution probably injected an important ideological element
into European corporate governance. Dunlavy (2004) argues that many corporate shareholder


                                                32
meetings were radically more democratic in the early 19th century than they are now. Many
corporate charters at that time granted one vote per shareholder, rather than one vote per share,
which Dunlavy calls plutocratic voting. Others had scaled voting rights systems, which granted
larger shareholders fewer votes per share, or capped their voting rights. The one vote per
shareholder system may have reflected common legal rules governing business and municipal
corporations. However, such voting systems were by no means universal in the early history of
capitalism. For example, the 1670 charter of the Hudson’s Bay Company provided for one vote
per share, not one vote per shareholder. Dunlavy reports that plutocratic voting rapidly came to
dominate American shareholder meetings, but that more democratic shareholder meetings
persisted through much of the 19th century on the European continent.
         Perhaps the radical democratic ideals of the French Revolution sustained the popularity
of one vote per shareholder corporate governance on the continent. Certainly, Frentrop (2002,
2003) argues that “the ideal of equality promulgated by the French Revolution made the
shareholders meeting, which provided equal rights for all shareholders, the most powerful body
of the company. This was so self-evident that Napoleon’s 1807 Code de Commerce does not
mention it. Directors were dismissible agents of the shareholders.”
         An alternative explanation, proposed by De Jong and Röell (2004) in connection with the
Netherlands, is that corporate insiders limited the voting power of large outside shareholders to
entrench themselves. Certainly, both explanations could be true. Corporate insiders might have
cynically exploited popular ideologies to lock in their control rights. Or they might have
genuinely subscribed to ideologies that coincidentally entrenched their economic power.
         Rajan and Zingales (2003) advance the former thesis to explain why the financial systems
of many countries atrophied during the 20th century. They show that many countries had much
larger and more developed financial systems at the beginning of the century than at the end of the
Cold War era. They propose that a first generation of entrepreneurs raised money to finance
industrialization at the beginning of the century, and that they or their heirs lobbied for
government policies that crippled their countries’ financial systems to prevent competitors from
raising capital. One way to do this is to support high income taxes and low estate taxes. Another
might be checks on the voting power of large outside shareholders, which might have been an
ideologically acceptable way to do this.
         Shleifer and Vishny (1986, 1997) argue that large outside shareholders, by rendering
takeovers credible threats, cause corporate managers in the United States to work harder, and that
this raises share prices for small investors. Weakening large outside shareholders would entrench
existing insiders by stopping takeovers; and would make stocks less attractive to small investors,
depriving potential entrants of capital.
         However, large outside shareholders may have interests of their own that mesh poorly
with small shareholders’ interests. Corporate pension funds might be reined in by corporate
management to invite reciprocal treatment from their counterparts’ pension funds. Public sector
pension funds might be subject to political influence. Nonetheless, Franks et al. (2004) argue that
institutional investors were clearly a force for good governance in the United Kingdom. Perhaps
they are set to play similar roles elsewhere too.
         Becht, Bolton, and Röell (2002) stress finding a balance between managerial discretion
and small shareholder protection. Systems that lean too far towards protecting small shareholders
from blockholders let existing corporate insiders do as they like because small shareholders lack
the resources to challenge them. Leaving too much power in the hands of large blockholders
exposes shareholders to expropriation, and perhaps also subjects managers to unwarranted
monitoring.

Financial Development
In an historical study of German universal banks, Kleeberg (1987, p. 112) remarks that “the best
advice for a young German industrialist who needed more capital was to marry a rich wife … this


                                                33
was the advice which the cologne merchant Friedrich Sölling constantly pressed upon his partner
Adolf Krupp. Hence the extremely complicated family trees and numerous intermarriages among
the Rhenish Bourgeoisie, grown rich off trade.”
          Schumpeter (1912) puts less faith in entrepreneurs’ ability to procure advantageous
marriages. He argues that the social purpose of financial markets and institutions is to put capital
in the hands of people with economically viable business plans, and that technology-driven
growth is very difficult without tandem financial development. Consistent with this, King and
Levine (1993) show that countries with better developed stock markets and banking systems
continually reallocate capital to finance visionary entrepreneurs and thereby grow faster.
          The studies in this volume largely support King and Levine (1993).
          Energetic stock markets are associated with the entry of new firms and corporate
governance entrusted to new entrepreneurs. Sleepy stock markets are associated with a freezing
of cast. Morck et al. (2004) show that Canadian stock market booms correspond to periods of
energetic entrepreneurial activity. Aganin and Volpin (2004) stress the importance of Italy’s
stock markets a century ago in financing her first generation of great industrial corporate groups.
Högfeldt (2004) argues that Sweden’s socialist governments weakened her financial system,
locking a corporate elite in place, and that this ultimately retarded economic growth. Rajan and
Zingales (2003) argue that yesterday’s entrepreneurs often lobbied to weaken financial markets as
a way to deter competitors from arising. While none of the studies in this volume reports direct
evidence of such lobbying, the argument is plausible. To distort Mark Twain only slightly, “The
radical of one century is the conservative of the next.”
          Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) argue that active stock markets affect corporate
governance by letting wealthy heirs sell out, and this is confirmed in several chapters. Becht and
DeLong (2004) describe how American stock markets deepened and broadened to finance first
railways and then industrial firms too. This permitted trust promoters to float shares to buy out
founders or their heirs in a wave of takeovers. Other American families sold out incompletely,
keeping a tenuous grip on their companies with relatively small ownership stakes or board seats.
Morck et al. (2004) describe similar events in Canada. Aganin and Volpin (2004) describe a
boom on the Milan Stock Exchange at the beginning of the 20th century caused by the Banca
Commmerciale and Credito Italiano, who helped numerous entrepreneurs raise capital by selling
shares on the stock market. They go on to note that, by 1907, 72 percent of the total equity of all
Italian limited-liability firms traded on stock markets.
          Irrational exuberance in America’s stock markets may also have helped disperse
corporate ownership in that country. Becht and DeLong (2004) echo Dewing (1919) and argue
that the American stock market gave founders and heirs the chance to sell their stock for more
than it was worth. “Physicians, teachers, dentists, and clergymen” constituted “the happy hunting
ground” of the “sucker list,” where people were persuaded to buy “highly speculative and
worthless securities” by “devious and dubious” methods. Stock market booms in other countries
may have played similar roles. Morck et al. (2004) describe Canadian families selling out into
the overheated market of the late 1920s, and a consequent increase in the importance of widely
held firms.
          Where shareholders’ property rights are insecure, trust commands a premium. Becht and
DeLong (2004) argue that American shareholders at the beginning of the 20th century had
“virtually no statutory legal rights, and so favored companies controlled by men of good repute
and accomplishment, such as J.P. Morgan and his partners, who charged handsomely for
monitoring services.” Under these circumstances, stock markets expand the governance sway of
established families. Pagano et al. (1998) report that, from 1983 through 1989, the number of
listings on the Milan stock market grew more than 50 percent; but that most of new listings were
subsidiaries of traded companies going public to take advantage of booming stock markets.
Khanna and Palepu (2004) point to similar developments in post-independence India, and argue



                                                34
that established families backed entrepreneurs by helping them build listed companies within
established family pyramidal groups.
         Where stock markets are ill trusted, banks can channel financing to entrepreneurs and
monitor corporate governance. However, this seems to have played an important role in only a
few countries. The chapters on Britain, Canadian, and the Netherlands highlight how commercial
banks in those countries entered the era of industrialization with strong attachments to the real
bills doctrine, which mandated that banks lend with trade goods as collateral. This let banks
enthusiastically fund trade, but kept them from financing industrial plant and equipment. Branch
banking restrictions and the Glass Steagall Act of 1933 kept American commercial banks to a
minimal role in financing large corporations. Memory of the Crédit Mobilier fiasco apparently
kept British banks out of investment banking too. In contrast, German, Japanese, and (later)
Swedish banks eagerly financed industrial development. In the case of Japanese banks, this was
despite an analog of Glass Steagall imposed by Macarthur in the postwar period.
         Aoki (1988), Kaplan (1994) and others argue that bankers can be sophisticated monitors
of corporate insiders, and thus reliable guarantors of good corporate governance. However,
Morck and Nakamura (1999), Morck et al. (2000), and others argue that bankers’ aim in
governance oversight is to make sure corporate borrowers repay their debts. This could induce
excessive risk aversion and excessive investment in tangible collateralizable assets, rather than
knowledge-based assets. Banks and other financial firms are also biased as monitors of corporate
governance because they see firms as customers too. De Jong and Röell (2004) make this point
succinctly quoting an insurance company representative thus: “You are in a difficult position if
you want to present a new contract to the management board whilst you have voted against one of
their proposals the day before.”29
         Fohlin (2004) argues that German banks’ contribution of corporate governance is often
overstated. Kleeberg (1987, p. 134) agrees, noting that “German industrialization advanced
rapidly in the late 19th century, but probably depended more on old family wealth than on bank
loans.” Where bank financing was important, he questions its economic effects, noting (p. 404)
that “An unfortunate result has been that often the most successful captains of industry in
Germany have not had any particular talent for industry or marketing, but rather were skilled at
handling the banks.”
         Finally, this volume makes it clear that financial development is not a given, but depends
on politics and history. China’s first attempt to develop a modern financial system was a serious
initiative that ran afoul of her ancient entrenched bureaucracy. Murphy (2004) argues that
France’s train of financial crises made her people leery of capital markets and induced her
politicians to over-regulate them. Pointing to a constricted financial system as an explanation for
highly concentrated corporate governance is inadequate, for this begs the question of why a
country’s financial system is what it is. Becht and DeLong (2004) and Franks et al. (2004) show
how politicians responsive to demands by investors made the financial systems of the United
States and United Kingdom, respectively, what they are.

Politics
The studies in this volume are unenthusiastic about direct political involvement in corporate
governance. But they also testify to the importance of government in establishing and sustaining
the legal and regulatory infrastructure needed for sustained good governance.
        From a historical perspective, entrusting corporate governance to the State evokes the
Axis powers’ policies in the 1930s and 1940s, described in this volume by Aganin and Volpin
(2004), Fohlin (2004), and Morck and Nakamura (2004). While the forms of private ownership
survived, effective control rested with party and military representatives on boards. From a
theoretical viewpoint, Boycko et al. (1996) argue that state control leads to excessive

29
     D. Brilleslijper, Delta Lloyd spokesman, in FEM Business, 20 September 2003.


                                                     35
employment. Krueger (1990) argues that political patronage inflicts inferior governance on state-
owned enterprises. Consistent with this, Dewenter and Malatesta (2001) find significantly
depressed profitability in state-owned enterprises.
         One state role in corporate governance that has not yet attracted much attention from
researchers is the pyramidal group of listed companies with a state-owned enterprise at the apex.
Aganin and Volpin (2004) argue that the “wasting of resources” by state-controlled pyramidal
groups of listed companies in Italy was an important cause of that country’s economic crisis in
the 1990s. Morck et al. (2004) refer to scandalous governance problems at the Caisse de Dépôt et
Placement du Québec, a provincially controlled pyramidal group in Canada. Further work is
needed to clarify the political purposes of these structures and to understand better their
governance and economic impact.
         Despite their skepticism about direct political involvement in corporate decisions, many
contributors stress the power of the State to despoil or distort corporate governance. Rajan and
Zingales (2003) argue that the stock market can either be fostered or hampered by government
action, depending on the balance of powers between pressure groups. Khanna and Palepu (2004)
describe the License Raj as a “Kafkaesque maze of controls [having] more to do with a heady
fascination with the intellectual cuisine of the London School of Economics and Cambridge …
and the wonder of the then ascendant Soviet planning machine, than with the actions of India’s
dominant family businesses. Business groups had to either manipulate it, as some did, or invent
themselves around it, as did others.” Aganin and Volpin (2004) likewise stress the role of politics
in Italian corporate governance through the century.
         Ghemawat and Khanna (1998) argue that business families control business groups to
extract personal gains, and attain their position through directly unproductive economic activities
and through their influence over government policies and actions.30 Pagano and Volpin (2001)
and Biais and Perotti (2003) argue that state intervention in the economy should be negatively
correlated with financial development, because the state acts as a substitute for financial markets.
Högfeldt (2004) proposes a similar history in Sweden, where the Social Democrats let the
financial system whither like an unnecessary appendix. Aganin and Volpin (2004) emphasize
how little Italian stock markets mattered mid-century, noting that “From 1950 to 1980, between
15 and 20 percent of traded companies in Italy were controlled by the government. The
correlation between the two series is –70 percent.”

Entrenchment
Finally, the studies in this volume all point to a commonality in human nature. Elites are self-
interested, and cooperate to entrench themselves – even at considerable cost to their economies
and to themselves in foregone opportunities to grow richer. Becht and Delong (2004) explain
how American controlling shareholders and professional managers took control of the board
nomination process to all but give themselves ironclad tenure. Morck and Nakamura (2004)
describe how the builders of Japanese zaibatsu family pyramids viewed those structures as
devices to lock in control, and how postwar keiretsu groups developed to block hostile takeovers
that threatened corporate insiders’ positions. De Jong and Röell (2004) argue that Dutch
corporate insiders developed an array of oligarchic devices to limit shareholders’ power to fire
them. Franks et al. (2004) describe how British corporate insiders tried unsuccessfully to erect
pyramidal business groups to similarly entrench a status quo that bestowed privileges upon them.
Fohlin (2004) depict German banks safeguarding their control of corporate proxy voting to
entrench the power of leading bankers. Aganin and Volpin (2004) relate how elite Italian business
families entrenched themselves. Goetzmann and Köll (2004), Khanna and Palepu (2004), Murphy
(2004), and Högfeldt (2004) describe bureaucrats destroying wealth to lock in their power. In the

30
  Morck et al. (2004a) develop several more arguments along these lines and assemble a range of empirical
evidence about their scope of applicability.


                                                   36
case of Sweden, Högfeldt argues that wealthy families ultimately cooperated with public officials
in a sort of ‘mutual entrenchment’ pact. Mody argues, in his discussion of the chapter on India,
that a similar confluence of self interest occurred in India, and Morck et al. (2004) speculate that
something analogous might have happened in Canada in the latter 20th century.
         A predisposition to invest in entrenching one’s position is consistent with recent research
into the nature of self-interest. Prospect theory, proposed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979)
holds that individuals view upside and downside risk asymmetrically, as in Figure 2. A
preponderance of empirical and experimental work, surveyed by Shleifer (2000), now supports
prospect theory as representative of typical human behavior.

[Figure 2 about here]

         Prospect theory makes people loss averse. Figure 2 graphs the subjective gains and
losses due to possible monetary gains and losses according to prospect theory. The key insight
for our purposes involves the subjective values individuals attach to risky bets. For example, bet
1 returns a small gain of G1 with probability p1 and a small loss of L1 with probability 1 – p1.
Suppose p1 is set so that the expected value of the bet is zero. The individual’s subjective value
of the bet is V(B1) = E[p1V(G1) + (1-p1)V(L1)] > 0, so the individual takes the bet. In contrast,
bet 2 returns a large gain of G2 with probability p2 and a large loss of L2 with probability 1 – p2.
Again, p2 is such that the expected value of the bet is zero. The individual’s subjective value of
the bet is V(B2) = E[p2V(G2) + (1-p2)V(L2)] < 0, so the individual refuses the bet.
         In this light, pervasive entrenchment seems almost inevitable. For entrenchment is
precisely about sacrificing opportunities for further gain to minimize the risk of loss –
archetypical self-interested behavior according to prospect theory. The patriarch of a large family
firm can either support or oppose institutional reforms, such as more efficient capital markets or
courts. These changes might let the patriarch greatly expand his family business group, and grow
much wealthier, but also might let competitors arise who might erode or even destroy the family’s
established wealth. Large risks of this sort, according to prospect theory, are typically rejected
even if they entail substantial upside potential. Risking the patrimony is simply unacceptable. In
contrast, minor tinkering with institutional change, analogous to bet 1 in Figure 2, is typically
acceptable. Prospect theory thus suggests a conservative bias that would encourage wealthy
patriarchs to invest in entrenching themselves and oppose institutional reform that might risk their
current wealth and status. If political power is largely in the hands of the currently wealthy,
Kuran (1988) predicts a locking in of the status quo. Olson (1965, 1982) suggests that this is
likely to be the case, as does Faccio (2003).
         But ordinary citizens might also entertain a bias against institutional reform. Murphy
(2004) shows how various attempts to reform the French financial system led to repeated disaster.
If most people view institutional change as a bet like bet 2 in Figure 2, carrying a substantial
probability of making things worse, populations as a whole might likewise favor the status quo.
         Another key element of human nature, first demonstrated in experimental work by
Milgram (1963, 1983), is an apparently reflexive obedience to perceived legitimate authority.31 It
seems likely that this behavioral response stabilizes family capitalism throughout much of the
world, especially where wealthy families who control large business groups are closely
intertwined with the State, and so have reinforced legitimacy.
         Thirdly, the economy requires a degree of institutional stability. Commons (1924) argues
correctly that business planning is impossible if critical institutions are uncertain. Business is
often easier with certain but unfavorable laws than with uncertain favorable laws. Owen and
Braeutigam (1978) argue in this vein that people holding uncompleted contracts perceive
themselves as having a right to the continuation of existing institutions, and so oppose change.

31
     For a quick summary, see Morck (2004a).


                                                37
         All of this might explain the one sided institutional momentum that is evident throughout
the studies in this volume. Institutional reform that locks in the status quo seems easy.
Institutional reform that brings real change is rare. China’s first attempt to import Western legal
institutions failed because it threatened the powers of her ancient bureaucracy. The reforms were
either ignored or modified to protect the bureaucrats, and so failed to bring sustainable free
enterprise to China. America’s attempt to impose freestanding widely held firms on postwar
Japan likewise failed because their professional managers saw their status at risk because of
threatened hostile takeovers. Those managers reconstituted corporate groups to lock in the status
quo. India’s License Raj, Sweden’s social democracy, and perhaps Canada’s post 1960s Statism
were all arguably attempts at radical reform of various sorts that ultimately entrenched corporate
elite families.
         Real reform seems to have succeeded in 1930s America – perhaps because people
thought they had little more to lose given the disaster of the Great Depression. A small loss
balanced against a large gain, diagrammatically represented by the grey line in Figure 2, can
induce people to take the bet and support institutional change. In America, they apparently won.
Similar willingness to bet in 1930s Germany, Italy, and Japan turned out less happily.
         Prospect theory is not the only possible underpinnings for a conservative bias against
institutional change. Roe (1996) argues that institutions might suffer from a QWERTY effect,
whereby institutions, like keyboards with which everyone is familiar, are retained because the
cost of adjusting to new ways exceeds the benefit – at least in the short term.32 Day (1987),
Heiner (1983, 1986, 1988), and others argue for a conservative bias based on bounded rationality
and computation costs.
         All of this has several implications. First, real institutional change is difficult, but not
impossible. Overcoming a popular conservative bias is easiest during crises, when people feel
they have less to lose should the reform go wrong. Second, countries will not easily mimic each
other, so variation in institutions across countries with different histories will not disappear easily
– even if one system appears better. Third, institutional change, even when implemented
enthusiastically from above, as in precommunist China, may fail because of a popular
conservative bias. Institutions that sustain great inefficiency, inequality, and even corruption may
thus be quite historically stable.

5. Conclusions
History, like poetry, does not repeat itself, but rhymes. Accidents of history give the rhyme a
different starting point in different countries, but there is a common meter throughout.
        Financial disasters tainted French confidence in financial securities early on, and set
corporate governance in that country on a different path from that of Britain, where similar
trauma was overcome and forgotten. Why trauma desolates some people and some nations, while
others pick up the pieces and move on is profoundly unclear. But history is more than a string of
accidental traumas.
        Ideas matter. There is a conservative bias in every country that impedes institutional
change. But when crisis strikes, that bias lessens and change is possible. Whatever idea is
waiting in the wings at that time can be swept into reality. Thus, American Progressivism,
German National Socialism, Italian Fascism, Japanese militarism, and Swedish Social
Democracy all became incarnate during the depressions of the 1920s and 1930s.
        Families matter. Throughout the word, big business was, at first, family business. It
seems likely this arose because blood kin can cooperate more reliably than non-kin. Reliable
cooperation is important in countries at early stages in their economic development, when legal
and regulatory institutions are unreliable guarantors of trustworthy behavior. But this, too, is
admittedly speculation. For families remain overwhelmingly important in the governance of the
32
     Though see David (1985).


                                                  38
large business sectors of all but a handful of developed economies. Perhaps this reflects a
conservative bias against change, or perhaps many developed countries still do not have
institutions that foster an ambient trust. Or perhaps there are other explanations, like inherited
talent, that we find intellectually uncomfortable.
          Business groups, each encompassing many separately listed firms, became important in
almost every country, including the United States, at some point, and remain important in most
developed economies. These groups almost always have a pyramidal structure, with a family,
family partnership, or family trust at the apex. To some extent, these structures were probably
hierarchical arrangements designed to span dysfunctional markets in the early stages of economic
development, and these explanations perhaps retain validity in modern emerging economies. But
the ubiquity of large pyramidal family controlled business groups in Canada, Japan, and most of
Western Europe is harder to square with this theory. Those countries have had many decades of
high income, and could surely have repaired such problems had they wanted to. It seems likely
that pyramidal business groups of listed companies survive in wealthy countries because they
lock in the corporate governance power of an elite family over capital assets worth far more than
the family fortune. That power brings intangible benefits that such families are loath to
surrender.
          Wealthy families, to lock in their corporate governance, might block the emergence of
trustworthy markets and institutions, and so greatly harm their countries. Or, they might persist
as a sort of corporate governance appendix while institutions and markets develop around them.
Or, like constitutional monarchs, they might serve shareholders by providing constitutional
guarantees of good governance, and so contribute to higher levels of trust. Or, might business
acumen sometimes actually pass down through families? Each possibility was probably realized
at different times and in different countries.
          Law clearly matters, though just how is less than clear. Many current differences
between Common Law and Civil Law countries regarding statutory shareholder rights are not
longstanding differences.33        This volume advances our understanding of the different
manifestations of capitalism throughout the world. By adopting a historical approach it provides
useful insights into how various economic institutions, and institutional configurations, came to
be. It also engenders some general observation regarding varieties of capitalism and economic
change.
          Legal systems are not the only features that distinguish former Western colonies from
each other. Perhaps vestiges of indigenous institutions mount an immune response against
transplanted Western institutions. Or perhaps radical changes in institutions invite problems.
Patterns in current corporate governance sometimes attributed to legal system origins may reflect
other historical antecedents.
          Institutions in every country studied evolved through time, and corporate control changed
with them. What caused what is often unclear, though. Many countries now considered to have
highly trustworthy institutions, including institutions of corporate governance, were profoundly
corrupt only a few generations ago. There seems to have been an evolution towards ever less
popular tolerance of corrupt elites everywhere, except perhaps in Britain.
          Where reformers sought to hasten that evolution by transplanting institutions from one
country to another, success has varied. Although Western institutions grafted onto Japan quickly
took on a native appearance, the grafts surely did not fail. Japan is a highly prosperous economy,
and few countries are so devoid of governance and other scandals as to denounce its institutional
experimentation as a failure. Western institutions grafted onto pre-Revolutionary China failed
spectacularly, and those grafted onto India long looked sickly, but recently seem invigorated.


33
 See Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2004) regarding the dearth of shareholder rights in the pre-depression
US.


                                                  39
         Large outside investors, such as pension funds, are becoming important throughout the
world, and may well have a salubrious effect on corporate governance everywhere. However, it
is hard to see how success in influencing the professional managers of widely held firms in the
United Kingdom or United States need imply similar success in influencing old moneyed families
with control blocks in scores of firms in a more typical country. Yet wonders happen.
         Financial development seems intimately tied to corporate governance, with more
developed financial systems associated with more professional management, more diffuse
shareholders, and less ubiquitous family control. But these correlations are only rough, and many
counterexamples arose in the histories of many countries. For example, family groups rose and
fell in importance in Italy, while financial development fell and then rose – consistent with the
general cross-country pattern. But family groups fell and then rose in importance in Canada,
while financial development probably mainly rose.
         Politics perhaps explains some of this, for large family groups may be better at dealing
with more interventionist governments than multitudinous freestanding firms. Or politicians bent
on interventionism may value being able to influence the whole corporate sector with phone calls
to a handful of patriarchs.
         Perhaps because business elites and political elites tend to overlap, institutions, including
those that pertain to corporate governance, seem hard to change, except to lock in more solidly
the status quo at any point in time. A common theme through all the countries surveyed is
entrenchment – corporate insiders modifying the rules to minimize the chances of becoming
outsiders. This is so ubiquitous that we propose something basic in human nature must be
involved.
         An ultimate bottom line for this volume is that history is best enjoyed vicariously.
Institutional change, and even worse, experimentation, though enlivening the studies in this
volume, has often been disastrous to those involved. This too may explain the institutional
momentum apparent in every country. Certainly, it cautions against overly optimistic plans for
top-down structural reforms to corporate governance in developing countries. But successful
reforms dot history and Japan’s wholesale transplanting of Western institutions can scarcely be
called a failure. History need not be the handmaiden of authority.




                                                 40
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2000. Political Losers as a Barrier to Economic Development.
         American Economic Review, 90(2), 126.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. The Colonial Origins of Comparative
         Development: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review, 91(5), 1369-1422.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson. 2002. Reversal of fortune: Geography and
         Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution. Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 117(4), 1231.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002a. The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
         Institutional Change and Economic Growth. Working Paper.
Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin. 2004. The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy. National Bureau
         of Economic Research Working Paper.
Aoki, Masahiko, 1988. Information, Incentives, and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy. New York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1974. The Limits of Organization. New York: Norton.
Axelrod, Robert, and William Hamilton. 1981. The Evolution of Cooperation in Biological Systems.
         Science 211(27) 1390-96.
Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang and Jin-Mo Kim. 2002. Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers
         by Korean business groups. Journal of Finance 57(6) 2695-2741.
Barca, Fabrizio and Marco Becht, eds. 2001. The Control of Corporate Europe. European Corporate
         Governance Network, Oxford University Press.
Baums, Theodor. 1995. Universal Banks and Investment Companies in Germany. Working paper. New
         York University Salomon Centre Conference on Universal Banking.
Bebchuk, Lucien, Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross Ownership and
         Dual Class Equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash Flow
         Rights. In R. Morck ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. National Bureau of Economic
         Research Conference Volume. University of Chicago Press.
Becht, Marco and J. Bradford DeLong. 2004. Why Has There Been So Little Blockholding in America?
         National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Röell. 2002. Corporate Governance and Control. In George
         Constantinides, Milton Harris and René Stulz, eds. Handbook of Economics and Finance,
         Amsterdam: North Holland.
Berkowitz, Daniel and Karen Clay. 2004. American Civil Law Origins: Implications for State
         Constitutions. American Law and Economic Review Symposium on Comparative Law,
         forthcoming.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. 2003. Economic Development, Legality,
         and the Transplant Effect. European Economic Review, 47(1), 165.
Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York:
         Macmillan.
Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. Ferreting out tunneling: An application
         to Indian business groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1) 121-148.
Biais, Bruno, and Enrico Perotti. 2003. Entrepreneurs and New Ideas. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3864.
Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1996. A Theory of Privatization. Economic Journal,
         106(435), 309-19.
Bradach, Jeffrey & Robert Eccles. 1989. Price, Authority, and Trust: From Ideal Types to Plural Forms.
         Annual Review of Sociology, 15, 97-118.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. Family Firms. Journal of Finance. October.
         58(5), 2167-2201.
Burt, Ron S. 1992a. The Social Structure of Competition, in N. Nohria & R.G. Eccles, eds., Networks and
         Organizations: Structure, Form, and Action (pp.57-91). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Burt, Ron S. 1992b. Structural Holes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burt, Ron S. 1997. The Contingent Value of Social Capital. Administrative Science Quarterly 42, 339-365.
Cheffins, Brian. 2001. Does Law Matter? The Separation of Ownership and Control in the United
         Kingdom. Journal of Legal Studies 459.




                                                  41
Claessens Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang. 2000. The Separation of Ownership and Control in
         East Asian Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics, (58)1-2, 81-112.
Claessens, Stjin, Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang. 2002. Disentangling the incentive and
         entrenchment effects of large shareholdings. Journal of Finance 57(6) 2741-72.
Coase, Ronald. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica, 4, 386-405.
Coffee, John. 2001. The Rise of Dispersed Ownership: The Roles of Law and State in the Separation of
         Ownership and Control. Yale Law Journal, 111(1) 1-82.
Coleman, James S. 1988. Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of Sociology,
         94, S95-S120.
Commons, John R., 1924. Legal foundations of capitalism. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Daniels, Ron, Randall Morck and David Stangeland. 1995. High Gear: A Case Study of the Hees-Edper
         Corporate Group. In R. Daniels and R. Morck, eds. Corporate Decision Making in Canada.
         Industry Canada and the University of Calgary Press. Calgary.
Das, Gurcharan. 2002. India Unbound. Anchor.
David, Paul A. 1985. Clio and the economics of QWERTY. American Economic Review 75 332-337.
Day, Richard H. 1987. The general theory of disequilibrium and economic evolution. In D. Batten, J. Casti
         and B. Johansson, eds. Economic evolution and structural adjustment. Springer-Verlag Berlin,
         46-63.
De Jong, Abe and Ailsa Röell. 2004. Financing and Control in The Netherlands: A Historical Perspective.
         National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Dewenter, Kathryn and Paul Malatesta. 2001. State-Owned and Privately Owned Firms: An Empirical
         Analysis of Profitability. American Economic Review, 91(1) 320-35.
Dewing, Arthur. 1919. The Financial Policy of Corporations. New York: Ronald Press.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. Norton.
Dunlavy, Colleen. 2004. The Plutocratic Turn in 19th-Century Shareholder Voting Rights: Why the U.S.
         but not Britain, France, or Germany? Harvard University Press, forthcoming. Manuscript
         presented at Harvard’s Charles Warren Center for Studies in American History on 19 April 2004.
Dyer, Jeffrey H. and Harbir Singh. 1998. The Relational View: Cooperative Strategy and Sources of
         Interorganizational Competitive Advantage. Academy of Management Review, 23, 660-679.
Enriques, Luca. 2002. Do Corporate Law Judges Matter? Some Evidence from Milan. European Business
         Organization Law Review 3, 765-821.
Faccio, Mara and Larry H.P. Lang. 2003. The Separation of Ownership and Control: An Analysis of
         Ultimate Ownership in Western European Countries. Journal of Financial Economics 65(3) 365-
         395
Faccio, Mara, Larry Lang and Leslie Young. 2001. Dividends and expropriation. American Economic
         Review 91(1) 54-78.
Faccio. 2002. Politically Connected Firms – Can They Squeeze the State? University of Notre Dame
         working paper.
Fohlin, Caroline. 2004. The History of Corporate Ownership and Control in Germany. National Bureau of
         Economic Research Working Paper.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2004. Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline
         of Family Ownership in the United Kingdom. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper.
Frentrop, Paul. 2002, 2003. A History of Corporate Governance 1602-2002. De minor Press, Amsterdam.
         A translation by Ted Alkins of Ondernemingen en hun aandeelhouders sinds de VOC, published
         in 2002 by Prometheus, Amsterdam.
Fukuyama, Francis. 1995. Trust, the Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. New York: Free Press.
Ghemawat, Pankaj and Tarun Khanna. 1998. The Nature of Diversified Business Groups: A Research Design
         and Two Case Studies. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(1), 35-62.
Glaezer, Edward and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. Legal Origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4) 1193-1250.
Goetzmann, William and Elisabeth Köll. 2004. The History of Corporate Ownership in China: State
         Patronage, Company Legislation, and the Issue of Control. National Bureau of Economic
         Research Working Paper.
Granovetter, Mark. In Press. Business Groups and social Organization. In N. Smelser and R. Swedberg eds.
         Handbook of Economic Sociology, 2nd ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Guerin, Daniel. 1945. Fascism and Big Business. Pathfinder: New York.



                                                   42
Haber, Stephen. 1999. Industry and Underdevelopment: The Industrialization of Mexico, 1890-1940.
         Stanford University Press.
Hayek, Friedrich. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. University of Chicago Press.
Heiner, Ronald A. 1983. The Origin of Predictable Behavior. American Economic Review 83 560-595.
Heiner, Ronald A. 1986. Imperfect decisions and the law: On the evolution of legal precedent and rules.
         Journal of Legal Studies 15 227-261.
Heiner, Ronald A. 1988. Imperfect decisions and organizations: Toward a theory of internal structure.
         Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 9 25-44.
Högfeldt, Peter. 2004. The History and Polices of Corporate Ownership in Sweden. National Bureau of
         Economic Research Working Paper.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1991. Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and Investment:
         Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 33-60.
Hosking, Geoffrey. 1985. The First Socialist Society – A History of the Soviet Union from Within, 2nd ed.
         Harvard University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk.
         Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kaplan, Steven. 1994. Top Executive Rewards and Firm Performance: A Comparison of Japan and the U.S.
         Journal of Political Economy 102, 510-546.
Khanna, Tarun. (2000) Business Groups and Social Welfare in Emerging Markets: Existing Evidence and
         Unanswered Questions. European Economic Review 44, 748-61.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu. 1997. Why Focused Strategies May be Wrong for Emerging Markets.
         Harvard Business Review 75(4), 41-51
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu. 2000. The Future of Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Long Run
         Evidence from Chile. Academy of Management Journal 43(3), 268-285.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu. 2004. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India - National
         Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Khanna, Tarun and Jan Rivkin. 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business groups in emerging
         markets. Strategic Management Journal. 22(1), 45.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes. London: Macmillan.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: Allen & Unwin.
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993. Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right. Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 108(3), 717–737.
Kleeberg, John. 1987. The Disconto-Gesellschaft and German Industrialization: A Critical Examination of
         the Career of a German Universal Bank, 1851-1914. D. Phil thesis, University of Oxford.
Krueger, Anne. 1990. Government Failures in Development. Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(3),9-23.
Kuran, Timur. 1988. The Tenacious Past: Theories of Personal and Collective Conservatism. Journal of
         Economic Behavior and Organization 10(2) 143-72.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. What Works in Securities Laws?
         Tuck School of Business Working Paper No. 03-22.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. What Works in Securities Laws?
         Journal of …
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1997. Legal
         Determinants of External Finance. Journal of Finance 52(3) 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1997a. Trust in Large
         Organizations. American Economic Review. 87(2), 333-9.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1998. Law and Finance.
         Journal of Political Economy. 106(6), 1113-57.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1999. Corporate
         Ownership Around the World. Journal of Finance. 54(2), 471-520.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. Judicial
         Checks and Balances. Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 445-70.
Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean Laurant Rosenthal. 2004. Corporate Governance and the Plight of Minority
         Shareholders in the United States before the Great Depression. NBER Working Paper 10900.
Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor.
         New York: W.W. Norton.




                                                   43
Landes, David. 1949. French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth Century. Journal of
         Economic History 9.
Macaulay, Stewart. 1963. Non-Contractual Relations in Business: A Preliminary Study. American
         Sociological Review, 28, 55-67.
Mahoney, Paul. 2001. The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be Right. Journal of Legal
         Studies 30, 503.
Markesinis, Basil. 2000. Our Debt to Europe: Past, Present and Future. In Basil Markesinis, ed. The
         Clifford Chance Millennium Lectures: The Coming Together of the Common Law and Civil Law.
         London: Hart
Mayer, Roger C., James H. Davis, and F.David Schoorman. 1995. An Integrative Model of Organizational
         Trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709-734.
Merryman, John. 1966. The Italian Style III: Interpretation. Stanford Law Review 18, 583-611.
Milgram, Stanley. 1963. Behavioral Study of Obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67,
         371-378.
Milgram, Stanley. 1983. Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York: Harper/Collins.
Mokyr, Joel. 2000. The industrial revolution and the Netherlands: Why Did it Not Happen? De Economist
         148(4), 503.
Moody, John. 1904. The Truth about the Trusts. Moody’s: New York.
Morck, Randall and Masao Nakamura. 1999. Banks and Corporate Control in Japan. Journal of Finance.
         Feb. 54(1), 319-340.
Morck, Randall and Masao Nakamura. 2004. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of
         Corporate Ownership in Japan. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1988. Management Ownership and Market Valuation:
         An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 20, No. ½, Jan./Mar. 293-315.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung. 2004a. Corporate Governance, Economic
         Entrenchment and Growth. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 10692.
Morck, Randall, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung. 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and
         Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease. In R. Morck ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership.
         University of Chicago Press.
Morck, Randall, Michael Percy, Gloria Tian, and Bernard Yeung. 2004. The Rise and Fall of the Widely
         Held Firm: A History of corporate Ownership in Canada. National Bureau of Economic Research
         Working Paper.
Morck, Randall. 2004. How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups – The Double Taxation of Inter-
         corporate Dividends and other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy. National Bureau of Economic
         Research working paper 106XX.
Morck, Randall. 2004a. Behavioral Finance in Corporate Governance - Independent Directors and Non-
         Executive Chairs. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 10644
Murphy, Antoin. 2004. Corporate Ownership in France: The Importance of History. National Bureau of
         Economic Research Working Paper.
Nakatani, Iwao. 1984. The economic role of financial corporate grouping. In Masahiko Aoki, ed. The
         Economic Analysis of the Japanese Firm. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Olson, Mancur Jr. 1963. Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force, Journal of Economic History 23(4), 529-
         552.
Olson, Mancur Jr. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Owen. Bruce M. and Ronald Braeutigam. 1978. The regulation game. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA.
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin. 2001. The Political Economy of Finance. Oxford Review of Economic
         Policy 17(4).
Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta and Luigi Zingales 1998. Why do companies go public? An empirical
         analysis. Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark West. 2003. Evolution of corporate law
         and the transplant effect: Lessons from six countries. World Bank Research Observer 18(1) 89-
         112.
Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinhelsterkamp, and Mark West. 1999. The Evolution of Corporate
         Law. University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Economic Law 22.
Portes, Alejandro. 1998. Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern Sociology. Annual
         Review of Sociology, 24, 1-24.



                                                  44
Posner, Richard. 1996. Law and Legal Theory in England and America. Oxford Clarendon Press.
Powell, Walter W. 1990. Neither Market Nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization. In B.M. Staw
          and L.L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organizational Behavior, 12, p. 295-396. Greenwich, CT:
          JAI Press.
Putnam, Robert. 1993. Making Democracy Work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development
          in the Twentieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69(1), 5.
Ramseyer, J. Mark and Minoru Nakazato. 1999. Japanese Law: An Economic Approach. University of
          Chicago Press.
Roe, Mark J. 1996. Chaos and evolution in law and economics. Harvard Law Review 109(3) 641-69.
Roe, Mark. 2002. Political Determinants of Corporate Governance: Political Context, Corporate Impact.
          Oxford University Press.
Sahlman, William A. 1990. The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations. Journal of
          Financial Economics, 27, 473-521.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1912. Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwichlung, Leipzig, Dunker und Humbolt.
          Translation by R. Opie (1934) published as The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry
          into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
          University Press.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1951. Imperialism and Social Classes. Meridian Books
Shleifer, Andrei. 2000. Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Clarendon Lectures in
          Economics, Oxford University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1986. Large Shareholders and Corporate Control. Journal of Political
          Economy 95, 461-88.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1997. A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance 52(2),
          737-784.
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. Investor Protection and Equity Markets. Journal of
          Financial Economics 66(1), 3-27.
Silverman, Dan. 1998. Hitler’s Economy – Nazi Work Creation Programs 1933-1936. Harvard University
          Press.
Steier, Lloyd. 1998. Confounding Market and Hierarchy in Venture Capital Governance: The Canadian
          Immigrant Investor Program. Journal of Management Studies, 35(4), 511-535.
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1965. Social Structure and Organizations. In J.G. March, ed., Handbook of
          organizations (pp.142-193). Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Stulz, René and Rohan Williamson. 2003. Culture, Openness and Finance. Journal of Financial Economics
          70(3) 313-349.
Sylla, Richard and George David Smith. 1995. Information and Capital Market Regulation in Anglo-
          American Finance. In Michael Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds, Anglo-American Financial Systems,
          New York: Irwin, pp.179-208.
Thurow, Lester C. 1989. An Establishment or an Oligarchy? National Tax Journal, 42(4) 405-411.
Watson, Alan.1981. The Making of the Civil Law Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weber, Max. 1904, 1905. Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus. In: Archiv für
          Sozialwissenschaft u. Sozialpolitik 20 (1904). S. 1-54 u. 21 (1905). S. 1-110. Translated in 1930
          by Talcott Parsons and Anthony Giddens as The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,
          Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Weber, Max. 1981. General Economic History. New Brunswick NJ: Transaction Books.
Weiss, Gunther. 2000. The Enchantment of Codification in the Common-Law World. Yale Journal of
          International Law 25, 435.
Williamson, Oliver. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New York: The
          Free Press.
Williamson, Oliver. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.




                                                    45
Figure 1. Who Controls the World’s Great Corporations?
Fraction of top ten firms with different types of controlling shareholders is shown for each
country. Control is assumed if any shareholder or group of shareholders believed to work
in consort controls 20% of the votes in a company’s annual shareholder meeting.

       Argentina
        Australia
          Austria
         Belgium
         Canada
        Denmark
          Finland
          France
        Germany
          Greece
      Hong Kong
          Ireland
            Israel
             Italy
           Japan
          Mexico
     Netherlands
    New Zealand
         Norway
         Portugal
       Singapore
    South Korea
           Spain
         Sweden
     Switzerland
 United Kingdom
   United States

                     0%   10%    20%    30%     40%     50%      60%    70%     80%     90%    100%

         No Controlling Shareholder                      Wealthy Families
         Governments                                     Widely Held Financial Institutions
         Widely Held Non-financial Firms                 Other


Source. La Porta et al. (1999) with Japanese data augmented by Morck and Nakamura (1999) to account
for combined keiretsu stakes and German data augmented with information from Baums (1995) to account
for bank proxy voting.



                                                46
Figure 2. Prospect Theory and Entrenchment
Prospect theory holds that individuals value gains and losses asymmetrically. This leads
to loss aversion, where individuals prefer no change to risks that entail nontrivial
probabilities of nontrivial losses. Wealthy patriarchs oppose institutional changes that
risk large losses to them, even if the patriarch might also make large gains as a result of
those changes.

                              Subjective Gain




                                         V(G2)




                                         V(G1)


               V(B1) = E[p1V(G1) + (1-p1)V(L1)]
                                                                                      Monetary
                        L2               L1           G1               G2              Gain

                                                   V(L1)




                                                   V(B2) = E[p2V(G2) + (1-p2)V(L2)]




                                              47
