                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PRIVATE CREDIT IN 129 COUNTRIES

                                             Simeon Djankov
                                             Caralee McLiesh
                                              Andrei Shleifer

                                          Working Paper 11078
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11078


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Credit in 129 Countries
Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 11078
January 2005, Revised June 2006
JEL No. G3, G32, K22

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate cross-country determinants of private credit, using new data on legal creditor rights

and private and public credit registries in 129 countries. We find that both creditor protection

through the legal system and information sharing institutions are associated with higher ratios of

private credit to GDP, but that the former is relatively more important in the richer countries. An

analysis of legal reforms also shows that improvements in creditor rights and in information sharing

precede faster credit growth. We also find that creditor rights are extremely stable over time, contrary

to the convergence hypothesis. Finally, we find that legal origins are an important determinant of

both creditor rights and information sharing institutions.

Simeon Djankov
World Bank
Research Department
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
sdjankov@worldbank.org

Caralee McLiesh
World Bank Group
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433
cmcliesh@worldbank.org

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       Recent research in the development of private credit markets across countries points to an

important role of institutions, such as legal investor protection and credit bureaus, in supporting

these markets (e.g., La Porta et al. 1997, Japelli and Pagano 2002). Although this research has

identified several empirical regularities, it suffers from small samples, weak results, and some

econometric problems. This paper greatly expands the available data set on credit institutions to

cover 129 countries and 25 years of data. The expansion allows an advance on previous research

in five directions. First, the greater country coverage yields statistically more reliable results on

the role of alternative credit institutions in a cross-section. Second, the larger sample allows us

to examine whether different institutions are more effective in countries at different levels of

economic development and judicial efficiency. Third, time series data on institutions allow us

to ask whether these institutions improve over time and/or converge across countries. Fourth, the

new data allow us to analyze the consequences of institutional reforms for financial

development, thereby avoiding some econometric concerns about cross-sectional work. Fifth,

the much larger sample allows us to better distinguish the roles of legal origins and culture in

shaping credit institutions (Stulz and Williamson 2003).

       There are two broad views of what determines how much private credit a financial

system would extend to firms and individuals. According to the first, what matters for the

viability of private credit is the power of creditors.      When lenders can more easily force

repayment, grab collateral, or even gain control of the firm, they are more willing to extend

credit. These “power” theories of credit have been formalized by Townsend (1979), Aghion and

Bolton (1992), and Hart and Moore (1994, 1998). According to the second view, what matters

for lending is information. When lenders know more about borrowers, their credit history, or

other lenders to the firm, they are not as concerned about the “lemons” problem of financing


                                                                                                   2
non-viable projects, and therefore extend more credit. These “information” theories of credit

have been pioneered by Jaffe and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981).

       We study the importance of information and power theories of credit in explaining the

variation in the size of private credit markets around the world using a new data set on private

credit institutions for 129 countries during the period 1978-2003. To assess the power theories

of credit, we construct a measure of legal rights of creditors in these countries, the “creditor

rights” index first proposed by La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), for every year during this period.

The index measures the legal rights of creditors against defaulting debtors in different

jurisdictions, and has been previously interpreted as a measure of creditor power. To assess the

information theories of credit, we collect data on the existence of public (i.e., government-

owned) and private credit registries in different countries during the same period.          These

registries collect information on credit histories and current indebtedness of various borrowers,

and share it with lenders. Credit registries exist in many countries, and have been shown to be

an important factor in determining credit availability (Jappelli and Pagano 2000, 2002, Pagano

and Jappelli 1993, Sapienza 2002).

       Our initial empirical strategy is to run cross-country regressions that explain the private

credit to GDP ratio in terms of creditor rights and the presence of registries. In addition, we take

advantage of the time series dimension of the data. First, we ask how stable the institutions of

credit are over time and whether they converge or diverge among different groups of countries.

In particular, we test the hypothesis that countries whose laws derive from different legal

traditions exhibit convergence in their creditor rights scores. Second, by looking at the changes

in either creditor rights or the information institutions, we can ask whether these reforms have

any effect on private credit.   This differences-in-differences approach gets around the concern

that credit institutions are endogenous, and presents an alternative to instrumental variable

techniques that have also been criticized (e.g., by Glaeser et al. 2004).
                                                                                                  3
       Creditor power and information theories are not mutually exclusive. Both ex ante (and

interim) better information and ex post stronger creditor rights can contribute to credit market

development. Indeed, as suggested by Jappelli and Pagano (2002), these institutions may be

substitutes: some countries may specialize in information institutions, others in legal systems

giving power to the creditors. We explore the substitution hypothesis in some detail. First, less

developed countries, with poorly functioning legal systems, might be unable to sustain an

effective lending channel based on ex post creditor rights, and may depend on information

sharing for their credit markets to function.    In contrast, richer countries might develop more

functional systems of bankruptcy, so that creditor power can be particularly important in these

countries. We examine the relative importance of information and power theories for countries

at different levels of development.

       Second, as argued by Djankov et al. (2003a) and Mulligan and Shleifer (2005), countries

in different legal traditions may specialize in different strategies of social control of business.

Specifically, common law countries often rely on private contracting, whereas civil law

countries, and especially French civil law countries, rely on government regulation and

ownership. Credit markets present an opportunity to evaluate these predictions, since creditor

power theories deal with legal creditor rights and their enforcement through courts, whereas

information theories deal with mandatory information disclosure and often state-owned

institutions for information sharing. We further distinguish between private and public credit

registries, and examine the roles of both creditor rights and these information sharing institutions

in supporting credit markets in countries from different legal traditions.

       Our results can be briefly summarized. First, we find a pronounced legal origin effect in

credit market institutions, with common law countries having sharply higher creditor rights

scores than French civil law countries. The latter, in contrast, have a much higher incidence of

public credit registries than do the former. Second, we find very little convergence in creditor
                                                                                               4
rights scores, or in information institutions, among legal origins. At least for these measures of

legal institutions, the differences persist over the 25 year period. Third, we find that both the

creditor rights scores, and the incidence of private credit registries, are higher in the richer than

in the poorer countries. Fourth, we find in a cross-section of countries that both better creditor

rights and the presence of credit registries are associated with a higher ratio of private credit to

GDP. In addition, we find that private credit to GDP ratio rises following either improvements

in creditor rights or the introduction of credit registries. The confirmation of cross-sectional

evidence with an analysis of reforms is a significant innovation in this paper. Fifth, we find that

creditor rights are particularly important for private credit in the richer countries, whereas credit

registries matter in the poorer countries.      These results both strengthen and refine earlier

findings, but also point to a beneficial role of public credit registries in poor French legal origin

countries – a rare example of an apparently successful state intervention.

       The next section presents our data. Section III presents the basic results on the effects of

various institutions on private credit. Section IV looks at the effects of changes in creditor rights,

and of the introduction of private and public registries, on private credit. Section V examines the

variation in the prevalence of these institutions across countries. Section VI concludes.



II. The Data

A. Variable Definitions

       We gather data on 133 countries, comprising every economy with a population over 1.5

million, except countries in civil conflict or inactive members of the World Bank, such as Iraq,

Afghanistan, Myanmar, Cuba and Sudan. Table 1 describes the variables used and their sources.

       The private credit data is from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, lines 22d and

42d, which measure claims on the private sector by commercial banks and other financial

institutions. The variable is expressed as a percentage of GDP. Data are available for all sample
                                                                                                5
economies except Puerto Rico, Serbia and Montenegro, and Uzbekistan. We exclude China,

since the credit variable includes credit to state-owned enterprises and stands at a staggering

130% of GDP. In comparison, the share of private credit to GDP in the United Kingdom is

136%, in Germany 118%, and in France 87%. This leaves us with a maximum of 129 countries

in the analysis of private credit.

        The creditor rights index follows that constructed by La Porta et al. (1997), with minor

differences. We construct the index as at January for every year between 1978 and 2003, and

expand their sample from 49 to 133 countries. The creditor rights index measures four powers of

secured lenders in bankruptcy. First, whether there are restrictions, such as creditor consent,

when a debtor files for reorganization. Second, whether secured creditors are able to seize their

collateral after the petition for reorganization is approved, in other words whether there is no

‘automatic stay’ or ‘asset freeze’ imposed by the court. Third, whether secured creditors are paid

first out of the proceeds of liquidating a bankrupt firm. Finally, whether an administrator, and

not management, is responsible for running the business during the reorganization. A value of

one is added to the index when a country’s laws and regulations provide each of these powers to

secured lenders. The creditor rights index aggregates the scores and varies between 0 (poor

creditor rights) and 4 (strong creditor rights).

        Our creditor rights data as of 1995 are the same as La Porta et al. (1997) report for over

90% of the observations. The most significant differences arise from coding different bankruptcy

procedures. For India, for example, La Porta et al. code using the reorganization provisions in

the Companies Act (1956), while we code with respect to the Sick Industrial Companies Act

(1985), which is more relevant for industrial firms. Australia, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are similar.

In some instances, such as Malaysia and the Netherlands, differences in coding arise because of

the treatment of the power of the administrator in reorganization. We code that “management

does not stay” if an administrator is automatically appointed and the debtor does NOT remain in
                                                                                              6
control in the ordinary course of business. In a few cases, differences derive from the moment at

which there exist restrictions on entering reorganization. We code with respect to restrictions “at

the gate,” i.e., the initial point of entering reorganization.

        In 2003, twenty one countries, including Benin, Chad, Colombia, France, and Tunisia,

had a score of 0. Nine countries, including Hong Kong (China), Kenya, Lebanon, New Zealand,

Panama, and the United Kingdom, had a perfect score. The United States has a score of 1, as

secured creditors are paid first out of the proceeds of bankruptcy, but there are no restrictions on

entering reorganization, the debtor benefits from the automatic stay on assets, and management

runs the company during the reorganization process.

        We collect time series data on creditor rights in two stages. We begin with a review of

bankruptcy and bankruptcy-related laws from 1978 to 2003, identifying all major reforms and

assessing their impact on the creditor rights index. We then survey local bankruptcy lawyers,

confirming the dates of reforms and their impact on the creditor rights index.

        We review bankruptcy law and reforms primarily using online legal resources, including

Foreign Law Guide, LexisNexis database, online library of the International Bar Association,

European Restructuring and Insolvency Guide, and Asia-Pacific Restructuring and Insolvency

Guide. 1 Additional legal resources include Collier International Business Insolvency Guide and

International Insolvency. 2 In identifying the number of reforms of bankruptcy law, we exclude

changes that affect bankruptcy only for financial institutions, state enterprises, or persons.

Likewise, purely procedural law reforms are not considered.

        We record all reforms to bankruptcy legislation—i.e., reorganization, liquidation,

foreclosure, and secured transactions laws. Substantive bankruptcy regulations, however, are not

1
  Foreign Law Database: http://www.foreignlawguide.com, International Bar Association: http://www.ibanet.org The Asia-
Pacific Restructuring and Insolvency Guide 2003/2004: http://www.asianrestructuring.com/ The European Restructuring and
Insolvency Guide 2002/20003: http://www.europeanrestructuring.com/
2
  Collier International Business Insolvency Guide published by Matthew Bendar and Company Inc. a member of the Lexis-
Nexis Group. International Insolvency published by Juris Publishing (2002).
                                                                                                             7
always contained in the Bankruptcy Law. Thus, we keep track of reforms of Corporate Law,

Company Law, Commercial Law, the Civil Code, and other associated laws if such reforms

affect bankruptcy. As an example, take Malawi. In 2000, the passage of the Employment Act, a

law seemingly unrelated to bankruptcy matters, affected the ranking of secured creditors’ claims

in liquidation. Before the reform, the Companies Act of 1984 ranked secured creditors first. The

2000 Employment Act ranked claims for wages ahead of secured creditor claims. The reform

lowered Malawi’s creditor rights index from 3 to 2.

       We survey a total of 440 lawyers from the 133 countries to verify the results of the legal

review. We ask our respondents to either confirm or amend our initial findings on the number

and timing of reforms affecting bankruptcy since 1978. In addition, we verify whether and how

the reforms impacted the creditor rights variables. In six countries the respondents amended our

findings, generally to correct the timing of the reform to reflect when it came into force.

       Since 1978, many countries reformed their bankruptcy laws. By our count, 99 countries

had at least one reform, and the total number of reforms is 162. We found evidence that richer

countries have more reforms, inconsistent with the idea that poorer countries reform more to

catch up with the richer ones. However, few reforms affected the La Porta et al. creditor rights

index. Only 25 countries had changes in their creditor rights index since 1978, with a total of 32

changes. The correlation between the 2003 and 1978 creditor rights indices is 0.95. Appendix

A lists all bankruptcy law reforms in this sample. Appendix B reports all changes in creditor

rights scores.

       We record the presence of public and private credit registries though a survey of banking

supervisors. Public credit registries are databases managed by a government agency, usually the

Central Bank or the Superintendent of Banks, that collect information on the standing of

borrowers in the financial system and make it available to actual and potential lenders. In 2003,

they operated in 71 countries in our sample. Some, such as the German and Saudi Arabian
                                                                                      8
registries, collect only limited information on outstanding loans of large borrowers, and focus on

banking supervision.         Others, such as those in Belgium, Ecuador, Malaysia, and Taiwan

distribute extensive information including on late payments and defaults, demographic data,

credit inquiries, ratings, and sometimes even the payment of utility bills and court records of the

company and its owners.

         A private credit bureau is a private firm or non-profit organization that maintains a

database on the standing of borrowers in the financial system. Its primary role is to facilitate

exchange of information among banks and financial institutions.3 As of 2003, private bureaus

operated in 55 of our sample countries, including all OECD countries but France. Three

international firms—Experian, Equifax and TransUnion—either own or are affiliated with half of

the bureaus in our sample. Unlike public registries, private bureaus usually gather information

from non-bank lenders and public sources, distribute more data, and offer a broader range of

services to lenders. The New Zealand bureau, for example, offers credit scoring, borrower

monitoring, fraud detection, debt collection and marketing services.

         For countries that confirmed the presence of a public or private registry, we conducted a

detailed survey of its structure, laws, and associated rules. The survey was filled by the director

of the registry or, in cases where the registry is a department of the Central Bank, by the

department’s head. To build the time series data, respondents were asked the year in which the

registry was legally established, as well as the year in which the registry began operations—i.e.,

distributing credit information. In some cases, the difference is significant. For example, the

Turkish credit bureau was incorporated in 1995, but did not become operational until 1999,

following years of negotiating with data providers and developing technology. The analysis is

based on the year in which the registry began operations.


3
  Credit investigative bureaus and credit reporting firms that do not directly facilitate exchange of information between
financial institutions exist in many countries, but are not considered here.
                                                                                                                     9
        In addition to laws on the books, the quality of law enforcement is likely to matter. We

control for enforcement with a measure of the number of days it takes to enforce a simple debt

contract. Data are based on the methodology developed in Djankov et al. (2003b), with one

change, namely that the current series refer to the time to enforce a contract of unpaid debt worth

50% of the country’s GDP per capita as of January 2003. This amounts to about $18,000 in the

United States, about $12,000 in France and Germany, $6,000 in Korea, and $3,000 in Mexico.

We expanded the Djankov et al. data set to 133 countries.4 It takes only 48 days to enforce a

debt contract in the Netherlands, 50 days in New Zealand, 69 in Singapore, 60 in Japan, and 75

in Korea. In contrast, it takes 1,459 days to enforce a debt contract in Guatemala, 1,028 in

Serbia, 1,003 in Slovenia, and 1,390 in Italy.

        We control for each country’s total GDP, as it has been suggested that larger economies

may have bigger credit markets because of economies of scale in organizing the supporting

institutions. We also control for growth of GDP, because rapid economic expansion may require

more credit. The GDP data come from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (CD-

Rom, January 2004), and like private credit data are not available for many countries in the

earlier part of our period5.

        A country’s legal origin has been shown to be an important determinant of both creditor

rights and private credit (La Porta et al. 1997, 1998; Levine 1999; Beck et al 2003a, b). There

are four main legal origins: English, French, German, and Nordic.                     The English legal origin

includes the common law of England, and the colonies to which it spread, including the U.S.,

Australia, and Canada. The French legal origin includes the civil law of France, of countries

Napoleon conquered (including Portugal and Spain), and of their former colonies. The German

4
  The correlation between our variable and the Djankov et al. (2003a) measure for the overlapping sample of 88 countries is
0.84.
5
  Data on the ratio of private credit to GDP are not available for 497 out of 3225 potential observations, mostly the
transition economies during the communist period. In these cases, we only use country-years with available private
credit to GDP ratios in the regressions.
                                                                                                                 10
legal origin includes the laws of the Germanic countries in Central Europe, but also countries in

East Asia where the German law was transplanted. The Nordic legal origin refers to the laws of

the four Scandinavian countries.

        We use this La Porta et al. classification and add a fifth category: Socialist (transition).

The countries in this category have inherited Soviet laws: these include 12 countries that

emerged from the breakup of the Soviet Union, plus Mongolia. We do not apply the Socialist

category to countries that have gone back to their pre-communist legal systems. Specifically, the

Baltic and East European countries reactivated their pre World War II laws after the collapse of

communism (these laws always stayed on the books, but were not used during the communist

era), and so we classify them according to the origin of those laws. Latvia’s laws belonged to the

German civil law tradition prior to annexation by the Soviet Union in 1940; it reverted back to

them in 1991. Lithuania was influenced by French and Dutch law both before its annexation in

1940 and after independence in 1990. It is classified as French legal origin. The remaining

former communist countries in central and Eastern Europe – Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech

Republic, Hungary, Poland, Serbia, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia - followed the German

legal tradition, with the exception of Romania, which followed the French tradition, and Albania,

which inherited French legal influences via Italy. These countries as well are assigned to their

pre-war legal systems6.

        Finally, it has been argued that religion is an important determinant of credit institutions

(Stulz and Williamson, 2003). We record the religion practiced by the largest proportion of the

population, as recorded in the CIA factbook (December 2003, online edition).




6
 The former communist countries only began reporting private credit to the IMF during 1989-1991, so the question
of applicable legal origin during the communist era does not arise. We should also emphasize that this allocation of
countries to legal origins is based on their bankruptcy laws, and might be different for other business laws.
                                                                                                                 11
B. Summary of the Data

       Table 2 presents the data on credit institutions around the world by legal origin. Panel A

shows creditor rights, Panel B public registries, Panel C private bureaus, and Panel D the

combined information sharing variable, defined as a dummy equal to 1 if a country has either a

public or a private registry. We present the data at five year intervals between 1978 and 2003.

       Panel A confirms for a much larger sample of countries the finding of La Porta et al.

(1997, 1998) that investor protection through creditor rights varies systematically across legal

origins, but in particular is higher in common law than in French civil law countries. This result

is highly statistically significant, and is as strong in 1978 as in 2003. The Table also confirms

the earlier finding that German civil law countries have strong creditor rights and Nordic

countries weak ones, although not as weak as those of French legal origin countries.

       In addition, Panel A demonstrates that there has been no trend toward greater creditor

rights over time in any legal origin, with the possible exception of the socialist countries. Indeed,

there is almost no change in average creditor rights score over time in any legal origin. This

implies that there has been NO CONVERGENCE of creditor rights between legal origins: the

French and common law countries are as far apart in 2003 as in 1978. The stability of creditor

rights scores over time, and the absence of convergence across legal origins, is broadly consistent

with the view that these particular measures of investor protection reflect relatively permanent

features of the institutional environment, deeply rooted in national legal traditions.

       Panel B presents the results on public registries. It shows that these registries are more

common in French and German civil law countries than in Nordic and common law countries.

In 2003, public registries existed in 76.6 percent of French legal origin countries, 61.1 percent of

German legal origin countries, a quarter of common law countries, and no Nordic countries. The

difference between French and common law countries is statistically significant in 2003, but also

in every prior year in the Panel.
                                                                                                  12
       Unlike the results of Panel A, which show no time trend, Panel B shows substantial

increases in the incidence of public registries in all legal origins but the Nordic. In 1978, there

were almost no public registries except in French legal origin countries; by 2003, over half the

countries in the world had them.     The results of Panels A and B suggest that public registries

may substitute for creditor rights, at least comparing common law and French civil law countries.

       Panel C reports the results for private credit registries. They are somewhat more frequent

in common law countries than in French legal origin countries, and by 2003 universal in Nordic

countries, but the difference between French and English origins is not statistically significant.

Like the public registries, private bureaus have become much more common around the world in

the last 25 years, and the ranking of legal origins is generally preserved. Panel D shows that

some kind of an information sharing institution (i.e., public or private) occurs more frequently in

civil than in common law countries. As we saw from Panels B and C, however, this is driven by

public registries rather than private bureaus.

       The bottom line is that there are pronounced legal origin effects in creditor rights and in

public registries, going in opposite directions. However, creditor rights are extremely stable over

time, whereas both public and private information sharing institutions are becoming increasingly

common during the time period 1978-2003.

       Table 3 looks at the same data arranging countries by income level in 1978. Many

countries do not have data for GDP per capita in 1978, but the results we report are very similar

if we use 2003 (or an interim year) per capita income rankings. Panel A shows that, unlike in the

La Porta et al. data, richer countries have statistically significantly higher creditor rights scores

than do poorer countries, and that this is true at all points in time. Part of this of course is the

composition effect, as Nordic and German legal origin countries are both rich and have high

creditor rights, so we need to run regressions to validate this finding.   Panel A also shows that

in neither the richer nor the poorer countries has there been a change of creditor rights over time.
                                                                                                  13
       Panel B shows that the poorer countries have a higher incidence of public registries than

do the richer countries; in contrast, Panel C shows that the richer countries have a much higher

incidence of private bureaus. If we divide the countries by both legal origin and income, we find

that, in 2003, 83.3 percent of the poor French legal origin countries have public credit registries,

compared to only 26.3 percent of the poor common law countries – a truly striking difference.

       The results of Tables 2 and 3 are suggestive of possible patterns of substitution among

credit institutions. First, in the domain of information sharing, richer countries rely relatively

more on private institutions, and poorer countries on public ones.            Second, common law

countries appear to emphasize the ex post mechanism of creditor power over the ex ante

mechanism of information sharing, with the reverse holding for civil law countries.               The

conspicuous exceptions to this tradeoff are the German civil law countries, which have both

strong creditor rights and extensive information sharing institutions.         Third, looking at the

information sharing institutions, French legal origin countries specialize in public registries

relative to countries in other origins. This specialization is most conspicuous in poor countries.

       Table 4 presents correlations among our variables.            First, it documents a positive

correlation between the amount of private credit and creditor rights, the existence of private

credit bureaus, aggregate income, income per capita, and income growth, as well as English,

German and Nordic legal origins.        Private credit is negatively correlated with French and

socialist legal origin, as well as with the inefficiency of the legal system as measured by contract

enforcement days. Second, Table 4 confirms the suggestion of Table 2 that creditor rights and

public registries are substitutes, and that public and private registries might be substitutes as well.

Public registries also appear to be more prevalent in countries with less efficient judicial systems.

We revisit this evidence on institutional substitution in the next section.




                                                                                                    14
III. Cross-Country Determinants of Private Credit

       In this section, we present cross-sectional results on the determinants of private credit to

GDP ratio in 129 countries in 2003. We have replicated these results for the cross-sections every

five years from 1978 to 1998, and the results we report hold in other time periods as well.

       Before presenting the results, three points should be noted. First, we try to present the

results in the simplest and most transparent form. We have estimated other specifications,

including various interaction terms, and the conclusions we draw are confirmed. Second, we

discuss a number of robustness checks below, and we have tried others. However, most potential

control variables are available for only a small subset of countries, so adding them often results

in cutting the sample by two thirds. Third, although an argument can be made that both legal

rules and information sharing institutions are endogenous, we present in Tables 5 and 6 ordinary

least squares results. Following La Porta et al. (1997), we have confirmed these results using

legal origins as instruments, but instrumental variables techniques have significant problems in

this context, including the fact that both of the key independent variables vary by legal origin.

In Section V below, we examine some determinants of private credit institutions, including legal

origins (see Table 8).

       Table 5 examines the effect of creditor rights on private credit in a framework similar to

La Porta et al. (1997), except using a much larger cross-section of countries (129 versus 39).

The dependent variable is the average ratio of private credit to GDP, expressed as a percentage,

computed over 1999-2003. The creditor rights score is as of 1999. We use several controls in

these OLS regressions. First, as in La Porta et al. (1997), we control for the total GDP on the

theory that credit markets might require fixed institutional costs to function, which are only paid

when the total economy is large enough. Second, also as in La Porta et al. (1997), we control for

per capita GDP growth, since faster growing economies may have greater demand for credit.

Third, we use our updated measure of days to enforce a simple contract as a proxy for the
                                                                                       15
efficiency of the legal system. Presumably, debt contracts are more prevalent in the more

efficient legal systems. Fourth, since inflation may devalue the stock of outstanding debt or

otherwise undermine debt contracting, we control for contemporaneous inflation.

       The first column shows that GDP, GDP per capita growth, and contract enforcement days

(but not inflation) enter significantly and with theoretically predicted signs. In particular, the

objective measure of the quality of courts is a significant predictor of private credit. Further,

countries with stronger legal protection of creditors have deeper credit markets (Figure 1). As

the creditor rights index rises by 1 (roughly the difference between the French and the German

legal origins), the private credit to GDP ratio rises by 6 percentage points (or a fifth of the way

from the French to the German legal origin mean). As do La Porta et al. (1997), we find support

for the power theories of debt, in which creditor rights determine the willingness to extend credit.

       However, the results presented here are substantially stronger than those presented by La

Porta et al. (1997) for a sample of 39 countries as of 1995. Part of the reason for this is that

several countries changed their bankruptcy scores between 1995 and 2003 in a way that

improved the fit. Yet even if we rerun the La Porta et al. (1997) regression using their 39

countries but our data as of 1995, we get stronger results than they do, indicating that recoding

the variables for a few countries, as discussed in Section I, improves the fit.

       The second column in Table 5 includes legal origins as additional controls. Except for

the fact that transition countries have less developed debt markets, there is no significant

influence of legal origin on private credit beyond that contained in other variables. In fact, the

coefficient on the creditor rights index barely changes. There is no additional information in

legal origins for the effect of legal rules on private credit markets.

       The next four columns revisit these results for the richer and the poorer countries

separately.   Note first that the quality of courts measure is only significant for the richer

countries, which suggests that the legal mechanism enforcing debt contracts is not important in
                                                                                            16
the poorer ones. Note second that inflation in these specifications exacts an adverse effect on

debt markets, especially in the richer countries. Turning to our main results, the evidence makes

clear that the creditor rights results are driven by the richer countries. For these countries, both

contract enforcement days and creditor rights remain significant determinants of private credit

(with legal origins remaining unimportant). For the poorer countries, in contrast, the statistical

significance of these variables disappears. This result again suggests that the legal mechanism

of enforcing debt contracts is more important in the richer countries.

         We have examined which components of the creditor rights index are responsible for its

ability to predict private credit. We find that the absence of automatic stay on assets and respect

for the priority of secured creditors matter a great deal. On the other hand, restrictions on

entering reorganization and mandatory removal of management in bankruptcy are not

particularly important. This evidence suggests that the power to grab and liquidate collateral by

secured creditors supports successful debt markets.7

         We check the robustness of the results in Table 5 in several ways. First, following

Mulligan and Shleifer (2005), we replace the overall GDP by population as the scale variable.

This would make sense if both the benefits and the costs of running institutions rise with per

capita income. All of the results we have just described are preserved when we make this

substitution. Second, we replace our preferred measure of the efficiency of the judicial system,

contract enforcement days, with the more conventional GDP per capita. We find, as in Table 5,

that countries with higher per capita income have a higher ratio of private credit to GDP, and that

this result is driven by the rich rather than the poor countries. The coefficients on other variables

of interest do not change materially. Third, instead of dividing countries into rich and poor, we

divide them according to their ICRG “law and order” score, on the theory that it is the law and


7
 In a related vein, Qian and Strahan (2004) find that, in a cross-section of countries, a higher creditor rights index is
associated with a higher likelihood that bank loans are secured.
                                                                                                                      17
order environment rather than just development that determines the relevance of specific legal

rules. We find, as with per capita income, that creditor rights matter in the high but not in the

low “law and order” countries. Fourth, it can be argued that our private credit variable includes

too much credit to state enterprises. Accordingly, we replace it by the private bond market

capitalization measure from Beck et al (2000), which unfortunately is only available for 36

countries. Even in this small sample, the creditor rights score is a statistically significant

predictor of private bond market capitalization. Fifth, we control individually for a number of

variables in the regression that might be correlated with the creditor rights score, but also

influence the development of private credit.                   These include the ratio of stock market

capitalization to GDP, a measure of the importance of state enterprises in the economy, a

measure of fiscal deficit, several proxies for central bank independence, and several proxies of

judicial checks and balances.8            None of these variables change our results.                 Finally, we

considered the possibility that not the creditor rights index itself, but some other aspect of legal

or regulatory intervention in debt markets correlated with creditor rights, is responsible for credit

market development.            Specifically, we include several measures of the quality of bank

supervision assembled by Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004). While some of these variables are

statistically significant, they do not eliminate the statistical significance of creditor rights.

           In Table 6, we add the three measures of information sharing – the existence of a public

registry, that of a private bureau, and that of either (information sharing = 1 if either a public

registry or a private bureau exists in a country) – to the regressions in Table 5.                   Like creditor

rights, these variables are measured as of 1999.                     We eliminate legal origins from the

specifications, since they do not influence private credit holding creditor rights constant.9 The

effects of the creditor rights index and of contract enforcement days do not change much at all

8
    For motivation for inclusion several of these controls, see Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine 2003a, 2003b, 2005.


                                                                                                                 18
from the estimates in Table 5 in all six specifications. In addition, the data show that public

registries are associated with more private credit, but only in the poorer countries (Figure 2), and

that private credit bureaus are associated with more private credit in both the poorer ones and the

overall sample (Figure 3).          When we combine these public and private registries into the

information sharing variable, it has a statistically significant and quantitatively large effect on

private credit in both the poorer countries and the overall sample.

         As noted earlier, credit registries vary significantly in their design. We analyze the extent

to which particular characteristics of registries are associated with more private credit with a

detailed survey of the structure, rules, and governing laws of credit registries. We find that

registries that distribute a broader range of data and provide legal incentives to ensure quality are

associated with significantly more private credit. We identify six characteristics that in the data

encourage private credit: 1) both positive information, meaning loans outstanding and payment

history on accounts in good standing, and negative information, meaning defaults and arrears, is

distributed; 2) data on both firms and individual borrowers is distributed; 3) data from retailers,

trade creditors, and/or utilities, as well as from financial institutions, is distributed; 4) five or

more years of historical data is available; 5) data are collected on all loans of value above 1

percent of income per capita; and 6) laws provide for borrowers’ right to inspect their own data.

Many of these characteristics might be endogenous, and so we merely note these results, rather

than interpret them as causal.

         The results in Tables 5 and 6 confirm some of the patterns of institutional substitution

identified earlier. Whereas creditor rights and judicial efficiency influence private credit in the

richer countries, neither public nor private credit registries do. In contrast, both public and

private registries benefit private credit in poorer countries. The data thus suggest that the power


9
  The results are robust to the inclusion of legal origins. Also, we performed the same robustness checks for the
results in Table 6 as we did for those in Table 5, and the results remain robust.
                                                                                                                    19
mechanism for sustaining credit works in the richer countries, while the information mechanism

matters in the poorer ones.10 Moreover, there appears to be a constructive role for government in

maintaining public credit registries in the poorer countries, where for reasons of cost or

compliance private credit registries are uncommon (see Table 3).                           Table 2 suggests that

governments in poor French legal origin countries are more likely to play this constructive role.

These results identify a role for both the power and the information theories of debt, but under

different circumstances.



IV. An Analysis of Reforms

         Cross-country regressions are often criticized because they may omit important country

characteristics or because the independent variables are endogenous. An alternative empirical

strategy is to look at the change in the private credit to GDP ratio around institutional reforms

that either change the creditor rights score or introduce a public registry or a private bureau. We

do this in two alternative ways recommended by Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004), and

report the results in Table 7.

         The first strategy, pursued in Panel A, is to collapse the data. Specifically, we restrict the

sample to countries that undertook reforms, and run a cross-sectional regression of the change in

the average levels of private credit to GDP ratio after versus before the reform on the change in

institutions. For concreteness, begin with reforms of creditor rights. Suppose country i changes

its creditor rights score in year t. Let AC (i, before) be the average private credit to GDP ratio of

the reforming country i taken over the five years before year t, and AC (i, after) be the average

private credit to GDP ratio in this country in the five years after the reform year t. Let ∆AC (i) =

AC (i, after) – AC (i, before) be the change in the average credit to GDP ratio of the reforming

10
  An important caveat to this interpretation is that the La Porta et al. index of creditor rights is computed from the
perspective of secured creditors in bankruptcy, and that this particular measure of investor protection – as opposed

                                                                                                                     20
country i following the reform. We are interested in how ∆AC (i) is affected by the change in

the creditor rights score in country i (occurring in year t), ∆CR (i).

         However, we need to worry that, during the period t-5,…,t,…,t+5, the private credit to

GDP ratio changed systematically in non-reforming countries as well. To this end, for each

country i reforming in year t, consider all countries j = 1,…, J which did not have a creditor

rights change in the years t-5,…,t,…,t+5, i.e., the whole ten year window around the year t of

reform in country i. For each of these countries, compute ∆AC (j) as above, i.e. the change in

private credit to GDP ratio in the 5 year window around the year t of reform of country i.

Finally, compute ∆AC (control, i) as the average ∆AC (j) over all the countries j not reforming in

the window around t. This ∆AC (control, i) can be computed for every reforming country i, and

will be used as a control variable. Obviously, ∆AC (control, i) differs for every year.

         We run on the cross-section of only the countries that actually experienced a change in

creditor rights score the following ordinary least squares regression:

                  ∆AC (i) = α + β* ∆CR (i) + γ* ∆AC (control, i).

The coefficient γ captures world trends in private credit to GDP ratio around reform years, while

the coefficient β captures the effect of a unit change in the creditor rights score on private credit.

The same regression can be run for 3 year windows around creditor rights score reforms.

         For the public and private registries, the change in institutions – the counterpart of ∆CR

(i) -- is always equal to one, since we only have the introductions of private bureaus or public

registries in the data. Accordingly, we follow the procedures above (including the calculation of

the corresponding control variables) for introductions of private and public registries (rather than

changes in creditor rights score), and then run

                  ∆AC (i) = α + γ* ∆AC (control, i),



to creditor rights more generally, might be especially relevant to debt finance in the richer countries.
                                                                                                           21
on the sub-samples of countries introducing registries or bureaus. The average effect of the

introduction of an information sharing institution is picked up by the constant term.

        In the sample, there are only 32 episodes of changes in the creditor rights index (see

Appendix B).        This result is consistent with the evidence of Tables 2 and 3 of virtually no

changes in average creditor rights index by income level or by legal origin over the 25 year

period. Unfortunately, many of the 32 changes occur in former communist countries close to the

end of the sample, so we cannot compute the average private credit to GDP ratio five or even

three years after the reform. We can only compute changes in the dependent variable for 21

observations with five year averages, and for 25 with three year averages.11

        The results, presented in Panel A, show that, for 3 and 5 year windows, a one point

increase in the creditor rights score raises the ratio of private credit to GDP by between 6.5 and 8

percentage points. The result (displayed in Figure 4) is statistically significant, and the estimate

is quantitatively similar to those in Tables 5 and 6.            The control for the average change in the

ratio of private credit to GDP among non-reforming countries is not statistically significant. The

results also show that, over a 5 year horizon, the private credit to GDP ratio rises after the

introduction of both public registries and private bureaus by 7 to 8 percentage points. The

magnitudes of the effects are smaller than those reported in Table 6, but the results are

statistically significant. However, although parameter estimates show a rise in the private credit

to GDP ratio over a 3 year window around the reform, these results are insignificant.

        Panel B presents the results of an alternative strategy of measuring the effects of reform,

namely panel regressions. Here the dependent variable is the ratio of private credit to GDP each

year in each sample country, but we introduce both country effects and year effects.

Identification here only takes advantage of within country variation in institutional variables. A


11
  In a recent paper, Haselmann, Pistor, and Vig (2005) focus specifically on transition economies to examine the
effects of changes in creditor protections on bank lending. Their conclusions are broadly consistent with ours.
                                                                                                                   22
key question in this specification is what standard errors to compute.                     One possibility is to

compute robust standard errors. This strategy does not take account of possible serial correlation

of error terms within each country. Another possibility is to cluster standard errors by country,

as recommended by Bertrand et al. (2004), which imposes no restrictions on the possible serial

correlation of error terms. With many time series observations (recall we have 25 years of data),

such a specification may blow up standard errors excessively.12 Since both strategies have

problems, we present both standard errors in Table 7B.

         These panel results yield lower parameter estimates than the findings from the cross-

sections in Tables 5 and 6 as well as those in Panel A (a 4 percentage point rise in the private

credit to GDP ratio per one point improvement in the creditor rights score).                         The effect is

statistically significant for both all and the rich countries using robust standard errors, but only

for the rich countries (at the 10 percent level) using standard errors clustered by country. The

effects of private bureaus and of public registries remain of the same magnitude as in the earlier

specifications, although again standard errors rise sharply when clustered by country.                          The

evidence on the information sharing institutions confirms the previous findings; the evidence on

creditor rights is weaker both in magnitude and in statistical significance.

         Except for the large standard errors clustered by country, the results for reforms,

including those from Panel A, support the findings from the cross-section. Both the power and

the information channel of credit play a role, and improvements in either channel raise the ratio

of private credit to GDP. We recognize that the results in this section are subject to the criticism

that the timing of reforms is endogenous, and in particular may occur when policy makers expect

private credit to grow. Still, the consistency of results across methodologies is encouraging.




12
  In a conversation, James Stock suggests that while clustering of standard errors has a modest impact for 3 to 5
year panels, it often blows up standard errors for longer panels (e.g., 20 years) by a factor of 2 to 3.
                                                                                                                    23
V. Determinants of Credit Institutions

       We have shown that credit institutions have a significant effect on credit market

development. But what shapes these institutions? We have already seen in Tables 2 and 3 that

the level of economic development and legal origin are potentially important determinants of

which countries have which institutions.        In a recent paper, Stulz and Williamson (2003)

emphasize that culture is an important determinant of creditor rights. Using the La Porta et al.

(1997) sample, they find that creditor rights are weaker in catholic countries, and that holding

religious composition constant, legal origin does not help predict creditor rights.

       Table 8 revisits some of these issues, looking at the potential determinants of creditor

rights, public registries, and private bureaus using our larger 2003 sample. With respect to

creditor rights, the first column shows that French legal origin countries have sharply weaker

rights than the (omitted) common law category without controlling for religion. The second

column shows that, consistent with Stulz and Williamson (2003), protestant countries have

statistically significantly stronger creditor rights than others, without controlling for legal origin.

However, when we put legal origin and religious orientation together in the regression, as we do

in columns 3 and 4, religious variables are no longer significant. We also could not get religion

to matter when we construct the more complex variables suggested by Stulz and Williamson.

       The two additional panels in Table 8 examine the determinants of the presence of public

registries and private bureaus. French and German legal origin countries are more likely to have

public credit registries than their common law counterparts, and transition countries are less

likely to have private credit bureaus than the common law countries. Richer countries as well

are more likely to have private credit bureaus. Protestant countries are less likely to have public

credit registries than others, but the result loses its significance once we control for legal origin.

There is no difference between catholic and protestant countries in the incidence of private credit


                                                                                                    24
bureaus, although muslim and orthodox countries are less likely to have them. In this sample,

legal origin appears to matter more for credit institutions than culture.

       The result that French legal origins predicts the presence of public credit registries, which

in turn benefit credit markets in poorer countries, is consistent with the argument of Djankov et

al. (2003a) that public ownership and regulation represent solutions to the problem of disorder

practiced especially by French civil law countries.      Research on the regulation of entry, civil

procedure, bank ownership, and the regulation of labor markets has not, however, been able to

identify any benefits of this approach to social control of business in developing countries.

Perhaps because public registries neither employ significant numbers of people nor can be easily

used to discriminate among borrowers for political reasons, they appear to be beneficial. This

evidence, then, illustrates a successful public ownership solution to the problem of supporting

credit markets in developing countries.



VI. Conclusion

       Using a new sample of credit institutions in 129 countries over 25 years, we revisit some

old and establish some new results on private credit around the world. First, in this large sample,

both the cross-sectional evidence and the analysis of reforms show that legal creditor rights and

information sharing institutions are statistically significant and quantitatively important

determinants of private credit development. Second, there is no evidence the creditor rights are

converging among legal origins, or among rich and poor countries. This evidence contradicts the

legal convergence hypothesis which holds that institutions converge toward the more successful

ones over time. Since credit institutions vary so much across countries and legal origins, and

since these differences matter for the development of debt markets, this evidence also contradicts

the “functional convergence” hypothesis, which holds that institutions in different countries,

while distinct on the surface, functionally converge to accomplish the same goals.
                                                                                                 25
        Third, the data show that the effectiveness of alternative institutions varies systematically

across countries at different levels of economic development. Most interestingly, both private

and public credit bureaus are strongly associated with private credit in the poorer, but not the

richer, countries, suggesting a role for government in facilitating information sharing.13 Since

public credit registries are especially common in French legal origin countries, these results

highlight a successful civil law response to financial underdevelopment. Such successes have

been difficult to identify in other domains of social control of business. These results suggest

that the choice between common and civil law approaches to solving economic problems is a

matter of comparative advantage of alternative strategies of social control and not just of the

absolute advantage of common law solutions.



VII. References

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Corporate

        Bankruptcy, Review of Economic Studies 59, 473-494.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2004, Bank Regulation and Supervision: What

        Works Best?, Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza, 2000, Finance and the Sources of Growth,

        Journal of Financial Economics 58, 261-300.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2000, A New Database on Financial

        Development and Structure, World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2003a, Law and Finance: Why Does

        Legal Origin Matter?, Journal of Comparative Economics 31, 653-675.

13
  These results echo recent research on the role of free media – another mechanism of information sharing – in
promoting good outcomes in both economic and political markets (Zingales 2000, Djankov et al. 2003b). Unlike in
the case of the media, however, our data suggest that information sharing through public firms is beneficial rather
than detrimental. A possible reason for the difference is that the scope for public abuse of information collected
about the debtors is more limited than that for distortion of news reporting by state-owned media.
                                                                                                                26
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2003b, Law, Endowments, and Finance,

       Journal of Financial Economics 70, 137-181.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2005, Law and Firms’ Access to

       Finance, American Law and Economics Review 7, 211-252.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2005, How Much Should We Trust

       Differences-In-Differences Estimates, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-276.

Black, Bernard, 2000, Political Determinants of Corporate Governance, Oxford: Oxford

       University Press.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei

       Shleifer, 2003a, The New Comparative Economics, Journal of Comparative Economics

       31, 595-619.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003b,

       Courts, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 453-517.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003c, Who Owns

       the Media, Journal of Law and Economics 46, 341-382.

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2004, Do

       Institutions Cause Growth?, Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271-303.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human

       Capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1-42.

Haselmann, Rainer, Katharina Pistor, and Virkant Vig, 2005, How Law Affects Lending,

       Mimeo, Columbia Law School.




                                                                                            27
Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano, 2000, Information Sharing in Credit Markets: the European

       Experience, Working Paper 35, University of Salerno, Italy.

Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano, 2002, Information Sharing, Lending, and Defaults: Cross-

       country Evidence, Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 2017-2045.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Legal

       Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law

       and Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Levine, Ross, 1999, Law, Finance, and Economic Growth, Journal of Financial Intermediation 8,

       8-35.

Mulligan, Casey, and Andrei Shleifer, 2005, The Extent of the Market and the Supply of

       Regulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1445-1474.

Pagano, Marco, and Tullio Jappelli, 1993, Information Sharing in Credit Markets, Journal of

       Finance 43, 1693-1718.

Qian, Jun, and Philip Strahan, 2004, How Law and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The

       Case of Bank Loans, Mimeo, Boston College.

Sapienza, Paola, 2002, The Effects of Banking Mergers on Loan Contracts, Journal of Finance

       57, 329-368.

Stiglitz, Joseph, and Andrew Weiss, 1981, Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

       Information, American Economic Review 71, 393-410.

Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Culture, Openness, and Finance, Journal of Financial

       Economics 70, 313-349.

Townsend, Robert, 1979, Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State

       Verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265-293.

Zingales, Luigi, 2000, In Search of New Foundations, Journal of Finance 55, 1623-1654.
                                                                                          28
                                                        Table 1: Description of the Variables
This table presents the variables used in the regression analysis. The Creditor rights variable updates La Porta and others (1998) and refines the collection methodology.
The Public registry and Private bureau variables are newly-collected data. The variable Information sharing is a discrete variable, which aggregates data from the Public
Registry and Private bureau variables. The variable Private credit to GDP comes from the IMF's International Financial Statistics . GDP and inflation data come from the
World Bank. The data for contract enforcement days is based on the methodology in Djankov and others (2003). The variable Legal origin comes from La Porta and
others (1999) and is updated with the CIA Factbook (2003). The variable Religion comes from Stulz and Willaimson (2003) and is updated with the CIA Factbook (2003).
All variables are constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to 2003.



             Variable                                                                             Description
Creditor rights                  An index aggregating creditor rights, following La Porta and others (1998). A score of one is assigned when each of the following rights
                                 of secured lenders are defined in laws and regulations: First, there are restrictions, such as creditor consent or minimum dividends, for a
                                 debtor to file for reorganization. Second, secured creditors are able to seize their collateral after the reorganization petition is approved,
                                 i.e. there is no "automatic stay" or "asset freeze." Third, secured creditors are paid first out of the proceeds of liquidating a bankrupt firm,
                                 as opposed to other creditors such as government or workers. Finally, if management does not retain administration of its property
                                 pending the resolution of the reorganization. The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is
                                 constructed as at January for every year from 1978 to 2003.


Public registry                  The variable equals 1 if a public credit registry operates in the country, 0 otherwise. A public registry is defined as a database owned by
                                 public authorities (usually the Central Bank or Banking Supervisory Authority), that collects information on the standing of borrowers in
                                 the financial system and makes it available to financial institutions. The variable is constructed as at January for every year from 1978 to
                                 2003.

Private bureau                   The variable equals 1 if a private credit bureau operates in the country, 0 otherwise. A private bureau is defined as a private commercial
                                 firm or non profit organization that maintains a database on the standing of borrowers in the financial system, and its primary role is to
                                 facilitate exchange of information amongst banks and financial institutions. Private credit reporting firms, which collect information from
                                 public sources but not banks and financial institutions, operate in several other countries but are not considered here. The variable is
                                 constructed as at January for every year from 1978 to 2003.


Information sharing              The variable equals 1 if either a public registry or a private bureau operates in the country, 0 otherwise, and is constructed as at January
                                 for every year from 1978 to 2003.

Private Credit to GDP            Ratio of credit from deposit taking financial institutions to the private sector (IFS lines 22d and 42d) to GDP (IFS line 99b),expressed as a
                                 percentage. Line 22d measures claims on the private sector by commercial banks and other financial institutions that accept
                                 transferable deposits such as demand deposits. Line 42d measures claims on the private sector given by other financial institutions that
                                 do not accept transferable deposits but that perform financial intermediation by accepting other types of deposits or close substitutes for
                                 deposits (e.g. savings and mortgage institutions, post office savings institutions, building and loan associations, certain finance
                                 companies, development banks and offshore banking institutions). Source: IMF International Financial Statistics September 2004.



GDP                              Logarithm of gross national income (current U.S. Dollars), average 2001-2003. Source: World Development Indicators 2004.

GDP per capita                   Logarithm of gross national income per capita (Atlas method), 2003. Source: World Development Indicators 2004.

GDP per capita growth            Average annual growth in gross domestic product per capita from 1979 - 2003. Source: World Development Indicators 2004.

Inflation                        Annual percentage inflation, GDP deflator, average 1999-2003. Source: World Development Indicators 2004.

Contract enforcement days        The number of days to resolve a payment dispute through courts. The data are based on the methodology in Djankov and others (2003)
                                 but describe the number of calendar days to enforce a contract of unpaid debt worth 50% of the country's GDP per capita. The variable
                                 is constructed as at January 2003.

Legal origin                     A dummy variable that identifies the legal origin of the Company law or Commercial Code of each country. The five origins are English,
                                 French, German, Nordic and Socialist. Source: La Porta and others (1999) and the CIA Factbook 2003.

Religion                         A dummy variable that identifies the religion practiced by the largest proportion of the population. There are nine religions: Athiest,
                                 Buddhist, Catholic, Hindu, Indigenous, Judaism, Muslim, Orthodox Christian and Protestant. Source: Stulz and Williamson (2003) and
                                 the CIA Factbook 2003.
                              Table 2: Credit Institutions by Legal Origin
This table presents the means of the Creditor rights, Public registry, Private bureau and Information sharing variables at five
year intervals between 1978 and 2003. The data are shown by legal origin and T-tests on the differences between English and
French legal origins are provided. The analysis covers 129 countries.

                                                       A. Creditor Rights

        Legal Origin                  1978             1983             1988             1993          1998             2003
English                              2.417            2.417            2.444            2.361         2.333            2.278
French                               1.311            1.311            1.311            1.328         1.297            1.313
German                               2.429            2.429            2.429            2.143         2.333            2.333
Nordic                               2.250            2.250            2.500            2.000         1.750            1.750
Socialist                     .                .                .                       2.000         2.273            2.182
All                                  1.787            1.787            1.806            1.774         1.812            1.797

T-Test, English vs French            4.644 a          4.644 a          4.719 a          4.298 a       4.364 a          4.039 a

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                        B. Public Registry

        Legal Origin                  1978             1983             1988             1993          1998             2003
English                              0.028            0.056            0.111            0.222         0.250            0.250
French                               0.422            0.469            0.500            0.531         0.719            0.766
German                               0.056            0.056            0.111            0.167         0.333            0.611
Nordic                               0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000         0.000            0.000
Socialist                            0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000         0.182            0.182
All                                  0.218            0.248            0.286            0.338         0.474            0.534

T-Test, English vs French           -4.599 a         -4.650 a         -4.179 a          -3.119 a     -5.020 a         -5.738 a

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                        C. Private Bureau

        Legal Origin                  1978             1983             1988             1993          1998             2003
English                              0.139            0.222            0.222            0.361         0.417            0.500
French                               0.141            0.156            0.188            0.266         0.344            0.359
German                               0.222            0.278            0.278            0.278         0.389            0.556
Nordic                               0.750            0.750            1.000            1.000         1.000            1.000
Socialist                            0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000         0.000            0.000
All                                  0.158            0.195            0.218            0.293         0.361            0.414

T-Test, English vs French           -0.024            0.819            0.413            0.995         0.720            1.372

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                     D. Information Sharing

        Legal Origin                  1978             1983             1988             1993          1998             2003
English                              0.167            0.278            0.333            0.556         0.639            0.694
French                               0.531            0.578            0.625            0.688         0.844            0.906
German                               0.222            0.278            0.278            0.278         0.556            0.944
Nordic                               0.750            0.750            1.000            1.000         1.000            1.000
Socialist                            0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000         0.182            0.182
All                                  0.353            0.414            0.459            0.549         0.699            0.797

T-Test, English vs French           -3.786 a         -2.987 a         -2.890 a          -1.318       -2.379 b         -2.783 a

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                       Table 3: Credit Institutions by Income Group in 1978
This table presents the means of the Creditor rights, Public registry, Private bureau and Information sharing variables at five
year intervals between 1978 and 2003. The data are shown by income group at the beginning of the sample period (1978). The
sample is split into two, with rich countries having income per capita above the median value and poor countries having
income per capita below the median value. T-tests on the differences between rich and poor countries are provided. The
analysis covers 129 countries.

                                                       A. Creditor Rights

      Income Group                    1978             1983             1988             1993         1998             2003
Poor                                 1.490            1.490            1.490            1.469        1.408            1.367
Rich                                 2.106            2.106            2.149            2.042        2.020            2.020
Missing 1978 GDP data                1.750            1.750            1.750            1.852        2.088            2.088
All                                  1.787            1.787            1.806            1.774        1.812            1.797

T-Test, Rich vs Poor                -2.561 a         -2.561 a         -2.702 a         -2.354 b      -2.582 a        -2.801 a

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                      B. Public Registries

      Income Group                    1978             1983             1988             1993         1998             2003
Poor                                 0.367            0.388            0.429            0.510        0.633            0.653
Rich                                 0.180            0.240            0.300            0.360        0.420            0.440
Missing 1978 GDP data                0.059            0.059            0.059            0.059        0.324            0.500
All                                  0.218            0.248            0.286            0.338        0.474            0.534

T-Test, Rich vs Poor                 2.119 b          1.589            1.328            1.510        2.146 b          2.157 b

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                       C. Private Bureaus

      Income Group                    1978             1983             1988             1993         1998             2003
Poor                                 0.020            0.020            0.041            0.102        0.184            0.224
Rich                                 0.400            0.500            0.540            0.660        0.760            0.800
Missing 1978 GDP data                0.000            0.000            0.000            0.029        0.029            0.118
All                                  0.158            0.195            0.218            0.293        0.361            0.414

T-Test, Rich vs Poor                -5.162 a         -6.400 a         -6.459 a         -6.897 a      -6.958 a        -6.935 a

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level



                                                     D. Information Sharing

      Income Group                    1978             1983             1988             1993         1998             2003
Poor                                 0.388            0.408            0.469            0.592        0.755            0.796
Rich                                 0.520            0.660            0.720            0.820        0.880            0.940
Missing 1978 GDP data                0.059            0.059            0.059            0.088        0.353            0.588
All                                  0.353            0.414            0.459            0.549        0.699            0.797

T-Test, Rich vs Poor                -1.319           -2.570 a         -2.601 a         -2.550 a      -1.616 c        -2.150 b

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                                                                                                                                        Table 4: Correlations
This table presents Bonferroni-adjusted simple correlations between all explanatory variables used in the analysis. The definition of each variable is shown in Table 1. The analysis covers 129 countries.




                                                                                                   Private bureau
                                                                            Public registry
                                                     Creditor rights




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Socialist legal
                                                                                                                                                          capita growth
                               Private credit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       German legal
                                                                                                                                                                                                English legal
                                                                                                                                                                              enforcement




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    French legal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nordic legal
                                                                                                                        Information




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ln GDP per




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Protestant
                                                                                                                                                                              Contract
                                                                                                                                                          GDP per




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Catholic
                                                                                                                        sharing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Muslim
                               to GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     origin
                                                                                                                                                                              days
                                                                                                                                           GDP
Creditor rights             0.299               a
                          (0.001)
Public registry            -0.164               c    -0.219            a
                          (0.063)                   (0.011)
Private bureau              0.599               a     0.163            c    -0.286            a
                          (0.000)                   (0.061)                (0.001)
Information sharing         0.357               a    -0.106                  0.540            a     0.424           a
                          (0.000)                   (0.224)                (0.000)                (0.000)
GDP                         0.686               a     0.150            c    -0.123                  0.555           a     0.291       a
                          (0.000)                   (0.086)                (0.158)                (0.000)               (0.001)
GDP per capita growth       0.341               a     0.080                 -0.082                  0.337           a     0.244       a     0.272   a
                          (0.000)                   (0.357)                (0.347)                (0.000)               (0.005)           (0.002)
Contract enforcement days -0.457                a    -0.130                  0.260            a    -0.222           a    -0.040            -0.279   a     -0.166          c
                          (0.000)                   (0.137)                (0.003)                (0.010)               (0.649)           (0.001)        (0.057)
English legal origin        0.154               c     0.256            a    -0.347            a     0.107                -0.155       c     0.065          0.041                -0.124
                          (0.081)                   (0.003)                (0.000)                (0.220)               (0.074)           (0.456)        (0.640)               (0.155)
French legal origin        -0.208               b    -0.409            a     0.447            a    -0.106                 0.262       a    -0.162   c     -0.163          c      0.218      a    -0.587         a
                          (0.018)                   (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.225)               (0.002)           (0.062)        (0.061)               (0.012)          (0.000)
German legal origin         0.193               b     0.186            b     0.061                  0.114                 0.145       c     0.213   a      0.347          a     -0.022           -0.241         a    -0.381        a
                          (0.029)                   (0.032)                (0.483)                (0.191)               (0.096)           (0.014)        (0.000)               (0.803)          (0.005)             (0.000)
Nordic legal origin         0.184               b    -0.007                 -0.188            b     0.210           b     0.089             0.165   c      0.058                -0.236      a    -0.107              -0.170        b    -0.070
                          (0.037)                   (0.934)                (0.030)                (0.015)               (0.309)           (0.058)        (0.509)               (0.006)          (0.219)             (0.051)            (0.426)
Socialist legal origin     -0.227               a     0.101                 -0.212            a    -0.252           a    -0.459       a    -0.177   b     -0.237          a     -0.022           -0.183         b    -0.289        a    -0.119         -0.053
                          (0.010)                   (0.247)                (0.014)                (0.003)               (0.000)           (0.042)        (0.006)               (0.802)          (0.035)             (0.001)            (0.173)        (0.546)
GDP per capita              0.715               a     0.239            a    -0.144            c     0.573           a     0.303       a     0.729   a      0.222          a     -0.327      a    -0.039              -0.151        c     0.298 a        0.237 a       -0.180 b
                          (0.000)                   (0.006)                (0.099)                (0.000)               (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.010)               (0.000)          (0.655)             (0.082)            (0.000)        (0.006)        (0.039)
Catholic                    0.104                    -0.120                  0.148            c     0.284           a     0.222       a     0.156   c     -0.076                 0.126           -0.305         a     0.382        a     0.062         -0.120         -0.204 b           0.223 a
                          (0.241)                   (0.169)                (0.088)                (0.001)               (0.010)           (0.073)        (0.383)               (0.150)          (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.477)        (0.170)        (0.019)           (0.010)
Protestant                  0.214               a     0.204            b    -0.351            a     0.224           a    -0.061             0.123         -0.019                -0.308      a     0.380         a    -0.393        a    -0.036          0.431 a       -0.123             0.129       -0.277 a
                          (0.015)                   (0.018)                (0.000)                (0.009)               (0.485)           (0.157)        (0.827)               (0.000)          (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.682)        (0.000)        (0.160)           (0.140)      (0.001)   .
Muslim                     -0.184               b    -0.070                  0.128                 -0.340           a    -0.155       c    -0.181   b     -0.026                 0.132            0.048               0.091             -0.192 b       -0.107          0.063            -0.266 a     -0.414 a    -0.249 a
                          (0.036)                   (0.427)                (0.141)                (0.000)               (0.074)           (0.037)        (0.766)               (0.129)          (0.585)             (0.299)            (0.027)        (0.219)        (0.473)           (0.002)      (0.000)     (0.004)   .
Buddhist                    0.136                     0.026                 -0.076                  0.108                 0.073             0.072          0.273          a     -0.178      b     0.019              -0.103              0.137         -0.050          0.018             0.003       -0.194 b    -0.116      -0.174 b
                          (0.125)                   (0.769)                (0.381)                (0.216)               (0.404)           (0.409)        (0.001)               (0.041)          (0.830)             (0.236)            (0.115)        (0.566)        (0.838)           (0.974)      (0.025)     (0.182)     (0.046)



Note: p-values are in parentheses; a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                Table 5: Private Credit to GDP Regressions
This table presents cross-section OLS regressions, using a sample of 129 countries. The dependent variable is Private Credit to
GDP, averaged over the 1999-2003 period. Results are shown separately for poor and rich countries. Poor countries are countries
with income per capita below the sample's median. Rich countries are countries with income per capita above the sample's median.
Four controls are used in the analysis: total GDP, per-capita income growth, a proxy for the efficiency of the legal system, and
inflation. The Inflation variable is averaged over the 1999-2003 period. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.


    Independent Variables                                    Dependent Variable: Private Credit to GDP
                                           All Countries                  Poor Countries                  Rich Countries
GDP                                    10.816 a         10.376 a         4.464 a         4.716 a       12.109 a        11.709 a
                                       (1.254)          (1.277)        (1.170)         (1.071)         (2.073)         (2.185)

GDP per capita growth                    1.976 c           1.593             0.816 a          0.283        4.924 b        4.968 b
                                       (1.081)           (1.068)           (0.263)          (0.821)      (2.389)        (2.420)

Contract enforcement days              -14.721 a        -15.143 a           -1.713           -7.497       -8.847 b       -8.289 b
                                        (3.249)          (3.379)           (5.573)          (5.365)      (3.642)        (3.858)

Inflation                               -0.093            -0.088 c          -0.054 b         -0.052 b     -1.626 a       -1.673 a
                                       (0.061)           (0.053)           (0.025)          (0.023)      (0.285)        (0.333)

Creditor rights                          5.841 a           6.413 a           0.768            2.399 c    10.647 a         9.936 a
                                       (2.070)           (2.472)           (1.270)          (1.452)      (2.963)        (3.410)

French legal origin                                       -0.451            0.000             8.305 c                    -9.466
                                                         (6.113)                            (4.710)                     (8.372)

German legal origin                                       -1.351                             14.099                     -18.204 c
                                                         (9.571)                           (16.977)                    (10.373)

Nordic legal origin                                        4.467                          (dropped)                      -8.950
                                                         (9.530)                                                       (10.425)

Socialist legal origin                                  -19.409 a                            -5.941                     -10.438
                                                         (6.648)                            (4.024)                    (10.755)

Constant                             -142.240 a        -128.197 a         -72.050 c         -49.519     -209.700 a    -192.053 a
                                      (36.014)          (37.867)         (40.025)          (38.442)      (56.062)      (60.603)

Obs                                       129               129                65                65          64             64
R-sq                                   0.6003            0.6155            0.2622            0.3399      0.6608         0.6823



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
            Table 6: Private Credit to GDP Regressions, with Information Sharing
This table presents cross-section OLS regressions, using a sample of 129 countries. The dependent variable is Private Credit to
GDP, averaged over the 1999-2003 period. Results are shown separately for poor and rich countries. Poor countries are countries
with income per capita below the sample's median. Rich countries are countries with income per capita above the sample's median.
Private bureaus and public registries established after 1999 are classified as 0 in the Private bureau and Public registry variables.
Information sharing is a discrete variable equal to 1 is either a private bureau or a public registry exists, 0 otherwise. Four controls are
used in the analysis: total GDP, per-capita income growth, a proxy for the efficiency of the legal system, and inflation. The Inflation
variable is averaged over the 1999-2003 period. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




    Independent Variables                                     Dependent Variable: Private Credit to GDP
                                            All Countries                  Poor Countries                  Rich Countries
GDP                                       9.751 a          8.401 a        3.945 a         3.686 a       11.712 a        11.368 a
                                        (1.262)          (1.403)        (1.014)         (1.179)         (2.222)         (2.382)

GDP per capita growth                     2.203 b           1.921 b           1.015 a          1.050 a           5.002 b           4.499 c
                                        (0.999)           (0.928)           (0.247)          (0.224)           (2.474)           (2.513)

Contract enforcement days              -15.014 a         -14.680 a           -4.476           -4.029            -8.873 b          -9.065 b
                                        (3.170)           (2.994)           (5.428)          (5.287)           (3.538)           (3.603)

Inflation                                -0.071            -0.064            -0.039           -0.037            -1.564 a          -1.514 a
                                        (0.070)           (0.058)           (0.035)          (0.032)           (0.292)           (0.304)

Creditor rights                           6.988 a           6.112 a           2.272 c          2.154 c         10.571 a          10.623 a
                                        (2.116)           (2.139)           (1.328)          (1.272)           (2.985)           (3.021)

Information sharing                     17.000 a                            10.861 a                             7.183
                                        (4.713)                             (3.284)                            (7.292)

Private bureau                                            20.788 a                            14.238 b                             7.401
                                                          (6.225)                             (5.892)                            (7.131)

Public registry                                             7.218                               9.926 a                           -0.095
                                                          (4.588)                             (3.616)                            (6.696)

Constant                              -129.954 a         -96.666 a         -53.507           -50.473          -205.707 a        -194.169 a
                                       (35.429)         (38.764)          (37.678)          (34.995)           (57.949)          (64.304)

Obs                                        129               129                65                65                64                64
R-sq                                    0.6323            0.6463            0.3536             0.391            0.6646            0.6658



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                                      B. Panel Regressions
Independent variables                           Dependent Variable: Annual Private Credit to GDP (1978 - 2003)
                                          All countries                 Poor Countries                Rich Countries
Creditor rights                         4.303            3.870         0.191          -0.144           8.155          7.429
(robust standard errors)              (1.448) a        (1.354) a     (1.600)         (1.522)         (1.809) a      (1.832) a
(errors clustered by country)         (3.732)          (3.447)       (2.459)         (2.188)         (4.749) c      (4.833)

Private bureau                          8.047            4.579            8.047            6.548             4.018         2.220
                                      (1.482) a        (1.516) a        (1.361) a        (1.349) a         (1.949) b     (2.005)
                                      (3.705) b        (3.753)          (3.530) b        (3.564) c         (4.907)       (4.962)

Public registry                         1.348            1.273            8.389            7.782            -5.164        -4.158
                                      (1.073)          (1.039)          (0.979) a        (0.943) a         (1.840) a     (1.858) b
                                      (3.423)          (3.140)          (2.722) a        (2.605) a         (5.988)       (5.885)

Inflation                              -0.026           -0.009           -0.094           -0.091             0.319         0.416
                                      (0.056) a        (0.063) a        (0.029) a        (0.028) a         (0.234)       (0.271)
                                      (0.056)          (0.063)          (0.029) b        (0.028) b         (0.234)       (0.271)

GDP                                                    13.616                              5.858                         13.229
                                                       (0.949) a                         (0.934) a                       (1.857) a
                                                       (2.869) a                         (2.216) a                       (6.073) b

Constant                               18.783        -292.346            -2.243        -125.331             94.891      -313.983
                                      (7.383) a       (19.635) a        (1.414)         (24.113) a         (9.046) a     (38.719) a
                                     (12.835)         (58.824) a        (2.383)         (57.919) a        (22.556) a   (125.366) a

Year effects                             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes
Country effects                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes
Observations                            2660             2645             1285             1277              1375          1368
R-squared                             0.8579           0.8697           0.7317           0.7439            0.8370        0.8440

Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
Robust standard errors (second row) and standard errors clustered by country (third row) in parentheses
                                                                 Table 8: Determinants of Credit Institutions
This table presents OLS regressions for the year 2003, using a sample of 133 countries that have data on credit institutions. The legal origin variables come from La Porta et al (1999) and are
updated with CIA Factboo k (2003). The religion variables come from Stulz and Williamson (2003) and are updated with CIA Factbook (2003). Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.


Independent Variables             Dependent Variable: Creditor Rights                        Dependent Variable: Public Registry                   Dependent Variable: Private Bureau
GDP per capita                0.364 b     0.337 b       0.356 b      0.377 b            -0.120 b    -0.079        -0.115 b     -0.091          0.415 a     0.409 a       0.413 a      0.359 a
                            (0.148)     (0.141)       (0.149)      (0.157)             (0.059)     (0.058)       (0.059)      (0.067)        (0.049)     (0.042)       (0.049)      (0.054)

French legal origin          -0.951 a                      -0.833 a       -0.801 a       0.506 a                   0.422 a       0.448 a      -0.107                       -0.074        -0.143
                            (0.230)                       (0.243)        (0.272)       (0.092)                   (0.116)       (0.118)       (0.086)                      (0.096)       (0.088)

German legal origin          -0.151                        -0.065         -0.007         0.429 a                   0.369 b       0.395 a      -0.180                       -0.157        -0.205
                            (0.272)                       (0.267)        (0.274)       (0.138)                   (0.156)       (0.155)       (0.126)                      (0.133)       (0.137)

Nordic legal origin          -0.987 b                      -1.187 b       -1.202 b      -0.098                     0.044         0.021        -0.024                       -0.079        -0.025
                            (0.494)                       (0.544)        (0.552)       (0.099)                   (0.093)       (0.097)       (0.093)                      (0.112)       (0.113)

Transition legal origin       0.020                         0.136          0.298        -0.107                    -0.189        -0.207        -0.367 a                     -0.336 a      -0.240 b
                            (0.225)                       (0.238)        (0.286)       (0.143)                   (0.160)       (0.198)       (0.078)                      (0.087)       (0.104)

Protestant                                   0.543 c        0.328          0.371                      -0.469 a    -0.232 c      -0.166                        0.154         0.090        -0.093
                                           (0.291)        (0.330)        (0.393)                     (0.090)     (0.123)       (0.143)                      (0.104)       (0.132)       (0.139)

Buddhist                                                                  -0.038                                                -0.082                                                    0.020
                                                                         (0.283)                                               (0.181)                                                  (0.116)

Muslim                                                                     0.045                                                 0.118                                                   -0.321 a
                                                                         (0.286)                                               (0.122)                                                  (0.099)

Orthodox                                                                  -0.208                                                 0.117                                                   -0.359 a
                                                                         (0.269)                                               (0.183)                                                  (0.124)

Other religion                                                             0.169                                                 0.120                                                   -0.210 b
                                                                         (0.348)                                               (0.111)                                                  (0.099)

Constant                      1.095 b        0.601          1.000 b        0.879         0.642 a       0.862 a     0.709 a       0.558 b      -0.850 a       -0.958 a      -0.876 a      -0.501 b
                            (0.505)        (0.471)        (0.508)        (0.630)       (0.215)       (0.191)     (0.222)       (0.284)       (0.174)        (0.127)       (0.166)       (0.216)

Obs                            133            133            133            133            133          133         133           133            133           133           133            133
R-Sq                        0.2191         0.0842         0.2253         0.2295         0.2936       0.1351      0.3099        0.3247         0.4094        0.3814        0.4119         0.4824



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                                                             Appendix A: Data
This table presents new data on Creditor rights, Information sharing, Public registry and Private bureau, collected for the purposes of this study. Information sharing is a
discrete variable equal to 1 is either a private bureau or a public registry exists, 0 otherwise. The variable Private Credit to GDP is based on the IMF's International Financial
Statistics . The variable Contract enforcement days is based on teh methodology developed in Djankov and others (2003) and is updated for teh purposes of this study. The
legal origin variables come from La Porta et al (1999) and are updated with CIA Factbook (2003). The religion variables come from Stulz and Williamson (2003) and are
updated with CIA Factbook (2003).

                              Private Credit to      Creditor      Information        Public                               Contract                 Legal
         Country                    GDP               Rights         Sharing         Registry      Private Bureau      Enforcement Days             Origin            Religion
Albania                              0.06                3               0               0                 0                   340                 French               Muslim
Algeria                              0.06                1               0               0                 0                   407                 French               Muslim
Angola                               0.04                3               1               1                 0                   1011                French            Indigenous
Argentina                            0.19                1               1               1                 1                   520                 French              Catholic
Armenia                              0.08                2               0               0                 0                   195                 Socialist          Orthodox
Australia                            0.88                3               1               0                 1                   157                 English            Protestant
Austria                              1.04                3               1               1                 1                   374                 German              Catholic
Azerbaijan                           0.05                3               0               0                 0                   267                 Socialist            Muslim
Bangladesh                           0.26                2               1               1                 0                   365                 English              Muslim
Belarus                              0.09                2               1               1                 0                   250                 Socialist          Orthodox
Belgium                              0.78                2               1               1                 0                   112                 French              Catholic
Benin                                0.12                0               1               1                 0                   570                 French            Indigenous
Bolivia                              0.56                2               1               1                 1                   591                 French              Catholic
Bosnia and Herzegovina               0.39                3               1               0                 1                   330                 German               Muslim
Botswana                             0.18                3               1               0                 1                   154                 English           Indigenous
Brazil                               0.35                1               1               1                 1                   566                 French              Catholic
Bulgaria                             0.16                2               1               1                 0                   440                 German             Orthodox
Burkina Faso                         0.12                0               1               1                 0                   458                 French               Muslim
Burundi                              0.21                1               1               1                 0                   512                 French              Catholic
Cambodia                             0.07                2               0               0                 0                   401                 French              Buddhist
Cameroon                             0.09                0               1               1                 0                   585                 French            Indigenous
Canada                               0.81                1               1               0                 1                   346                 English             Catholic
Central African Republic             0.05                0               1               1                 0                   660                 French            Indigenous
Chad                                 0.04                0               1               1                 0                   526                 French               Muslim
Chile                                0.61                2               1               1                 1                   305                 French              Catholic
China                                  .                 2               1               1                 0                   241                 German               Athiest
Colombia                             0.27                0               1               0                 1                   363                 French              Catholic
Congo, Dem. Rep.                     0.01                1               0               0                 0                   909                 French              Catholic
Congo, Rep.                          0.05                0               1               1                 0                   560                 French              Catholic
Costa Rica                           0.27                1               1               1                 1                   550                 French              Catholic
Cote d'Ivoire                        0.14                0               1               1                 0                   525                 French               Muslim
Croatia                              0.44                3               0               0                 0                   415                 German              Catholic
Czech Republic                       0.42                3               1               1                 1                   300                 German               Athiest
Denmark                              1.23                3               1               0                 1                    83                  Nordic            Protestant
Dominican Republic                   0.38                2               1               1                 1                   580                 French              Catholic
Ecuador                              0.27                0               1               1                 0                   388                 French              Catholic
Egypt, Arab Rep.                     0.61                2               1               1                 0                   410                 French               Muslim
El Salvador                          0.05                3               1               1                 1                   275                 French              Catholic
Ethiopia                             0.28                3               0               0                 0                   420                 English              Muslim
Finland                              0.58                1               1               0                 1                   240                  Nordic            Protestant
France                               0.87                0               1               1                 0                    75                 French              Catholic
Georgia                              0.08                2               0               0                 0                   375                 Socialist          Orthodox
Germany                              1.18                3               1               1                 1                   184                 German             Protestant
Ghana                                0.12                1               1               0                 1                   200                 English            Protestant
Greece                                0.6                1               1               0                 1                   151                 French             Orthodox
Guatemala                             0.2                1               1               0                 1                   1459                French              Catholic
Guinea                               0.04                0               1               1                 0                   306                 French               Muslim
Haiti                                0.16                2               1               1                 0                   368                 French              Catholic
Honduras                             0.41                2               1               1                 0                   545                 French              Catholic
Hong Kong, China                     1.54                4               1               0                 1                   211                 English           Indigenous
Hungary                              0.34                1               1               0                 1                   365                 German              Catholic
India                                 0.3                2               0               0                 0                   425                 English              Hindu
Indonesia                             0.2                2               1               1                 0                   570                 French               Muslim
Iran, Islamic Rep.                   0.31                2               1               1                 0                   545                 English              Muslim
Ireland                               1.1                1               1               0                 1                   217                 English             Catholic
Israel                               0.89                3               1               0                 1                   585                 English             Judaism
Italy                                0.79                2               1               1                 1                   1390                French              Catholic
Jamaica                              0.22                2               0               0                 0                   202                 English            Protestant
Japan                                1.07                2               1               0                 1                    60                 German              Buddhist
Jordan                               0.74                1               1               1                 0                   342                 French               Muslim
Kazakhstan                           0.15                2               0               0                 0                   400                 Socialist            Muslim
Kenya                                0.26                4               1               0                 1                   360                 English            Protestant
Korea, Rep.                          0.93                3               1               0                 1                    75                 German              Buddhist
Kuwait                               0.68                3               1               0                 1                   390                 French               Muslim
Kyrgyz Republic                      0.04                3               0               0                 0                   492                 Socialist            Muslim
                                                        Appendix A: Data (cont.)

                        Private Credit to   Creditor   Information    Public                         Contract       Legal
        Country               GDP            Rights      Sharing     Registry   Private Bureau   Enforcement Days   Origin       Religion
Lao PDR                       0.07             0           1            1             0               443           French        Buddhist
Latvia                        0.23             3           1            1             0               189           German       Protestant
Lebanon                       0.84             4           1            1             0               721           French         Muslim
Lesotho                       0.13             1           0            0             0               285           English      Protestant
Lithuania                     0.14             2           1            1             0               154           French        Catholic
Macedonia, FYR                0.19             3           1            1             0               509           German       Orthodox
Madagascar                    0.08             2           1            1             0               280           French      Indigenous
Malawi                        0.08             2           0            0             0               277           English      Protestant
Malaysia                      1.38             3           1            1             1               300           English        Muslim
Mali                          0.17             0           1            1             0               340           French         Muslim
Mauritania                    0.28             1           1            1             0               410           French         Muslim
Mexico                        0.18             0           1            0             1               421           French        Catholic
Moldova                       0.15             2           0            0             0               280           Socialist    Orthodox
Mongolia                      0.16             2           1            1             0               314           Socialist     Buddhist
Morocco                       0.55             1           1            1             0               240           French         Muslim
Mozambique                    0.09             2           1            1             0               580           French      Indigenous
Namibia                       0.47             2           1            0             1               270           English      Protestant
Nepal                         0.29             2           1            1             0               350           English        Hindu
Netherlands                   1.42             3           1            0             1                48           French        Catholic
New Zealand                   1.17             4           1            0             1                50           English      Protestant
Nicaragua                     0.27             4           1            1             0               155           French        Catholic
Niger                         0.05             0           1            1             0               330           French         Muslim
Nigeria                       0.15             4           1            1             0               730           English        Muslim
Norway                        0.83             2           1            0             1                87            Nordic      Protestant
Oman                           0.4             0           0            0             0               455           French         Muslim
Pakistan                      0.28             1           1            1             1               395           English        Muslim
Panama                        0.92             4           1            0             1               355           French        Catholic
Papua New Guinea              0.15             1           0            0             0               295           English     Indigenous
Paraguay                      0.24             1           1            1             1               285           French        Catholic
Peru                          0.25             0           1            1             1               441           French        Catholic
Philippines                   0.41             1           1            0             1               380           French        Catholic
Poland                        0.28             1           1            0             1               1000          German        Catholic
Portugal                       1.4             1           1            1             1               320           French        Catholic
Puerto Rico                     .              1           1            0             1               270           French        Catholic
Romania                       0.08             1           1            1             0               335           French       Orthodox
Russian Federation            0.16             2           0            0             0               330           Socialist    Orthodox
Rwanda                         0.1             1           1            1             0               395           French        Catholic
Saudi Arabia                  0.56             3           1            1             0               360           English        Muslim
Senegal                       0.19             0           1            1             0               485           French         Muslim
Serbia and Montenegro           .              2           1            1             0               1028          German       Orthodox
Sierra Leone                  0.03             2           0            0             0               305           English        Muslim
Singapore                     1.17             3           1            0             1                69           English       Buddhist
Slovak Republic               0.43             2           1            1             0               565           German        Catholic
Slovenia                      0.38             3           1            1             0               1003          German        Catholic
South Africa                  0.76             3           1            0             1               277           English      Protestant
Spain                         1.06             2           1            1             1               169           French        Catholic
Sri Lanka                     0.29             2           1            0             1               440           English       Buddhist
Sweden                        0.72             1           1            0             1               208            Nordic      Protestant
Switzerland                   1.64             1           1            0             1               170           German        Catholic
Syrian Arab Republic          0.09             3           0            0             0               672           French         Muslim
Taiwan, China                 0.99             2           1            1             1               210           German        Buddhist
Tanzania                      0.06             2           0            0             0               242           English        Muslim
Thailand                        1              2           1            0             1               390           English       Buddhist
Togo                          0.16             0           1            1             0               535           French      Indigenous
Tunisia                       0.67             0           1            1             0                27           French         Muslim
Turkey                         0.2             2           1            1             1               330           French         Muslim
Uganda                        0.05             2           0            0             0               209           English       Catholic
Ukraine                       0.15             2           0            0             0               269           Socialist    Orthodox
United Arab Emirates          0.52             2           1            1             0               614           English        Muslim
United Kingdom                1.36             4           1            0             1               288           English      Protestant
United States                 1.46             1           1            0             1               250           English      Protestant
Uruguay                       0.53             3           1            1             1               620           French        Catholic
Uzbekistan                      .              2           0            0             0               368           Socialist      Muslim
Venezuela, RB                 0.11             3           1            1             0               445           French        Catholic
Vietnam                       0.39             1           1            1             0               404           French        Buddhist
Yemen, Rep.                   0.06             0           1            1             0               360           English        Muslim
Zambia                        0.07             1           0            0             0               274           English      Protestant
Zimbabwe                      0.28             4           0            0             0               350           English      Protestant
 Appendix B: Reforms to Creditor Rights
                 Index
This table lists the 32 changes in the variable Creditor Rights during
the 1978-2004 period.

                             Year of
Country                      reform       Change in Creditor Rights
Austria                           1982                -1
Denmark                           1984                1
United Kingdom                    1985                1
Ireland                           1990                -1
Canada                            1992                -1
Finland                           1993                -2
India                             1993                -1
Russian Federation                1994                1
Romania                           1994                1
Israel                            1995                -1
Sweden                            1995                -1
Lithuania                         1995                1
Armenia                           1996                -1
Azerbaijan                        1997                1
Kazakhstan                        1997                1
Mongolia                          1997                1
Niger                             1998                -2
Indonesia                         1998                -1
Russian Federation                1998                -1
Kazakhstan                        1998                1
Lithuania                         1998                1
Thailand                          1999                -1
Ukraine                           1999                -1
Japan                             2000                -1
Malawi                            2000                -1
Bulgaria                          2000                1
Kazakhstan                        2001                -1
Uruguay                           2001                1
Japan                             2002                1
Romania                           2003                1
Russian Federation                2004                1
Spain                             2004                1
                                                   Appendix C: Reforms In Bankruptcy Laws
                                      This table lists the 162 reforms in bankruptcy laws in 99 countries, during the 1978-2004 period.

Country                 Reforms 1978-2004                  Country               Reforms 1978-2004                        Country                Reforms 1978-2004
Albania                 1992, 1995, 1996, 2002             Guinea                1992, 1998                               Papua New Guinea       none
Algeria                 none                               Haiti                 none                                     Paraguay               none
Angola                  none                               Honduras              none                                     Peru                   1992, 1996, 1999, 2002
Argentina               1995, 2002                         Hong Kong, China      none                                     Philippines            2000
Armenia                 1995, 2003                         Hungary               1986, 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000             Poland                 1990, 2003
Australia               1989, 1991, 1992, 2001             India                 1985, 1986, 1993, 2002                   Portugal               1986, 1993, 1998, 2004
Austria                 1982                               Indonesia             1998                                     Puerto Rico            1978, 1994
Azerbaijan              1994, 1997                         Iran                  none                                     Romania                1990, 1995, 2004
Bangladesh              1997                               Ireland               1990, 1999, 2001                         Russian Federation     1992, 1998, 2002, 2004
Belarus                 1991, 2001,                        Israel                1995, 1999, 2002                         Rwanda                 none
Belgium                 1997, 2002                         Italy                 1979, 1999, 2003                         Saudi Arabia           1996
Benin                   1998                               Jamaica               none                                     Senegal                1984, 1998
Bolivia                 2003                               Japan                 2000, 2002                               Serbia and Montenegro 1989, 1993, 1996
Bosnia and Herzegovina 1989, 1994, 1998, 2003              Jordan                none                                     Sierra Leone           none
Botswana                1981                               Kazakhstan            1992, 1995, 1997, 1998, 2001             Singapore              1994, 1995
Brazil                  2004                               Kenya                 none                                     Slovak Republic        1991, 1993, 1998, 2000
Bulgaria                1989, 1994, 2000, 2003             Korea, Rep.           1991, 1998                               Slovenia               1994, 1997
Burkina Faso            1991, 1998                         Kuwait                1980                                     South Africa           1984, 1998
Burundi                 none                               Kyrgyz Republic       1994, 1997, 1999, 2002                   Spain                  2004
Cambodia                none                               Lao PDR               1994                                     Sri Lanka              1982
Cameroon                1998                               Latvia                1991, 1996, 2002                         Sweden                 1979, 1987, 1996, 2003
Canada                  1992, 1997                         Lebanon               none                                     Switzerland            1994
Central African Republic 1998                              Lesotho               none                                     Syrian Arab Republic   none
Chad                    1998                               Lithuania             1992, 1995, 1997, 2001                   Taiwan, China          1980
Chile                   1982                               Macedonia             1989, 1997                               Tanzania               none
China                   1986, 1991                         Madagascar            none                                     Thailand               1998, 1999
Colombia                1989, 1995, 1999                   Malawi                1984, 2000                               Togo                   1988, 1998
Congo, Dem. Rep.        none                               Malaysia              1998, 2000                               Tunisia                1995, 1999, 2003
Congo, Rep.             1998                               Mali                  1986, 1992, 1998                         Turkey                 2003, 2004
Costa Rica              1989, 1996                         Mauritania            2000                                     Uganda                 none
Cote d'Ivoire           1998                               Mexico                2000                                     Ukraine                1992, 1999, 2002
Croatia                 1989, 1994, 1997, 2000             Moldova               1992, 1996, 2001                         United Arab Emirates   1984, 1993
Czech Republic          1991                               Mongolia              1991, 1997                               United Kingdom         1985, 1986, 2000, 2002
Denmark                 1984                               Morocco               1996                                     United States          1978, 1994
Dominican Republic      none                               Mozambique            none                                     Uruguay                2001
Ecuador                 1997                               Namibia               none                                     Uzbekistan             1994, 1998, 2003
Egypt, Arab Rep.        1999                               Nepal                 none                                     Venezuela              none
El Salvador             none                               Netherlands           1992                                     Vietnam                1993
Ethiopia                none                               New Zealand           1993                                     Yemen, Rep.            1991, 1998
Finland                 1985, 1991, 1993, 1995             Nicaragua             none                                     Zambia                 1994
France                  1984, 1985, 1994                   Niger                 1997, 1998                               Zimbabwe               1998
Georgia                 1996, 2001                         Nigeria               1990
Germany                 1994, 1999                         Norway                1984
Ghana                   none                               Oman                  1990
Greece                  1983, 1990                         Pakistan              1984
Guatemala               none                               Panama                none
