NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADJUSTMENT TO MONETARY POLICY AND DEVALUATION
UNDER TWO—TIER AND FIXED EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES

Joshua Aizenman

Working Paper No. 1107

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER' research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1107
April 1983

Adjustment to Monetary Policy and Devaluation
Under Two—Tier and Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to determine whether a two—tier exchange
rate regime is more effective than a fixed rate regime in increasing a
country's ability to pursue an independent monetary policy in the short run.
The analysis compares adjustment to a monetary policy and to a devaluation in
the two exchange rate regimes in a portfolio model under imperfect asset
substitutability. It is shown that the two policies have in the short run

larger effects on interest rates under a two—tier regime. The duration of
this effect, however, is longer under a fixed rate regime. The analysis is
conducted for the case of static and rational expectations, demonstrating that
the above results do not depend on the expectation mechanism.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk,CR

Philadelphia, PA 19104
(215) 898-7409

I. Introduction Summary
The recent experience of various countries has renewed interest in a two—

tier exchange rate regime. In such a regime different exchange rates are
applied for current account and capital account transactions. One possible
version of a two—tier system pegs the commercial exchange rate, whereas the
financial exchange rate is free to fluctuate and to be determined by market

forces. A country might adopt a two—tier exchange rate in order to increase
its ability to pursue an independent monetary policy, and to reduce its

exposure to interest—sensitive and speculative capital flows. The purpose of
this paper is to consider to what degree a two—tier regime is capable of
performing the first task, i.e., increasing monetary independence.

In some respects, a two—tier exchange rate might be viewed as a

compromise between fixed and floating exchange rates. Under fixed exchange
rate the adjustment in the market for foreign exchange is a quantity adjust-

ment, whereas under a floating rate it is a price adjustment. In a two—tier
exchange rate the adjustment is assigned to quantities in the submarket for
foreign exchange that reflects current account transactions, and to prices in

the submarket associated with capital account transactions. As a result, a
two—tier exchange rate inhibits foreign capital flows. Any excess demand for
foreign capital is cleared only by adjustment of the rate of return on foreign
capital, and not by actual inflows of foreign capital.

Previous contributions by Marion (1981) and Flood and Marion (1982) have
analyzed the isolating properties of a two—tier exchange rate in portfolio

balance models.' The portfolio approach, developed among others by Branson
(1974), Dornbusch (1976) and Kouri (1976) suggests that the short—run
equilibrium of the exchange rate and returns of various assets is determined

—1—

so as to equilibrate the market for financial assets. Over time, the economy
is propelled to its long run equilibrium by accumulation of assets via the
current account.

The purpose of this paper is to use a related framework to analyze and
compare the adjustment process to monetary shocks under two—tier and fixed

exchange rate regimes. More specifically, the paper asks if a two—tier
exchange rate regime increases the ability of a country to pursue an
independent monetary policy more than a fixed exchange rate regime.

In

general, the long run effects of the same policy may differ between the two

exchange rate regimes. To make the comparison meaningful, therefore, the
analysis considers policies that result in the same long run effects under

both regimes, assuming that we start from the same equilibrium. We find that
there is a short run trade—off between quantity adjustment and the adjustment

of rates of return of various assets. Because a two—tier regime constrains
the quantity adjustment in the foreign capital market, the short run
adjustment of rates of return under a two—tier exchange rate will exceed their

adjustment under a fixed exchange rate. Thus, in the short run a monetary
injection has a greater effect on interest rates under a two—tier exchange

rate than under a fixed rate. The duration of this effect, however, turns out
to be longer under a fixed rate than under a two—tier regime. The result of
the larger response of rates of return in a two—tier exchange rate is to
induce in the short run a larger current account adjustment to the new policy

(relative to its adjustment in a fixed rate regime). Because the total
accumulative current account adjustment proves to be the same under both
exchange rate regimes, we can conclude that the speed of adjustment to the new

long run equilibrium is larger under a tw—tier exchange rate regime. This
result is srengthened by another factor: a fixed exchange rate regime allows a

—2--

swap of domestic money balances for foreign assets, whereas such a channel is

closed by a two—tier exchange rate. Following an expansion of the money
supply we will get under a fixed rate an instantaneous adjustment to
composition disequilibrium in the money market, via a swap of money for traded

assets. This adjustment will eliminate part of the monetary expansion, having
the effect of increasing the service account surplus and reducing the overall
current account deficit that resulted from the pursuit of a monetary expansion

under a fixed rate regime. Thus, the service account effect works to further
reduce the speed of adjustment under a fixed rate regime, relative to a two—
tier system.

The speed of adjustment to the new long run equilibrium is interesting
because of its implications for the ability of a country to sterlize balance

of payments adjustment in the short run. A country which would like to
conduct an independent monetary policy might find it desirable to sterlize the

balance of payments effects in the short run.2 A more rapid speed of adjustment reduces the sterlization capacity of the central bank, in turn reducing
the ability of monetary policy to significantly influence the economy.
The same type of result is found for a devaluation, which is designed to

generate the same long run equilibrium under the two exchange rate regimes. A
devaluation of the commercial rate in a two—tier regime will generate short
run undershooting of the financial rate, which implies that the rate of return

on foreign assets will increase. This paper shows that in a two—tier exchange
system rates of return on financial assets will increase more following the

devaluation than under a fixed rate system. The devaluation will generate a
larger current account surplus in a two—tier regime, implying a quicker
adjustment under a two—tier regime towards the new equilibrium.
The analysis is conducted first for the case of static expectations.

—3—

Then, it is contrasted with the case of rational expectations.

It is shown

that the results of the paper hold for both expectation mechanisms. The
policies analyzed in the paper for a two—tier regime cause a short run
deviation of the financial rate from its long run equilibrium level. It is
shown that the effect of rational expectations is to mitigate this deviation,
resulting in a smaller change of the return on foreign assets in a two—tier
regime, relative to the case of static expectations.

To summarize, a two—tier regime does not necessarily increase the
capacity of the economy to pursue an independent monetary policy relative to a

fixed rate. The effect of a given monetary injection on interest rates is
larger in the short run under a two—tier exchange rate, however the duration

of those effects is larger in a fixed rate system. The same implications
apply for the effects of a devaluation which extracts the same long run
effects in both regimes.

Section II presents the model, Section III applies it to the analysis of
a monetary injection, and Section IV evaluates the adjustment to a devalua-

tion. Section V describes the case of rational expectations.

II. The Model
Let us consider a small, open economy, under either a fixed or a two—tier

exchange rate regime. The purpose of the analysis is to compare financial
adjustment to various shocks under the two alternative regimes.

To focus on

those aspects, let us take the case in which output is composed of one traded
good, and wage and price flexibility generates full employment, fixing real

output at its equilibrium level (y). The financial sector is based on the
work of Kouri and Porter (1974). There are three assets: domestic bonds,
foreign bonds, and domestic caoney balances. Foreign bonds are of the consol

—4—

type (perpetual annuity), whereas domestic bonds are short—term assets. If
the domestic bonds are treated as consols, disturbances may create capital

gains or losses on domestic bonds. However, this potential transmission does
not affect the main results of the analysis.

The domestic money supply consists exclusively of the liabilities of a

central bank, which holds both domestic and foreign currency assets. Domestic
bonds and money balances are held only by domestic citizens, and the country
is assumed to be too small to influence the foreign interest rate, r*.

The three assets are gross and imperfect substitutes, and the assets
demand functions are given by:

—*
r )

•V

=

demand for money

f(r, r )

•V

=

demand for foreign bonds

l(r,
(1)

—*

r

)

•V =

demand for domestic bonds.

where V is nominal wealth; and 1, f, x are the desired portfolio shares of
domestic money balances, foreign bonds, and domestic bonds. Each is a
function of the return on domestic bonds (r) and foreign bonds (j*) facing
domestic citizens.3 The signs of the partial effects of the various variables
are determined by the assumption of gross substutability.4 The analysis takes
the case in which inflation is zero, assuming real domestic expenditure to be
a function of real disposable income and the rates of return on the various
assets:

(2)

EE(yd,r,r) ;

O<1—E1<1 ;

—5—

E2 E3<O

where

is disposable real income. Suppose that interest payments on

public debt are financed completely by lump sum taxes. In such a case real
disposable income is given by:

(3) d+
where t is the (real) service account surplus. Let M and X denote nominal
money balances and domestic bonds. Asset market equilibrium is obtained
where:

(4)

1 • v = M

(5)

X.VX

Notice that the wealth constraint implies that x + ÷ f = 1.

Thus,

clearing two asset sub—markets is enough to ensure that all asset markets
clear.

II a. A Two—Tier Exchange Rate
Let e denote the exchange rate used for current account transactions.
C
The central bank is committed to pegging its value to a pre—announced level.

Let ef denote the exchange rate used for financial transactions. It is
allowed to fluctuate and to be market determined. In such a system, the
principal on foreign bonds must be acquired and repatriated at the financial

exchange rate (ef). Interest income, which is a current account item, must be
repatriated at the commercial rate. Nominal wealth is given by:

—6—

(6)

V=M+X+ef.-

where r* is the foreign interest rate.5 The market value of foreign bonds is
evaluated using the financial rate. Suppose that the choice of units is such
that the international price of the good is one, causing the domestic price to

be given by ec. In such a case, the real service account surplus is given by:

(7)

=

* F
=F
r (—v)

r
1

The price of a foreign bond is given by ef(—) . Such a bond will pay
next period interest of one unit of foreign exchange, which will be

repatriated at rate ec • Thus, the domestic return on foreign bonds r
is:6

e

(8)

r =—. r
f

The net return on foreign bonds should in principle include also the

expected capital gain due to expected depreciation. To simplify, let us start
the analysis with static expectations. Section V evaluates the case of
rational expectations. It is shown that the results of the paper hold for
both expectation mechanisms. The current account surplus is given by:

(9)

e(y+F—E)

In a two—tier system the stock of foreign bonds is not allowed to

adjust. Thus, the current account surplus increases the domestic money supply
by increasing the foreign asset component of the central bankts assets.

—7—

Assuming no active monetary policy, we get that over time:

(10)

=

e(y +

F — E)

A short run equilibrium is determined by the clearing of asset markets.
Because under a two—tier regime money supply can be adjusted only via a
current account surplus, money balances are given in the short run.

Therefore

there are two endogenous variables in the short run: the two rates of return
r, r

.

They are determined by eq. 4 and 5.

Curve xx, Figure one, describes combinations of the financial exchange
rate (ef) and domestic interest rate that are compatible with equilibrium in

the domestic market bonds (eq. 5). An increase in the domestic interest rate
results in excess demand for domestic bonds. To clear the market for domestic
bonds the return on foreign bonds should increase enough to eliminate the

excess demand for domestic bonds. Because r* is exogenously given, it implies

that ef should drop. Thus, x x is downward sloping. Curve mm, Figure one,
describes combinations of (r, ef) that are consistent with money market
equilibrium. An increase in the domestic interest rate results in an excess
supply of money balances. To clear the money market, the domestic return on
foreign bonds should drop, or ef should increase. Thus, mm is upward sloping.
The short run equilibrium is determined at the intersection of the two

curves. Long run equilibrium occurs only when the current account is
balanced. For example, if at point A we have a current account surplus, money

balances will increase over time. At a given financial exchange rate (ef)
higher money balances induce excess supply in the money market. This excess
is cleared by a drop in the interest rate, shifting mm to m'm'. At a given
financial eaxchange rate, higher money balances also imply higher nominal

—8—

wealth. This situation induces excess demand for domestic bonds which is
cleared by a drop in the domestic interest rate, shifting xx to x'x'. This
process will continue over time, till we reach current account equilibrium.
At this stage, assets holdings are at their long run equilibrium level.

II b. A Fixed Rate
Let e0 denote the exchange rate under a fixed rate regime. Because the

same rate is used for financial and commercial transactions, e = e = e
0
f
c
Because the exchange rate is unified, the domestic return on foreign assets is

exogenously given, at a rate r*. In the short run only the domestic interest
rate is endogenously determined, by eq. 5. Notice that with a fixed rate the
sum of money balances plus foreign bonds is a state variable, given in the

short run. Their desired composition is achieved by a swap7 which does not

change H + e0

.

Suppose that the exchange rate is given by e0 = 1.

A

short run equilibirum occurs at a point like A (Figure one), where curve RR
defines the interest rate that clears the market for domestic bonds for a

given M + e

*

•

F/r

.

Over time, M ÷

e0

•

F/r

*

is affected by a current

account surplus

(11)

If

F
M + e0 • —-— = e0(y + F —

at point A we get a current account surplus, RR will gradually shift

to the left. The effect of a current account surplus is to accumulate assets
over time. The increase in wealth induces excess demand for domestic bonds
which is cleared by a drop in the domestic interest rate (RR shifts to R'R').

This process will continue, till we reach current account equilibrium. At
this stage we get stock and flow asset market equilibrium.

—9—

The long run equilibrium under both regimes is found by adding to the
conditions defining short run equilibrium the requirement that the current

account should be balanced. Thus, money supply is endogenously determined in
the long run in both regimes, and a similar result obtains for the holdings of
foreign bonds in a fixed rate regime.

III. Adjustment to a Monetary Injection
In order to compare the adjustment process in the two exchange rate
regimes, suppose that we start from the same point of long run equilibrium,

point A (Figure one), where the exchange rate is one (e0

=

ef

=

e

1). To

make the comparison meaningful, let us consider policies that will generate

the same long run equilibrium under each of the two regimes. As section II
has shown, money balances are endogenous in the long run in both regimes.
Thus, an unexpected monetary injection, brought about by a lump—sum transfer,

is neutral in the long run. Let us compare in this section the impact effect
of such an injection and the adjustment to it under each regime.

III. a. The Impact Effect
Let us start with the case of a fixed exchange rate. At a given interst
rate the increase in money balances increases nominal wealth, resulting in

excess demand for domestic bonds. A short run equilibrium is obtained by a
decline of the interest rate, which drops enough to clear the domestic bond
market. RR. shifts to the left, and the short run equilibrium is obtained at

point C. The effect of the increase in money balances and the drop in
interest rate is to generate excess demand for foreign bonds at point C.
Equilibrium is obtained by an instantaneous swap of domestic money for foreign

bonds. From eq. 4 and 5 we obtain that under a fixed exchange rate the impact

—10—

effect of the monetary injection is:

=

(12)

(13)

ciF

=

— XrT

tr

< 0

VI + f
o

The main difference between a fixed rate and a two—tier regime is that
under the first regime the domestic return on foreign bonds is given and the
holdings of foreign bonds are allowed to adjust; whereas under the second
regime the holdings of foreign bonds are given and the domestic return on
—*
foreign bonds (r ) is allowed to adjust to clear the asset markets. As was
described in section II, the impact effect of a monetary injection is to shift
both mm and xx curves to the left to m'm', and x'x'; resulting in a lower
interest rate.

Notice that at the initial financial rate (ef =

1

=

e)

the value of

money plus foreign bonds is the same under a fixed rate and a two—tier

regime. Therefore, at the initial financial rate the same domestic interest
rate clears the market for domestic bonds under the two regimes. Thus the
short run equilibrium under a fixed rate (point C) is on curve x'x'. At point
C we get excess demand for foreign bonds resulting from a lower domestic

interest rate and higher nominal wealth. Under a fixed rate, this excess
demand is cleared by purchase of foreign bonds (via a swap). Under a two—tier
exchange rate, however, this channel is not open. The excess demand for
foreign bonds will bid up the financial exchange rate, reducing the domestic

return on foreign bonds. Therefore, if we wish to clear the market for both

—11—

domestic and foreign bonds we should move on curve x'x' upwards, to the
—*
This process will continue until r is depressed enough to clear the

left.

excess demand for foreign bonds. During this adjustment, the domestic
interest rate will drop to keep the market for domestic bonds in

equilibrium. Short run equilibrium will occur at a point like B.
Comparing the impact effect of the monetary injection under the two
regimes, we see that rates of return will be depressed more under a two—tier

regime. A quantity constraint in the market for foreign bonds magnifies the
needed adjustment of rates of return; and there is a trade—off between
quantity and rates of return adjustment.

Notice that the long run equilibrium

is at point A in both regimes. Thus the financial exchange

rate overshoots in

response to the monetary injection.

III.b. The Adjustment Process
At point B, the new short run equilibrium under a two—tier regime, we
observe lower rates of return on domestic and foreign assets. Lower interest
rates will encourage expenditure, generating a

current account deficit at

point B. Because a two—tier regime prevents the private sector from adjusting
its holding of foreign bonds (F), the current account deficit is matched by an

equivalent decline in money balances (and depletion of foreign reserves held

by the central bank). From eq. 10 we get that the impact effect on the
balance of payment is:

.

(14)

dM

——E2

dr

dM

dr
<0
—E3dM

Over time, the gradual reduction in money balances will slowly shift
m'm', x'x' curves to the right, moving us to the long run equilibrium at point

—12—

A. During this process we will observe a current account deficit,
appreciation of the financial rate, and an upward trend in rates of return
—*
r )

(r,

Under a fixed rate regime, short run equilibrium occurs at point C. The
impact effect of the monetary injection (dN) is to generate at this point a
current account adjustment, given by:

• *
dM+e.F/r
°
=
S

(15)

dM

(1—E

— — E2dM

1) dN

As eq. 12, 13 demonstrated, the effect of the monetary injection Is to

Increase holdings of domestic bonds (— > 0) and to reduce interest rates
< 0 .

Increasing

the holding of foreign bonds Implies a larger service

account surplus, whereas a lower interest rate increases

expenditure, Inducing

a current account deficit. To ensure stability, It is assumed that the second
effect dominates the first, such that at point C we get a current account

deficit. The effect of such a deficit is to reduce wealth gradually and to
increase the interest rate, shifting curve R'R' towards the long run

equuum A).
Comparing eq. 14 and 15, we find that the monetary injection induces
larger current account deficits under a two—tier regime. This occurs because
the drop in interest rates (r, —*
r ) Is smaller in the fixed exchange rate
regime, implying a larger increase in consumption under a two—tier regime. A
second force working to mitigate the current account deficit under a fixed
rate regime Is the increase in the service account surplus which results from
the swap of money balances for foreign bonds that occurs following the

monetary injection. Notice that the total accumulative current account
deficit during the adjustment to the long run equilibrium is the same under

—13—

the two exchange rate regimes, and is equal to the monetary injection. Thus,

we can conclude that the speed

of adjustment is lower under a fixed rate

regime than under a two—tier exchange rate regime.

IV. A Devaluation
Let us compare the adjustment process to a

magnitude under the two regimes (dee
run equilibrium conditions, a

=

de0

devaluation of the same

> 0). As can be seen from the long

devaluation is not neutral in the long run

because of the existence of a nominal asset whose holdings are exogenously

given: domestic bonds.8 It will be neutral only if it is coupled with an
devaluation rate; dX = X de0. As in
expansion of domestic bonds at the

Section III, the analysis in this section will compare the speed of adjustment
in the two regimes to the new long run equilibrium.

means of comparing the resulting current

This will be done by

account deficit under the two

regime. This comparison provides information on the speed of adjustment only
if the new long run equilibrium following the

devaluation is the same for both

regimes, because then the needed cumulative current account surplus is the

same. To be able to use this strategy, let us design the devaluation such as
to yield the same long run equilibrium

for both regimes. Consider the case in

which we start from an equivalent long run equilibrium in both regimes, and an
unexpected devaluation occurs which is coupled with an expansion of domestic

bonds at the devaluation rate. (I.e. de0 = de C > 0; dX = Xde0 )
Alternatively, take the case of a simple devaluation in an economy whose
domestic bonds are indexed to the price level,because in such a case a
devaluation is neutral in the long run without any expansion of domestic
bonds.

—14—

Iv. a. The Impact Effect
Following the devaluation we get an expansion of domestic wealth at a
smaller rate than the rate of expansion in the nominal value of domestic

bonds. Thus, we get an excess supply of domestic bonds which is cleared in a
fixed rate regime by an increase in interest rates:

(16)

de

o

0
V•X.r

In terms of Figure two, we move to a new short run equilibrium at point
C.

In moving from A to C, we observe a readjustment of the portfolio

composition; which is achieved by swaping foreign bonds for money balances.

Thus, at the new short run equilibrium we get higher nominal balances and
lower holdings of foreign bonds relative to the initial equilibrium.

Under a two—tier regime the devaluation applies only for the commercial

rate. At a given financial rate the devaluation generates an excess supply of
domestic bonds (because the value of domestic bonds increases at a rate higher

than the expansion in wealth). Thus, in order to clear the market for
domestic bonds, the domestic interest rate should go up, shifting curve xx to

x'x'. Notice that for a financial rate that equals the new fixed exchange
rate, wealth is equal in both regimes for the same interest rate. Thus, for

e =
f

both

1

+ de
0

,

the same interest rate clears the market for domestic bonds in

regimes, implying that point C is on curve x'x'. At point C we get

excess demand for money balances and an excess supply of foreign bonds. Under
a fixed rate regime this portfolio composition disequilibrium is cleared by an

instantaneous swap. Under a two—tier regime, however, the stock of foreign
bonds is not allowed to adjust, and money balances can adjust only over
time. Therefore the rates of return (r, r—*) should adjust moving us on xtxt

—15—

to the new short run equilibrium.

Notice that moving on x'x' upward implies

lower rates of return on both domestic and foreign assets, whereas moving

downward implies the opposite. Thus, short run

equilibrium in a two—tier

C, at points like B or B'.
regime can occur only on the position of x'x' below

There are two opposing forces at work on curve mm: at a given financial
exchange rate we get a higher return on foreign assets (because dec > 0)

reducing the demand for money. At the same time, the nominal wealth expansion
works to increase the demand for domestic money.

As a result, curve mm can

shift in either direction, but in any case we can conclude that following the
def

devaluation ---— < 1 •

Because such a devaluation is neutral in the long run,

we can conclude that the financial rate will undershoot its new long run
equilibrium level (which is 1 + dec).

Comparing the short run adjustment in the two regimes, we see that rates
of return will adjust upward more under a

two—tier regime. As in the case of

monetary expansion, we find that quantity constraint on foreign bonds shifts
the burden of adjustment in the short run to rates of return.

IV. b. The Adjustment Process
The increase in the rates of return will reduce consumption, inducing a
current account surplus at the new short run equilibrium. In a two—tier
will
regime this implies a gradual increase in domestic money balances which
gradually shift m'm', x'x' to the left, moving us over time towards the new

long run equilibrium (point D). During

this adjustment, both rates of return

will decline, assets value will increase, and the financial exchange rate will
depreciate.

Under a fixed rate regime, short run equilibrium occurs at point C, where
the increase in the domestic interest rate generates a current account

—16—

surplus. Over time the resulting accumulation of foreign assets will
gradually move us along line CD towards the new long run equilibrium. During
this process the domestic interest rate will fall, to accommodate the increase

in assets. Final equilibrium under both regimes occurs at point D. The long
run effect of the devaluation is to Increase the reserve holdings in the

central bank, otherwise the devaluation is neutral. Notice that we arrive at
the neutrality only because we assumed that the devaluation was accompanied by
the right expansion of domestic bonds, or alternatively that domestic bonds
were indexed to the price level.
In both regimes the current account surplus following the devaluation is:

dM+e
.

(17)—

.

*

Fir

de =(1—E1)———E2——E3—

where under a fixed rate regime de = de0,
regime de = dec

*

dr

dr

dF

,

= 0.

—*

dr = o

; and under a two—tier

Using the analysis of this section we conclude that

the devaluation will Induce a larger current account surplus under a two—tier

regime. As in the case of a monetary expansion, there are two reasons
explaining this: first, the Interest rate will respond more under a two—tier
regime. Next, under a fixed rate regime we get an adjustment in the service

account surplus following the devaluation. Because of the swap of foreign
bonds for money, we find a decrease in the service account surplus which

reduces the current account surplus. Such an adjustment does not occur in a
two—tier regime. In both regimes the accumulative current account surplus
during the adjustment process to the new equilibrium is the same, equal to
M • de

,

where N is the money holdings at the initial equilibrium.

Therefore, we can conclude that the speed of adjustment is lower under a fixed
rate regime relative to a two—tier regime.

—17—

V. The Role of Expectations
The previous discussion assumed static expectations. In such a case
assets holders in a two—tier regime ignore expected capital gains on foreign

bonds due to expected depreciation of the financial rate. The purpose of this
section is to analyze how allowing for rational expectations modifies the

results. It turns out that all the previous results stay intact. The effect
of rational expectation is only to mitigate the short run deviation of the
financial exchange rate from its long run level under a two—tier regime.
However, even with rational expectations rates of return will adjust more in
the short run under a two—tier regime relative to a fixed rate; and the
adjustment will be slower in a fixed rate relative to a two—tier regime.
The new aspect of rational expectation is that now the net domestic
return on holdings of foreign bonds is:
I

*=_!s.

(8')

ef

r*+—
ef

The second term reflects the expected capital gains due to future

depreciation of the financial, exchange rate. Notice that under a unified
exchange rate net domestic return on foreign bonds equals the foreign interest

rate. Thus, adding rational expectations under a fixed rate does not alter
the discussion. Under a two—tier regime short run equilibrium is defined, as
before, by eq. 4 and 5, using eq. 8' as the relevant net rate of return on

holding of foreign bonds. The adjustment is governed by eq. 10 (using the

modified

—*
r ).

Taking a linear approximation of the economy arrouned the long

run equilibrium we can describe the system by the following two—motion
equation:

—18—

ef =

M)

g1(ef,

(18)

M =

g2(ef,M)

For given values of H, ef, we get the interest rate that clears the

domestic bonds market by means of eq. 5. Assuming that the necessary
conditions for saddle path stability hold, we get that around the long run
equilibrium

(19)

ef = O(ef —

ef)

where ef is the long run value of the financial exchange rate.9 Thus, for a
given financial exchange rate ef we get

—*
(20)

e

•

C

r =

r*

+ O(ef —

ef)

ef
As in section II, we can plot curves xx, mm describing the short run

equilibrium. The slope of xx is given by:

def

=

XrV

—

X

Vef X* {ef.6 + e.r*}/e

The case of static expectation is where 0

0. Notice that allowing for

rational expectation (0 > 0) will make xx flatter. Let xx5 be the xx curve
under static expectations, and point H some point on it, with ef > ef (see

figure 3). For ef > ef we expect appreciation, implying a lower net return on
foreign assets under rational expectations. This works to increase the demand
for domestic bonds. Thus, at point H we get excess demand for domestic bonds

—19--

under rational expectations. Thus, for a given ef a lower interest rate will
clear the market for domestic bonds, at a point like H'. In a similar way,
for ef < e we expect depreciation, implying that we need a higher interest
rate to clear the domestic bonds market under rational expectations.

In a

similar way, curve mm is flatter under rational expectations.

Let us analyze the effect of a monetary injection. Suppose that we

start with long run equilibrium at point A. As in Section III, under a fixed
rate short run equilibrium is at point C. Notice that for ef =

depreciation is zero. Thus, for ef = Cf

,

Cf

expected

the xx and mut curves shift by the

same distance under static and rational expectations. Because both curves are
flatter with rational expectations, short run equilibrium under a two—tier

regime is at a point like B'. Point B is no longer equilibrium because at
this point we expect appreciation, implying that at point B we get an excess

demand for domestic bonds and an excess supply of foreign bonds. This is
cleared by a drop in the financial rate which works to Increase net domestic

return on foreign bonds sufficiently to clear both markets. Thus, allowing
for rational expectation we need smaller overshooting of the financial rate
following the monetary injection, because part of the drop in net return on

foreign assets is captured by the expected appreciation. Notice, however,
that compared with the fixed rate case, we find that under a two—tier exchange
rate regime, even with rational expectations, we get in the short run a larger
drop in net returns on assets (compare point B' to point c).

Because we observe in the short run lower net rates of return in a two—
tier regime, we get a larger current account surplus, and the argument of

Section III is not modified by the existence of rational expectations. The
discussion of this Section applies also for the case of unexpected

depreciation. Allowing for rational expectation, we get that under a two—tier

—20—

regime short run equilibrium is at points like (H, H') instead of (B, B'), Figure two.

All the results of Section IV stay intact. Notice that allowing for rational
expectation we get a smaller depreciation of the financial exchange rate
following a monetary injection, and a larger depreciation following a
devaluation of the commercial rate relative to the case of static

expectation. That is because in the first case the long run equilibrium
financial rate does not change, whereas it goes up in the second case.

—21—

Comments

1.

Their studies showed that a two—tier regime can isolate (under certain
conditions) the effects of foreign interest rate disturbances, and that
the normative aspect of such isolation is questionable.

2. For a study of sterilization in a fixed exchange rate regime see Herring
and Marston (1977).

3. The main results of the analysis stay intact if we allow for a positive
but less than unit wealth effect on assets demand (implying that the
desired portfolio share itself is a function of wealth).

4. Thus 11 , 12

f1 ,

x2 <

0 ;

,

f2

> U (where for g(X1, x2)

—

81

5.

x.1

It is assumed that the private sector ignores the composition of the
central bank's balance sheet in arriving at portfolio decisions, and that
agents do not capitalize the stream of tax liabilities associated with the
government debt.

6. For a discussion of the domestic return on foreign bonds under a two—tier
regime in a stochastic world see Flood and Marion (1982).

7. For a discussion of such an adjustment process in a fixed rate regime see
Frenkel and Rodriguez (1975).

8. The non—neutrality is the result of the assumptions described in comment 5.

9. Let A be the stable root of the above system (A < U). Under a saddle—path

adjustment we get that M a + b • eAt
ef =

O(ef

—

ef)

where 0 = — A.

—22—

,

ef

=

+

d •

eXt

.

Thus,

References

Branson, W.H., 1974, Stocks and Flows in International Monetary Analysis,
in :

A. Ando, R. Herring and R. Marston, eds. International aspects

of stabilization policies (Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston).

Dornbusch, R., 1976, The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and
Macroeconomic Policy, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78, 255—75.

Flood, R.P. and N.P. Marion, 1982, The Transmission of Disturbances Under
Alternative Exchange Rate Regime With Optimal Indexing, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 95, 45—62.

Frenkel, J. and Rodriguez, C., 1975, Portfolio Equilibrium and the Balance

of Payments: A Monetary Approach, American Economic Review Vol. 65,
December, pp. 674—88.

Herring, R. and Marston R.

1977, National Monetary Policies and

International Financial Markets. New York: Elsevier—North—HolJ.and.

Kouri, P.J.K. and M.G. Porter, 1974, International Capital Flows and
Portfolio Equilibrium, Jounral of Political Economy 82, 443—467.

Marion, N.P., Insulation Properties of a Two—Tier Exchange Market in a
Portfolio Balance Model, Economica, Feb. 1981, 48(189), pp. 61—70.

—23—

m' (M')

ef

x

I

/

/
/

/

/
m(M)

R(M+e.F/r*)

/
/

B

e0 =1

/

/
/

c.

\
\' (M')
R'
r

Figure 1

Adjustment to a Monetary Injection

ef

\R

R'

\
1+ de

m

\

C

B

'H'

'.\

e0 =1

\

\

m

R
r

Adjustment to a Deva1uaton

ef
x

S

M

S

x
N

-,
e0 =1
'N
x
N

x

N

S

S

r

F igure3

The Role of Expectations

