                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SYSTEMIC CRISES AND GROWTH

                                        Romain Ranciere
                                         Aaron Tornell
                                       Frank Westermann

                                       Working Paper 11076
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11076


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2005




We thank Jess Benhabib, Ariel Burstein, Roberto Chang, Daniel Cohen, Raquel Fernandez, Pierre
Gourinchas, Thorvaldur Gylfason, Jurgen von Hagen, Lutz Hendricks, Olivier Jeanne, Kai Konrad,
Fabrizio Perri, Thomas Piketty, Joris Pinkse, Carmen Reinhart, Hans-Werner Sinn, Carolyn Sissoko,
Jaume Ventura, Fabrizio Zilibotti, and seminar participants at Bonn, DELTA, ESSIM, ECB, Harvard,
IIES, IMF, Munich, NBER and NYU for helpful comments. Chiarra Sardelli, Guillermo Vuletin,
and Mary Yang provided excellent research assistance.

© 2005 by Romain Ranciere, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Systemic Crises and Growth
Romain Ranciere, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann
NBER Working Paper No. 11076
January 2005, Revised November 2006
JEL No. F34,F36,F43,O41

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we document the fact that countries that have experienced occasional financial crises
have, on average, grown faster than countries with stable financial conditions. We measure the incidence
of crisis with the skewness of credit growth, and find that it has a robust negative effect on GDP growth.
This link coexists with the negative link between variance and growth typically found in the literature.
To explain the link between crises and growth we present a model where contract enforce-ability problems
generate borrowing constraints and impede growth. In the set of financially liberalized countries with
a moderate degree of contract enforceability, systemic risk-taking relaxes borrowing constraints and
increases investment. This leads to higher mean growth, but also to greater incidence of crises. We
find that the negative link between skewness and growth is indeed strongest in this set of countries,
validating the restrictions imposed by the model's equilibrium.

Romain Ranciere                                     Frank Westermann
International Monetary Fund                         Department of Economics
Research Department, 9-612                          Rolandstr. 8
700 19th Street NW                                  49069 Osnabrueck, Germany
Washington, DC 20431                                Frank.Westermann@uni-osnabrueck.de
rranciere@imf.org

Aaron Tornell
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Ave, Bunche Hall #8283
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
tornell@econ.ucla.edu
1        Introduction

In this paper we show that over the last four decades countries that have experienced financial crises
have, on average, grown faster than countries with stable financial conditions. To explain this fact
we present a theoretical mechanism in which systemic risk taking mitigates financial bottlenecks
and increases growth in countries with weak institutions. Systemic risk, however, also leads to
occasional crises. We then show that the set of countries to which our mechanism applies in theory
is closely identified with the countries that have experienced fast growth and crises in the data.
        We use the skewness of real credit growth as a de facto measure of systemic-risk. During
a systemic crisis there is a large and abrupt downward jump in credit growth. Since crises only
happen occasionally, these negative outliers tilt the distribution to the left. Thus, in a large enough
sample, crisis-prone economies tend to exhibit lower skewness than economies with stable financial
conditions. We provide evidence of a strong correspondence between skewness and several crisis
indexes. In particular, we show that crises are the principal source of negative skewness once we
have controlled for large exogenous shocks such as war and large scale deterioration in the terms
of trade.
        We choose not to use variance to capture the uneven progress associated with financial fragility
because high variance captures not only rare, large and abrupt contractions, but also frequent and
symmetric shocks. In contrast, skewness specifically captures asymmetric and abnormal patterns
in the distribution of credit growth and thus can identify the risky paths that exhibit rare, large
and abrupt credit busts.1
        We estimate a set of regressions that adds the three moments of credit growth to standard
growth equations. We find a negative link between per-capita GDP growth and the skewness of
real credit growth. This link is robust across alternative specifications and sample periods and is
independent of the negative eﬀect on growth due to variance that is typically found in the literature.
The positive link between systemic crises and growth is confirmed when systemic banking crisis
indicators are used instead of skewness.
        Thailand and India illustrate the choices available to countries with weak institutions. While
India followed a path of slow but steady growth, Thailand experienced high growth, lending booms
and crisis (see Figure 1). GDP per capita grew by only 114% between 1980 and 2002 in India,
whereas Thailand’s GDP per capita grew by 162%, despite the eﬀects of a major crisis.
        The link between skewness and growth is economically important. Our benchmark estimates
indicate that about a third of the diﬀerence in growth between India and Thailand can be attributed
to systemic risk taking. Needless to say this finding does not imply that financial crises are good
for growth. It suggests, however, that high growth paths are associated with the undertaking of
    1
    In the finance literature, skewness is used to characterize the presence of abnormal downside risk. The literature
review section provides references.


                                                          1
systemic risk and with the occurrence of occasional crises.
    To interpret the link between skewness and growth we present a model in which high growth
and a greater incidence of crises are part of an internally consistent mechanism. In the model,
contract enforceability problems imply that growth is stymied by borrowing constraints. In a
financially liberalized economy, systemic risk taking reduces the eﬀective cost of capital and relaxes
borrowing constraints. This allows for greater investment and growth as long as a crash does not
occur. Of course, when a crash does occur the short-term eﬀects of the sudden collapse in financial
intermediation are severe. Since a crash is inevitable in a risky economy, whether systemic risk
taking is growth enhancing or not is open to question. The key contribution of our model is to
show that whenever systemic risk arises, it increases mean growth even if crises have arbitrarily
large output and financial distress costs.
    Our theoretical mechanism implies that the link between systemic risk and growth is strongest
in the set of financially liberalized economies with a moderate degree of contract enforceability.
In the second part of our empirical analysis, we test this identification restriction and find strong
support for it.
    This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 presents the
empirical analysis. Sections 4 and 5 present a literature review and our conclusions. The appendix
contains some extensions of the model and the description of the data used in the regression analysis.
Finally, an extended appendix contains the proofs and presents some additional empirical results.


2    Model

Here, we present a stochastic Ak growth model where high growth depends on the nature of the
financial system. Fast growth takes place either when contracts are easily enforced or when con-
tracts are only moderately enforceable, but systemic risk taking supports high levels of investment.
In the appendix we present a decreasing returns version of the model. Because our model gener-
ates a positive link between systemic risk and growth when financial institutions are moderately
strong, the identifying restrictions considered in the empirical section select out countries with this
characteristic.
    We consider an economy where imperfect contract enforceability generates borrowing constraints
as agents cannot commit to repay debt. This financial bottleneck leads to low growth because
investment is constrained by firms’ internal funds. When the government promises —either explicitly
or implicitly— to bail out lenders in case of a systemic crisis, financial liberalization may induce
agents to coordinate in undertaking insolvency risk. Since taxpayers will repay lenders in the
eventuality of a systemic crisis, risk taking reduces the eﬀective cost of capital and allows borrowers
to attain greater leverage. Greater leverage allows for greater investment, which leads to greater


                                                  2
future internal funds, which in turn will lead to more investment and so on. This is the leverage eﬀect
through which systemic risk increases investment and growth along the no-crisis path. Systemic
risk taking, however, also leads to aggregate financial fragility and to occasional crises.
      Crises are costly. Widespread bankruptcies entail severe deadweight losses. Furthermore, the
resultant collapse in internal funds depresses new credit and investment, hampering growth. Can
systemic risk taking increase long-run growth by compensating for the eﬀects of enforceability
problems? Yes. If contract enforceability problems are severe —so that borrowing constraints arise—
but not too severe —so that the leverage eﬀect is strong, then a risky economy will, on average,
grow faster than a safe economy even if crisis costs are arbitrarily large.

Setup
      During each period the economy can be either in a good state (Ωt = 1), with probability u, or
in a bad state (Ωt = 0). To allow for the endogeneity of systemic risk, we assume that there are
two production technologies: a safe one and a risky one. Under the safe technology, production
is perfectly uncorrelated with the state, while under the risky one the correlation is perfect. For
concreteness, we assume that the risky technology has a return Ωt+1 θ, and the safe return is σ
                                                              ⎧
                                                              ⎨ θI r prob u, u ∈ (0, 1)
                         saf e                      risky         t
                        qt+1   = σIts ,            qt+1     =                                                     (1)
                                                              ⎩ 0    prob 1 − u

where Its is the investment in the safe technology and Itr is the investment in the risky one.2
Production is carried out by a continuum of firms with measure one. The investable funds of a
firm consist of its internal funds wt plus the one-period debt it issues bt . Thus, the firm’s budget
constraint is
                                                  wt + bt = Its + Itr                                             (2)

The debt issued by firms promises to repay Lt+1 := bt [1 + ρt ] in the next period. It is acquired by
international investors who are competitive risk-neutral agents with an opportunity cost of funds
equal to the international interest rate r.
      In order to generate both borrowing constraints and systemic risk, we follow Schneider and
Tornell (2004) and assume that firm financing is subject to two credit market imperfections: con-
tract enforceability problems and systemic bailout guarantees. We model these imperfections by
assuming that firms are run by overlapping generations of managers who live for two periods and
cannot commit to repay debt. In the first period of her life, for example t, a manager chooses
investment and whether to set up a diversion scheme. At t + 1 the firm is solvent if revenue is
  2
      Since we will focus on symmetric equilibria, we will not distinguish individual from aggregate variables.




                                                             3
greater than the promised debt repayment:


                                              π t+1 = qt+1 − Lt+1 > 0                                     (3)


If the firm is solvent at t + 1 and there is no diversion, the now old manager receives [d − τ ]π t+1
and consumes it, the government is paid taxes of τ π t+1 , the young manager receives [1 − d]π t+1 and
lenders get their promised repayment. If the firm is insolvent at t+1, all output is lost in bankruptcy
procedures. In this case, old managers get nothing, no tax is paid, and lenders receive the bailout
if any is granted. If the firm is solvent and there is diversion, the firm defaults strategically, the
old manager takes [d − τ ]qt+1 , and the rest of the output is lost in bankruptcy procedures. Lenders
receive the bailout if any is granted. Finally, if the firm defaults, the young manager receives an aid
payment from the government (at+1 ) that can be arbitrarily small.3 Thus, a firm’s internal funds
evolve according to
                                 ⎧
                                 ⎨ [1 − d]π            if qt+1 > Lt+1 and no diversion
                                            t+1
                        wt+1   =                                                                          (4)
                                 ⎩ at+1                otherwise

In the initial period internal funds are w0 = [1 − d]w−1 and the tax is τ w−1 .
      For concreteness, we make the following two assumptions.

Contract Enforceability Problems.                  If at time t the manager incurs a non-pecuniary cost
        h · [wt + bt ][d − τ ], then at t + 1 she will be able to divert provided the firm is solvent.

Systemic Bailout Guarantees.                  If a majority of firms becomes insolvent, the government pays
        lenders the outstanding debts of all defaulting firms. Otherwise, no bailout is granted.

      Since guarantees are systemic, the decisions of managers are interdependent and are determined
in the following credit market game. During each period, every young manager proposes a plan
Pt = (Itr , Its , bt , ρt ) that satisfies the budget constraint (2). Lenders then decide whether to fund
these plans. Finally, every young manager makes a diversion decision η t , where η t = 1 if the
manager sets up a diversion scheme, and zero otherwise. The problem of a young manager is thus
to choose an investment plan Pt and a diversion strategy η t to maximize her expected payoﬀ:


              max Et ξ t+1 ([1 − η t ][qt+1 − Lt+1 ] + η t [qt+1 − h[wt + bt ]]) (d − τ )     s.t. (2),   (5)
               Pt ,ηt


where ξ t+1 = 1 if qt+1 > Lt+1 , and zero otherwise.
      Bailouts are financed by taxing solvent firms’ profits at a rate τ < d. The tax rate is set such that
the expected present value of taxes equals the expected present value of bailout plus aid payments.
  3
      The aid payment is necessary to restart the economy in the wake of a systemic crisis.


                                                           4
To ensure that the bailout scheme does not involve a net transfer from abroad we impose the
following fiscal solvency condition

                P
                ∞          ©                                                    ª                      1
           Et         δ j−t ξ t+j+1 π t+j+1 τ − [1 − ξ t+j+1 ][at+j+1 + Lt+j+1 ] |τ <d = 0, δ ≡                    (6)
                j=0                                                                                   1+r

Finally, we define financial liberalization as a policy environment that does not constrain risk
taking by firms and thus allows firms to finance any type of investment plan that is acceptable to
international investors.


2.1      Discussion of the Setup

To make it clear that the positive link between growth and systemic risk in our mechanism does
not derive from the assumption that risky projects have a greater mean return than safe ones, we
restrict the risky technology to have an expected return (uθ) that is lower than the safe one (σ)


                                            δ −1 ≡ 1 + r ≤ uθ < σ < θ                                              (7)


The condition uθ < σ implies that the moral hazard induced by the guarantees supports lending to
ineﬃcient projects. Nevertheless, because an equilibrium with risky projects is also an equilibrium
with high leverage and high investment, the risky equilibrium can exhibit greater mean growth—as
shown by Proposition 2.2.4 The condition 1 + r ≤ uθ guarantees that both projects have a positive
net present value.
       The mechanism linking growth with the propensity to crisis requires that both borrowing con-
straints and systemic risk arise simultaneously in equilibrium in a financially liberalized economy.
In most of the literature, there are models with either borrowing constraints or systemic risk, but
not both. In our setup, in order to have both it is necessary that enforceability problems interact
with systemic bailout guarantees. If only enforceability problems were present, lenders would be
cautious and the equilibrium would feature borrowing constraints, but lenders would not allow
firms to risk insolvency. If only systemic guarantees were present, there would be no borrowing
constraints, so risk taking would not be growth enhancing.
       It is necessary that guarantees be systemic. If bailouts were granted whenever there was an
idiosyncratic default, borrowing constraints would not arise because lenders would always be repaid
—by the government.
       The government’s only role is to transfer fiscal resources from no-crisis states to crisis states.
The fiscal solvency condition (6) implies that in crisis times the government can borrow at the
   4
     In other words, because higher average growth derives from an increase in borrowing ability due to the undertaking
of systemic risk, the mechanism does not depend on the existence of a ‘mean-variance’ channel. That is, the mechanism
does not require that high variance technologies have a higher expected return than low variance technologies.



                                                          5
world interest rate —or that it has access to an international lender of last resort— to bail out foreign
lenders, and that it repays this debt in no-crisis times by taxing solvent domestic firms. In the
extended appendix, we present evidence on bailouts that supports these assumptions.
    Managers receive an exogenous share d of profits. The advantage of this assumption and of
the overlapping generations structure is that we can analyze financial decisions period-by-period.
Among other things, we do not have to take into account the eﬀect of the firm’s value —i.e. the
future discounted profits of the firm— on a manager’s decision to default strategically. This is
especially useful in our setting, where financial decisions are interdependent across agents due to
the systemic nature of bailout guarantees.
    Our model is designed to be simple enough to make transparent the link between growth and
systemic risk. Next, we discuss three extensions of the model that clarify how the mechanism
works in more complicated situations. In the current setup, there are two states of nature, and
the agents’ choice of production technology determines whether or not systemic risk arises. This
is a simple way to represent the basic mechanism underlying more realistic situations like currency
mismatch, where insolvency risk arises endogenously because firms that produce for the domestic
market issue debt denominated in foreign currency. Modelling currency mismatch makes the
analysis more complicated because one needs to consider two sectors and characterize the behavior
of their relative price. In the appendix, we describe how a mechanism analogous to ours emerges
in a two-sector economy where systemic risk is generated by currency mismatch.
    Our simple Ak set-up allows us to simplify the presentation dramatically, but it has implausible
implications for the world income distribution and the world interest rate in the very long run.
In the appendix we present a version of the model with decreasing returns technologies. We show
that systemic risk accelerates growth if the level of income is suﬃciently low, but does not increase
growth indefinitely. When the economy becomes rich, it must switch to a safe path.
    Finally, taxes in our current setup do not distort the incentives to divert income. In the proof
of Proposition 2.1, we also consider an extension with a distortionary setup where old managers of
solvent non-diverting firms are taxed, but those of diverting firms are not taxed. We find the same
equilibria without diversion as those we describe in Proposition 2.1 below. However, more stringent
conditions must be imposed on u and the tax rate on old managers must lie below a threshold.


2.2    Equilibrium Risk Taking

In this subsection, we characterize the conditions under which borrowing constraints and systemic
risk can arise simultaneously in a symmetric equilibrium. Define a systemic crisis as a situation
where a majority of firms goes bust, and denote the probability at date t that this event occurs in
the next period by 1 − ζ t+1 , where ζ t+1 equals either u or 1. Then, a plan (Itr , Its , bt , ρt ) is part of
a symmetric equilibrium if it solves the representative manager’s problem, taking ζ t+1 and wt as


                                                      6
given.
       The next proposition characterizes symmetric equilibria at a point in time. It makes three key
points. First, binding borrowing constraints arise in equilibrium, and investment is constrained by
internal funds only if contract enforceability problems are severe:


                               0 ≤ h < [1 + r]ζ t+1 ≡ h̄t+1 ,        ζ t+1 ∈ {1, u}                             (8)


Lenders are willing to lend up to the point where borrowers do not find it optimal to divert. When
(8) does not hold, the expected debt repayment is lower than the diversion cost h[wt + bt ] for all
levels of bt , and no diversion takes place. Thus, when (8) does not hold, lenders are willing to lend
any amount. Secondly, systemic risk taking eases, but does not eliminate, borrowing constraints
and allows firms to invest more than under a safe plan. This is because systemic risk taking allows
agents to exploit the subsidy implicit in the guarantees and thus they face a lower expected cost
of capital. Thirdly, systemic risk may arise endogenously in a liberalized economy only if bailout
guarantees are present. Guarantees, however, are not enough. It is also necessary that a majority of
agents coordinates in taking on insolvency risk, that crises be rare, and that contract enforceability
problems are not ‘too severe’ (h>h):

                                        £                                    ¤1/2
                             σ − θu2     (σ − θu2 )2 − 4uδ −1 (1 − u)(σ − θu)
                        h :=          −                                                                         (9)
                             2(1 − u)                   2(1 − u)

When h is too small, taking on risk does not pay because the increase in leverage is too small to
compensate for the risk of insolvency.

Proposition 2.1 (Symmetric Credit Market Equilibria (CME)) Borrowing constraints arise
in equilibrium only if the degree of contract enforceability is not too high: h < h̄t+1 . If this condition
holds, then:

   1. There always exists a ‘safe’ CME in which all firms only invest in the safe technology and a
         systemic crisis in the next period cannot occur (ζ t+1 = 1).

   2. Under financial liberalization there also exists a ‘risky’ CME in which ζ t+1 = u and all firms
         invest in the risky technology if and only if crises are rare events (u > 0.5) and h > h.

   3. In both safe and risky CMEs, credit and investment are constrained by internal funds:

                                                                                              1
                  bt = [mt − 1]wt ,          It = mt wt ,               with mt =                         .    (10)
                                                                                      1 − (ζ t+1 )−1 hδ

       The intuition underlying the safe equilibrium is the following.5 Given that all other managers
   5
    We show in the proof that if taxes are imposed only on old managers of solvent non-diverting firms (as described
in subsection 2.1), the equilibria of Proposition 2.1 exist provided τ old < dh/uθ and u is large enough.


                                                         7
choose a safe plan, a manager knows that no bailout will be granted next period. Since lenders
must break-even, the manager must internalize the insolvency risk. Thus, she will choose a safe
technology, which has a greater expected return than the risky technology (i.e., σ > uθ). Since
the firm will not go bankrupt in any state, the interest rate that the manager has to oﬀer satisfies
1 + ρt = 1 + r. It follows that lenders will be willing to lend up to an amount that makes the no
diversion constraint binding: (1 + r)bt ≤ h(wt + bt ). By substituting this borrowing constraint in
the budget constraint we can see that there is a financial bottleneck: investment equals internal
funds times a multiplier (Its = wt ms , where ms = (1 − hδ)−1 ).6
       Consider now the risky equilibrium. Given that all other managers choose a risky plan, a young
manager expects a bailout in the bad state, but not in the good state. The key point is that since
lenders will get repaid in full in both states, the interest rate allowing lenders to break even is again
1 + ρt = 1 + r. It follows that the benefits of a risky no-diversion plan derive from the fact that,
from the firm’s perspective, expected debt repayments are reduced from 1 + r to [1 + r]u, as the
government will repay debt in the bad state. A lower cost of capital eases the borrowing constraint
as lenders will lend up to an amount that equates u[1 + r]bt to h[wt + bt ]. Thus, investment is higher
than in a safe plan. The downside of a risky plan is that it entails a probability 1 − u of insolvency.
Will the two benefits of a risky plan —more and cheaper funding— be large enough to compensate
for the cost of bankruptcy in the bad state? If h is suﬃciently high, the leverage eﬀect ensures
that expected profits under a risky plan exceed those under a safe plan: uπ rt+1 > π st+1 . Note that
the requirement that crises be rare events (i.e. that u be large) is necessary in order to prevent
diversion. A high u rules out scams where the manager oﬀers a very large repayment in the bad
state and diverts all funds in the good state. Since the firm must be solvent in order for diversion
to occur, when u is large enough the manager will not find it optimal to oﬀer a diversion plan.
       Finally, there is no CME in which both I r > 0 and I s > 0. The restrictions on returns and the
existence of bankruptcy costs rule out such an equilibrium. Since in a safe equilibrium no bailout
is expected, a firm has no incentive to invest any amount in the risky technology as its expected
return, uθ, is lower than the safe return, σ. In a risky equilibrium, firms have no incentive to invest
any amount in the safe technology as in the bad state all output is lost in bankruptcy procedures,
and in the good state the risky return is greater than the safe (σ < θ).


2.3      Economic Growth

We have loaded the dice against finding a positive link between growth and systemic risk. First,
we have restricted the expected return on the risky technology to be lower than the safe return
(θu < σ). Secondly, we have allowed crises to have large financial distress costs as internal funds
   6
    This is a standard result in the macroeconomics literature on credit market imperfections, e.g. Bernanke et. al.
(2000) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).



                                                         8
collapse in the wake of crisis, i.e., the aid payment (at+1 ) can be arbitrarily small.
    Here we investigate whether systemic risk is growth-enhancing in the presence of borrowing
constraints by comparing two symmetric equilibria, safe and risky. In a safe (risky) equilibrium in
every period agents choose the safe (risky) plan characterized in Proposition 2.1. We ask whether
average growth in a risky equilibrium is higher than in a safe equilibrium.
    The answer to this question is not straightforward because an increase in the probability of
crisis, 1 − u, has opposing eﬀects on growth. One the one hand, when 1 − u increases, so does the
subsidy implicit in the bailout guarantee. This in turn raises the leverage ratio of firms and the
level of investment and growth along the lucky no-crisis path. On the other hand, an increase in
1 − u also makes crises more frequent, which reduces average growth. In what follows we assume
that the aid payment is a share α of the internal funds that the firm would have received had no
crisis occurred
                               at+1 = α[1 − d]π rt+1 |(Ωt+1 =1) ,          α ∈ (0, 1)                             (11)

The smaller α, the greater the financial distress costs of crises. Assumption (11) implies that
although a richer economy experiences a greater absolute loss than a poor economy, in the after-
math of crisis the richer economy remains richer than the poor economy. Below, we discuss the
implications of assuming instead that at+1 is a constant.
    In a safe symmetric equilibrium, crises never occur, i.e. ζ t+1 = 1 in every period. Thus, internal
                           s
funds evolve according to wt+1 = [1 − d]π st+1 , where profits are π st+1 = [σ − h]ms wt . It follows that
the growth rate, g s , is given by

                                                                                         1
                        1 + g s = [1 − d][σ − h]ms ≡ γ s ,                     ms =                               (12)
                                                                                      1 − hδ

Since σ > 1 + r, the lower h, the lower the growth rate.
    Consider now a risky symmetric equilibrium. Since firms use the risky technology, ζ t+1 = u
every period. Thus, there is a probability u that firms will be solvent at t + 1 and their internal
funds will be wt+1 = [1−d]π rt+1 , where π rt+1 = [θ−u−1 h]mr wt . However, with probability 1−u firms
will be insolvent at t + 1 and their internal funds will equal the aid payment: wt+1 = at+1 . Since
crises can occur in consecutive periods, growth rates are independent and identically distributed
over time. Thus, the mean growth rate is

                                                                                                  1
       E(1 + g r ) = [u + α(1 − u)]γ n ,       γ n = [1 − d][θ − u−1 h]mr ,           mr =                        (13)
                                                                                              1 − u−1 hδ

The following proposition compares the mean growth rates in (12) and (13) and establishes condi-
tions for systemic risk to be growth enhancing.7
   7
     Although expected profits are greater in the risky than in the safe equilibrium, it does not follow that the risky
equilibrium must be played every period. Proposition 2.2 simply compares situations where a safe equilibrium is


                                                          9
Proposition 2.2 (Growth and Systemic Risk) Given the proportional aid payment (11), for
any financial distress costs of crisis (i.e., for any α ∈ (0, 1)) :

   1. A financially liberalized economy that follows a risky path experiences higher average growth
       than one that follows a safe path.

   2. The greater the degree of contract enforceability, within the bounds (h, h), the greater the
       growth enhancing eﬀects of systemic risk.

   3. Guarantees are fundable via domestic taxation.

The Leverage Eﬀect
    A shift from a safe to a risky equilibrium increases the likelihood of crisis from 0 to 1 − u.
                                               br    bs
This shift results in greater leverage ( wtt − wtt = mr − ms ), which increases investment and growth
in periods without crisis. We call this the leverage eﬀect. However, this shift also increases the
frequency of crises and the resultant collapse in internal funds and investment, which reduces
growth. Proposition 2.2 states that the leverage eﬀect dominates the crisis eﬀect if the degree
of contract enforceability is high, but not too high. If h is suﬃciently high, the undertaking of
systemic risk translates into a large increase in leverage, which compensates for the potential losses
caused by crises. Of course, if h were excessively high, there would be no borrowing constraints to
begin with and risk taking would not enhance growth.
    An increase in the degree of contract enforceability —a greater h within the range (h, h̄)— leads
to higher profits and growth in both risky and safe economies. An increase in h can be seen as a
relaxation of financial bottlenecks allowing greater leverage in both economies. However, such an
institutional improvement benefits the risky economy to a greater extent as the subsidy implicit in
the guarantee amplifies the eﬀect of better contract enforceability.8
    Notice that whenever systemic risk arises, it is growth enhancing. This is because the thresholds
h and h̄ in Propositions 2.1 and 2.2 are the same. Managers choose the risky technology when the
expected return of the risky plan is greater than that of the safe plan. The resulting systemic risk
is associated with higher mean growth because in an Ak world with an exogenous savings rate,
the expected growth rate of the economy equals the expected rate of return times the savings rate.
The tiny aid payment after a crash does not undermine this result because it does not aﬀect the
return expected ex-ante by managers.
    Figure 2 illustrates the limit distribution of growth rates by plotting diﬀerent paths of wt
corresponding to diﬀerent realizations of the risky growth process. This figure makes it clear that
played every period with situations where a risky equilibrium is played every period.
   8
     Needless to say, the first best is to improve financial institutions dramatically, so that h exceeds h̄ and borrowing
constraints are no longer binding. However, we are considering economies where such institutional changes may not
be possible in the medium-run.



                                                           10
greater long-run growth comes at the cost of occasional busts. We can see that over the long
run the risky paths generally outperform the safe path, with the exception of a few unlucky risky
paths. If we increased the number of paths, the cross section distribution would converge to the
limit distribution.9
       The choice of parameters used in the simulation depicted in Figure 2 is detailed in the appendix.
The probability of crisis (4.13%) corresponds to the historical probability of falling into a systemic
banking crisis in our sample of countries over 1981-2000.10 The financial distress costs are set to
50%, which is a third more severe than our empirical estimate derived from the growth diﬀerential
between tranquil times and a systemic banking crisis. The degree of contract enforceability is set
just above the level necessary for risk taking to be optimal (h = 0.5). Finally, the mean return on
the risky technology is 2% below the safe return. Nevertheless, growth in the risky equilibrium is
on average 3% higher than in the safe equilibrium.
       Figure 3 plots the diﬀerence in log wt between a risky and a safe economy for varying degrees of
contract enforceability. As we can see, an increase in the degree of contract enforceability increases
the growth benefits from risk taking. Figure 4 plots the diﬀerence in log wt for diﬀerent financial
distress costs. Recall that if risk taking is optimal, it is also growth-enhancing for any arbitrarily
large financial distress cost. Less severe distress costs evidently improve the average long-run growth
in the risky equilibrium. Notice that the upper curve is computed with the value of financial distress
costs estimated from our sample of countries (α = 0.8).

Net Expected Value of Managers’ Income: Risky vs. Safe Equilibria
       Proposition (2.2) shows that because of the leverage eﬀect bailouts can be funded domestically
by taxing non-defaulting firms. There is in fact a stronger result that we prove in the extended
appendix: if the leverage eﬀect is strong enough, the increase in the expected profits generated by
systemic risk is greater than the associated expected bailout cost. That is, the expected present
value of managers’ income net of taxes —denoted by Y — is greater in a risky than in a safe equilib-
rium. This result holds even for an arbitrarily large financial distress cost of crisis (α → 0). To see
this consider the value of Y in a risky and in a safe equilibrium:

                                                                          w
                                 Y r = w + δ(1 − d)(θu − (1 + r))mr                                                      (14)
                                                                       1 − δγ r
                                                                         w
                                 Ys     = w + δ(1 − d)(σ − (1 + r))ms
                                                                      1 − δγ s
   9
      If instead of (11) the aid payment were a constant, the result in Proposition 2.2 illustrated in Figure 2 would have
to be qualified. This is because over time it would become more and more unlikely that the level of output along the
risky path overtakes the safe one as along a safe path w grows without bound, while along a risky path crises would
reset w to a constant with probability 1 − u.
   10
      Notice that this is the probability to shift from a non-crisis state to a crisis state, which is diﬀerent from the share
                                                                                           π1
of years spent in a crisis state. The probability of falling into a crisis is given by 1−π    2
                                                                                                , where π1 is the unconditional
probability that a crisis starts in a given year, and π2 is the unconditional probability of being in a crisis in given
year.


                                                              11
The net expected present value of income depends on three factors: the expected excess return on
investment (θu−(1+r), σ−(1+r)), the leverage (mr , ms ), and the mean growth rate of the economy
(γ r , γ s ). Since we have imposed the condition uθ < σ, the following trade-oﬀ arises. Projects have
a higher expected rate of return in a safe equilibrium than in a risky one, but leverage and scale are
smaller (ms < mr ). In a risky economy, the subsidy implicit in the guarantees attracts projects with
a lower expected excess return but permits greater scale by relaxing borrowing constraints. This
relaxation of the financial bottleneck is dynamically propagated at a higher growth rate (γ r > γ s ).
If h is high enough, greater leverage and growth compensate for the costs of crises and generate a
higher net expected present value of income in a risky than in a safe equilibrium.


2.4    From Model to Data

The equilibria of the model indicate that a positive link between systemic risk and growth may
be present in countries with particular characteristics. In the empirical section we will use these
characteristics in our identification strategy through country groupings. First, we discuss the
relationship between skewnes and growth.

Skewness and Growth.        In a risky equilibrium, firms face endogenous borrowing constraints, and so
credit is constrained by internal funds. As long as a crisis does not occur, internal funds accumulate
gradually. Thus, credit grows fast but only gradually. In contrast, when a crisis erupts there are
widespread bankruptcies, internal funds collapse and credit falls abruptly. The upshot is that in a
risky equilibrium the growth rate can take on two values: low in the crisis state (g c ), or high in the
lucky no crisis state (g n ).
    A risky equilibrium exists only if crises are rare events. In particular, the probability of crisis 1−u
must be less than half (by Proposition 2.1). Since 1 − u < 1/2, the low growth rate realizations (g c )
are farther away from the mean than the high realizations (g n ). Thus, in a large enough sample, the
distribution of growth rates in a risky equilibrium is characterized by negative outliers and must be
negatively skewed. In contrast, in the safe equilibrium there is no skewness as the growth process is
smooth. Since systemic risk arises in equilibrium only when it is growth enhancing (by Proposition
2.2), our model predicts that there is a negative link between skewness and mean growth.

Identifying Restrictions.       In the model, systemic guarantees are equally available to all countries.
However, countries diﬀer crucially in their ability to exploit these guarantees by taking on systemic
risk. An equilibrium with systemic risk exists and is growth enhancing only in the set of financially
liberalized countries with a ‘medium’ degree of contract enforceability h. On the one hand, bor-
rowing constraints arise in equilibrium only if contract enforceability problems are ‘severe’: h < h̄
so borrowers may find it profitable to divert funds. On the other hand, risk taking is individually
optimal and systemic risk is growth enhancing only if h > h. Only if h is large enough can risk

                                                     12
taking induce enough of an increase in leverage to compensate for the distress costs of crises. A
central part of our empirical strategy is, therefore, to exploit cross-country diﬀerences in financial
liberalization and contract enforceability to test the identifying restriction described above.


3     Systemic Risk and Growth: The Empirical Link

The empirical analysis of the link between systemic risk and growth faces several challenges. The
first challenge is measurement. In subsection 3.1, we discuss why skewness of credit growth is a
good de facto measure of systemic risk and how skewness is linked to financial crisis indexes. The
second challenge is the identification of a channel linking systemic risk and growth. In subsection
3.2, after having established a robust and stable partial correlation between the skewness of credit
growth and GDP growth, we test an identifying restriction derived from our theoretical mechanism:
the link between skewness and growth is strongest in the set of financially liberalized countries with
moderately weak institutions. The third challenge is robustness. In subsection 3.2.3, we revisit our
results using a GMM system estimator. In subsection 3.3, we present an alternative analysis of the
link between systemic risk and growth based on several indexes of financial crises. In subsection
3.4, we test a further implication of our theoretical mechanism which is that skewness increases
growth via its eﬀect on investment. Finally, subsection 3.5 presents a set of additional robustness
tests.


3.1      Measuring Systemic Risk

We use the skewness of real credit growth as a de facto indicator of financial systemic risk. The
theoretical mechanism that links systemic risk and growth implies that financial crises are associated
with higher mean growth only if they are rare and systemic. If the likelihood of crisis were high,
there would be no incentives to take on risk. If crises were not systemic, borrowers could not exploit
the subsidy implicit in the guarantees and increase leverage. These restrictions —rare and systemic
crises— are the conditions under which negative skewness arises. During a crisis there is a large and
abrupt downward jump in credit growth. If crises are rare, such negative outliers tend to create
a long left tail in the distribution and reduce skewness.11 When there are no other major shocks,
rare crisis countries exhibit strictly negative skewness.12
   11
   [  Skewness is a measure of asymmetry of the distribution of a series around its mean and is computed as S =
       n  (yi −y)3
1
n             3/2 , where ȳ is the mean and ν is the variance. The skewness of a symmetric distribution, such as the
       i=1 ν
normal distribution, is zero. Positive skewness means that the distribution has a long right tail and negative skewness
implies that the distribution has a long left tail.
   12
      We use the skewness of real credit rather than GDP growth because the former reflects more accurately the
eﬀects of crisis on credit constrained firms. In middle-income countries, there is a pronounced sectoral asymmetry
in the response to crisis: while large export oriented firms expand due to the real depreciation, small nontradables
firms contract. Since the former have access to world financial markets, while the latter are bank-dependent, this
asymmetry dampens GDP fluctuations more than credit fluctuations.



                                                          13
    To illustrate how skewness is linked to systemic risk, the kernel distributions of credit growth
rates for India and Thailand are given in Figure 5.13 India, the safe country, has a lower mean and
is quite tightly distributed around the mean, with skewness close to zero. Meanwhile, Thailand,
the risky fast-growing country, has a very asymmetric distribution with large negative skewness.
    Negative skewness can also be caused by forces other than financial systemic risk. We control
explicitly for the two exogenous events that we would expect to lead to a large fall in credit: severe
wars and large deteriorations in the terms of trade. Our data set consists of all countries for which
data is available in the World Development Indicators and International Financial Statistics for the
period 1960-2000. Out this set of eighty-three countries we identify twenty five as having a severe
war or a large deterioration in the terms of trade.14
    Crises are typically preceded by lending booms. However, the typical boom-bust cycle generates
negative, not positive, skewness. Even though during a lending boom credit growth rates are large
and positive, the boom typically takes place for several years and in any given year is not as large
in magnitude as the typical bust.15


3.1.1    Skewness versus Variance

Rare crises are associated not only with negative skewness but also with high variance, the typical
measure of volatility in the literature. For the purpose of identifying systemic risk there is, however,
a key diﬀerence between variance and skewness. Variance may also reflect other shocks, that
could either be symmetric or happen more frequently. In contrast, skewness captures specifically
asymmetric and abnormal patterns in the distribution and can thus identify the risky paths that lead
to rare, large and abrupt busts. If crises were not rare but the usual state of aﬀairs, unusually high
variance, not large negative skewness, would arise. Brazil is a good example. Here, hyperinflation,
unsustainable government debt, and pro-cyclical fiscal policy have led to frequent falls and rebounds,
so clear negative outliers are not identifiable. Over 1981-2000, the crisis indexes we consider below
indicate that for more than half of the sample years Brazil was in a crisis.16
    As we shall show below, our regression results do not contradict the negative link between
variance and growth found by Ramey and Ramey (1995).
  13
     The kernel distributions are smoothed histograms. They are estimated using an Epanechnikov kernel. For
comparability we choose the same bandwidth for both graphs.
  14
     The severe war cases are: Algeria, Congo Rep., Congo Dem. Rep, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iran, Nicaragua,
Peru, Philippines, Sierra Leone, South Africa and Uganda. The large terms of trade deterioration cases are: Algeria,
Congo, Rep., Congo, Dem. Rep., Cote d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Ghana, Haiti, Iran, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Syria, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Venezuela and Zambia. A detailed description of
how these countries were identified is given in the extended appendix.
  15
     See Tornell and Westermann (2002) for a description of boom-bust cycles in middle income countries.
  16
     This case is not the standard in our sample, as in most countries crises are rare. Across the financially liberalized
countries in our sample only 9% of country-years are coded as having a consensus crisis by the ten indexes we consider.




                                                           14
3.1.2      Correspondence Between Skewness and Crisis Indexes

In principle, the sample measure of skewness can miss cases of risk taking that have not yet led to
crisis. This omission, however, makes it more diﬃcult to find a negative relationship between growth
and realized skewness. Thus, it does not invalidate our empirical strategy. What is important,
however, is that skewness captures mostly financial crises once we control for wars and large terms
of trade deteriorations. To investigate this correspondence, we consider ten standard indexes: three
of banking crises, four of currency crises and two of sudden stops.17 We then identify two types of
crises: coded crises, which are classified as a crisis by any one of the indexes, and consensus crises.
The latter are meant to capture truly severe crises and are defined as follows: First, the epsiode is
identified by at least two banking crises indexes or two currency crises indexes or two sudden stop
indexes. Second, it has not been going on for more than ten years, and, third, it does not exhibit
credit growth of more than 10%.18
       First, we find that our skewness measure captures mostly coded crises as: (i) the elimination
of 2 (or 3) extreme negative credit growth observations suppresses most of the negative skewness;
and (ii) at least 80% of these extreme observations correspond to coded crises. Table 1, panel A
shows that among the countries with negative skewness, 90% (79%) of the of the 2 (3) extreme
negative observations are coded as a crisis. Moreover, if we eliminate the 2 (3) extreme observations,
skewness increases on average from -0.7 to +0.16 (0.36), and in 80 % (90%) of the cases, skewness
increases to more than -0.2, which is close to a symmetric distribution. These are particularly high
numbers given the fact that we forced each country to have 2 (3) outliers. It remains, in theory, a
possibility that skewness is aﬀected by non-extreme observations. To consider this possibility, for
each country we eliminate the three observations whose omission results in the highest increase in
skewness. Panel B in Table 1 shows that this procedure eliminates virtually all negative skewness.
Moreover, 79% of the omitted observations correspond to coded crises.19
       Second, there is significantly less negative skewness once we exclude consensus crises. Table 1,
panel C, shows that if we eliminate the observations with a consensus crisis, skewness increases
in 32 out of the 35 crisis countries.20 On average, skewness increases from -0.41 to 0.32 and the
percentage of crisis countries with skewness below -0.2 shrinks from 63% to 11%.21
       In sum, there is a fairly close correspondence between both measures. There are, however,
  17
     These indexes are described in the extended appendix.
  18
     This last criterion ensures that the beginning of the crisis is the year in which it actually starts having macroeco-
nomic consequences. For example DD and CK report 1997 as the start of the crisis in Thailand when credit growth
was still strong (+12%) before contracting abruptly in 1998 (−12%). The application of this criterion adjusts the
start date in nine cases (all banking crises): Argentina (1981,1989), Brazil (1994,1998), Mexico (1994), Korea (1997),
Thailand (1982-1983,1997), and Norway (1987).
  19
     Table EA4 in the extended appendix details for each country the list of extreme observations, the associated
coded or consensus crises and the eﬀect on skewness of eliminating 2 (3) observations.
  20
     This procedure eliminates on average 2.9 observations for each country.
  21
     Table EA5 in the extended appendix presents for each country the list of consensus crises and skewness with and
without consensus crises.


                                                           15
advantages and disadvantages to the use of both skewness and crisis indexes as proxies for systemic
risk. On the one hand, skewness simply looks for abnormal patterns in a macro variable and does
not use direct information about the state of the financial system. On the other hand, it is objective
and can be readily computed for large panels of countries over long time periods. Furthermore, it
signals in a parsimonious way the occurrence of rare and systemic falls in credit growth. In contrast,
de jure banking crisis indexes are based on more direct information. Unfortunately, they are also
subjective, limited in their coverage over countries and time, and do not provide information on the
relative severity of crises.22 In addition, they are sometimes vague about the timing of a crisis and
their samples are often not unconditional as in many instances they only include crisis countries.
These shortcomings limit their usefulness for regression analysis over large panels.
    To illustrate the diﬃculty of measuring banking crises, consider the well-known indexes of
Caprio and Klingbiel (CK) and Detragiache and Demirguc-Kunt (DD). They report 35 and 42
crises, respectively, over 1981-2000 in our sample of 58 countries. Although DD is in part built on
CK, there is a striking mismatch between the two: out of a total of 46 crisis episodes reported by
at least one index, there are 16 episodes in which they do not agree at all on the existence of a
crisis episode. Out of the remaining 30 crisis episodes, there are only 17 cases where the the timing
of crisis is the same.
    Other financial crisis indexes —e.g., currency crisis and sudden stops— are, like skewness, de
facto indexes. However, the rules followed to construct these indexes are subjective and diﬀer from
one author to another.23 As a result, it is not unusual for these crisis indexes to identify diﬀerent
episodes. In contrast, skewness is a standard and objective way to detect abnormal patterns in
aggregate financial variables.
    Finally, consider Thailand as an example to compare the two procedures. Figure 6, panel
A exhibits Thailand’s credit growth rates. We see two severe busts with negative growth rates
(1980 and 1998-2000), and a slowdown with small positive growth rates (1985-86). Figure 6, panel
B displays the same information using histograms and kernel distributions, which are smoothed
histograms. The first panel covers the entire sample, in which skewness is -0.90. The second
panel eliminates the consensus crisis years: 1998-2000 and 1985-87. We see that one important
outlier (1980) has not been eliminated and therefore skewness remains almost unchanged at -0.99.
If instead we eliminate the major negative outliers (1998-2000 and 1980), the third panel shows
that skewness shrinks abruptly to -0.19. If we also eliminate 1986, the year with the next smallest
growth rate, skewness becomes virtually zero (+0.04).
    The Thai case shows that crisis indexes capture well-known crises (1998-2000). However, they
  22
     As Caprio and Klingbiel acknowledge: “Some judgement has gone into the compilation of this list, not only for
the countries in which data are absent on the size of the losses but also in that in many cases the oﬃcial estimates
understate the size of the problem.”
  23
     The extended appendix describes the crisis indexes and, in particular, illustrates the diﬀerent rules used to
construct them.


                                                        16
can make two types of errors: (i) failure to report some severe episodes (1980);24 and (ii) the
placement of a mild episode (1985-1986) on an equal footing with a severe crisis episode (1998-
2000). In contrast, the procedure that selects the observations that drive negative skewness —which
are the largest negative credit growth observations— correctly identifies both the 1998-2000 and the
1980 crises.


3.2     Skewness and Growth

We start by presenting baseline evidence of the link between skewness and growth based on cross-
section regressions estimated by OLS, and panel regressions estimated by GLS using ten-year
non-overlapping windows. We then test the identifying restriction of our theoretical mechanism by
introducing interaction term eﬀects in the growth regressions. Finally, we revisit our results using a
GMM system estimator. The sample used in the regressions consists of the 58 countries that have
experienced neither a severe war nor a large deterioration in the terms of trade.


3.2.1    Baseline Estimation

In the first set of equations we estimate, we include the three moments of credit growth in a standard
growth equation.25


                        ∆yit = γ 0 Xit + β 1 µ∆B,it + β 2 σ ∆B,it + β 3 S∆B,it + η t + εit ,                      (15)


where ∆yit is the average growth rate of per-capita GDP; µ∆B,it , σ ∆B,it and S∆B,it are the mean,
standard deviation, and skewness of the growth rate of real bank credit to the private sector,
respectively; Xit is a vector of control variables; η t is a period dummy and εit is the error term.26
Here, we consider a simple control set that includes initial per-capita GDP and the initial ratio
of secondary schooling. In section 3.5 we show that similar results are obtained with an extended
control set that includes the simple set plus the inflation rate, the ratio of government consumption
to GDP, a measure of trade openness and life expectancy at birth.27 We do not include investment
in (15) as we expect the three moments of credit growth, our variables of interest, to aﬀect GDP
growth through investment.28
  24
     Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) in their well-known study on twin banking and currency crises do record a crisis
in 1979. Moreover, the 1980 IMF Article IV Mission in Thailand reports a credit crunch, a rapid deterioration of
the financial position of financial institutions and the collapse of a major finance company. It also mentions that the
Central Bank reacted aggressively by providing emergency lending to the financial sector and by injecting liquidity
through the newly created repurchase market.
  25
     The complete description of the variables used in the regression analysis is presented in the appendix.
  26
     In cross-section regressions, ηt is a constant, and in panel regressions it corresponds to time eﬀects.
  27
     These control variables are standard in the empirical growth literature, e.g. Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000).
  28
     In section 3.4, we analyze the link between investment and the three moments of credit growth.




                                                          17
       We consider three sample periods: 1961-2000, 1971-2000 and 1981-2000.29 In the cross-sections,
the moments of credit growth are computed over the sample period and initial variables are mea-
sured in 1960, 1970 or 1980. In the panels, the moments of credit growth are computed over each
decade and the initial variables are measured in the first year of each decade.30 All panel regressions
are estimated with time eﬀects.31
       Table 2 reports the estimation results. The novel finding is the negative partial correlation
between the skewness of real credit growth and real GDP growth. Skewness always enters with
a negative point estimate that ranges between -0.244 and -0.334. These estimates are significant
at the 5% level in the cross-section regressions and at the 1% level in the panel regressions. The
positive partial correlation between the mean of credit growth and GDP growth is standard in the
literature (e.g., Levine and Renelt (1992)). The negative partial correlation between the standard
deviation and GDP growth is consistent with the finding of Ramey and Ramey (1995) on the
negative link between growth and variance.
       Are these estimates economically meaningful? To address this question consider India and
Thailand over the period 1981-2000. India has near zero skewness, and Thailand a skewness of
about minus one.32 The cross-sectional estimate of -0.32 for 1981-2000 implies that a one unit
decline in skewness (from 0 to -1) is associated with a 0.32% increase in annual real per capita
growth. This figure corresponds to a little less than a third of the per-capita growth diﬀerential
between India and Thailand over the same period.
       Figure 7 depicts the partial linear eﬀect of each moment of credit growth on per-capita GDP
growth. The plots reveal that higher per-capita GDP growth is associated with (a) higher mean
growth rate in credit, (b) lower variance and (c) lower skewness.


3.2.2      Identification of the Mechanism

Here, we test an identification restriction implied by the equilibria of our model. Namely, whether
the negative link between skewness and growth is stronger in the set of financially liberalized
countries with a medium degree of contract enforceability than in other countries.33
  29
     By using three sample periods, we make the baseline estimation results presented in this section comparable to
the results of all the regressions presented in this paper.
  30
     For example, if the sample period is 1981-2000, two sets of moments of credit growth are computed (over 1981-
1990 and 1991-2000) and the initial variables are measured in 1980 and 1990. To compute the moments of credit
growth, we impose a minimum of 8 annual observations over each non-overlapping ten-year window.
  31
     We do not include fixed-eﬀect in our baseline regressions. The GMM estimation presented below is the standard
method to deal with the presence of country fixed eﬀects in a dynamic equation. Moreover, Hauk and Wacziarg
(2004) have shown, using Monte-Carlo simulations, that in the presence of measurement error, the typical growth
regression can be better estimated with the simple pooled estimators used in this section. When within group
estimators are used, they exacerbate measurement error problems.
  32
     A one unit increase in skewness also corresponds to the average change resulting from eliminating, for each
country, the three lowest observations in the set of countries with negative skewness. See Table 1.
  33
     A similar empirical strategy is followed by Rajan and Zingales (1998) to analyze the eﬀect of financial development
on growth.



                                                          18
    In the theory section we show that in economies where financing constraints are an important
obstacle to growth, systemic risk taking allows agents to attain greater leverage, increasing invest-
ment and growth. Risk taking, however, also generates financial fragility and implies that crises
will occur occasionally. Therefore, high mean growth is associated with negative skewness. The
theory indicates that the negative link between skewness and growth will be observed in only a
restricted set of countries. First, our mechanism is present only in countries with a medium degree
of contract enforceability (MEC), so financial markets function, but borrowing constraints are an
important barrier to growth. By contrast, in countries with high enforceability (HEC) agents have
easy access to external finance, so that growth is determined by investment opportunities, not by
borrowing constraints. In the other extreme, in countries with low enforceability (LEC) borrowing
constraints are too severe. In these countries the increase in leverage induced by risk taking is so
small that it does not compensate for the eﬀects of crises. Secondly, the mechanism requires not
only weak institutions but also policy measures that are conducive to the emergence of systemic
risk. Financial liberalization can be viewed as such a policy measure. In non-liberalized economies,
regulations do not permit agents to take on systemic risk.
    We use the law and order index of the Political Risk Service Group in 1984 to construct the
MEC set.34 We classify as MECs the countries with an index in 1984 ranging between 2 and 5.35
We use three alternative indexes of financial liberalization: First, a de facto binary index based on
the identification of trend breaks in capital flows, which is equal to one if a country is liberalized
in a given year and zero otherwise. By averaging this index over 10 years, we obtain the share of
liberalized years in a given decade. Second, the de jure index of Quinn (2001) that reports on a
zero to one scale the intensity of capital account liberalization based on the IMF report on capital
account restrictions. Third, the de jure index of Abiad and Mody (2004). The de facto index is
computed for the full sample of 58 countries for the period 1981-2000. The two other indexes cover
fewer countries, but are available for a longer time period.36
    We generate a composite index by combining an MEC dummy —that equals one for MEC
countries and zero otherwise— with one of the liberalization indexes. For each country i and each
of our non-overlapping ten-year windows (t, t + 9) the index equals

                                                    9
                                           1 X
                M ECi _F Li,t    = M ECi •     fli,t+j              t ∈ {1961, 1971, 1981, 1991}                 (16)
                                           10
                                                   j=0


For each liberalization index, we interact the MEC_FL index with the three moments of credit
  34
     This index rates countries on a 1 to 6 scale according to the quality of enforceability of the legal system. We
use the index in 1984 as it is the earliest available date. For a small number of countries for which the index is not
available in 1984, we use 1985 instead.
  35
     Table 9 shows that our estimation results are robust to alternative definitions of the MEC set.
  36
     See the extended appendix for a detailed description of the three financial liberalization indexes.




                                                         19
growth and add them to regression equation (15).37 Table 3 shows that, consistent with the
restrictions imposed by the model, the eﬀect of skewness on growth is strongest among MEC_FL
countries. The interaction term skewness ∗ M EC_F L enters negatively and significantly at the
1% level in the three regressions. Its point estimate ranges between -1.00 and -0.75. By contrast,
the coeﬃcient of skewness is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. It ranges between -0.08 and
-0.01. The diﬀerence between the two estimates indicates that the negative link between skewness
and growth is not only stronger in the MEC_FL set, but that it also only exists within this set.
       By adding up the interacted and non-interacted skewness coeﬃcients, we obtain the eﬀect of
skewness on growth for a fully liberalized MEC country. The point estimates of this eﬀect —reported
at the bottom of Table 3— range between -1.00 and -0.81 and are significant at the 1% level. An
estimate of -0.81 means that a one unit increase in skewness for a fully liberalized MEC country is
associated with a 0.81 percentage point increase in annual GDP growth. This eﬀect is three times
larger than the homogenous eﬀect estimated in Table 2.
       We have shown that the negative relationship between skewness and growth emerges only in the
set of financially liberalized countries with a medium level of contract enforceability. By validating
the identifying restrictions of our theoretical mechanism, this finding supports our hypothesis that
the negative link between skewness and growth results from a systemic risk taking mechanism.


3.2.3      Generalized Method of Moments System Estimation

Here, we use a GMM system estimator developed by Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell
and Bond (1998) that controls for unobserved time- and country-specific eﬀects, and accounts
for some endogeneity in the explanatory variables. The regression equation to be estimated is
yi,t − yi,t−1 = (α − 1) yi,t−1 + β 0 Zi,t + η i + εi,t , where yi,t is the logarithm of real per-capita GDP, Zit
is the set of explanatory variables excluding initial income and a time dummy, ηi is the country-
specific eﬀect, and εi,t is the error term. In order to eliminate the country-specific eﬀect, we take
first-diﬀerences and get


                    yi,t − yi,t−1 = α(yi,t−1 − yi,t−2 ) + β 0 (Zi,t − Zi,t−1 ) + εi,t − εi,t−1                (17)


We relax the assumption of exogeneity of the explanatory variables by allowing them to be correlated
with current and previous realizations of the error term. However, we assume that future realizations
of the error term do not aﬀect current values of the explanatory variables.38 The use of instruments
deals with: (i) the likely endogeneity of the explanatory variables, and (ii) the problem that, by
construction, the new error term, εi,t − εi,t−1 , is correlated with the lagged dependent variable,
  37
    For each regression, the estimation period corresponds to the time coverage of the liberalization index.
  38
    As Levine et al.(2000) point out, this assumption of weak exogeneity does not imply that expectations of future
growth do not have an eﬀect on current moments of credit expansion, but only that unanticipated future shocks to
economic growth do not influence the current realizations of the explanatory variables.


                                                        20
yi,t−1 − yi,t−2 . Following Blundell and Bond (1998), we use the GMM system estimator.39 This
estimator combines the regression in diﬀerences (17) and the corresponding regression in levels
together into a single system. The system estimator uses a set of moment conditions where lagged
levels are used as instruments in the diﬀerence equations and lag diﬀerences in the level equation.40
The consistency of the GMM estimates depends on whether lagged values of the explanatory
variables are valid instruments in the growth regression. We address this issue by considering
two specification tests. The first is a Sargan-Hansen test of over-identifying restrictions, which
tests the overall validity of the instruments.41 The second test examines whether the diﬀerenced
error term is second-order serially correlated.
       The use of lagged variables as instruments and the requirement of three consecutive time units
to perform the two specification tests restrict the available periods of estimation to 1970-2000.
Table 4 shows the estimation results. In the first column all regressors are treated as endogenous
and moment conditions are computed using appropriate lagged values of the levels and diﬀerences
of the explanatory and dependent variables. In the second column, all the regressors are treated
as endogenous with the exception of skewness. We can see that skewness enters with very similar
coeﬃcients in both regressions (-0.60 and -0.59) and that both are significant at the 5% level.
Thus, relaxing the exogeneity assumption for skewness seems to have little eﬀect on the estimates.
Notice that the coeﬃcients on the skewness and mean of credit growth are noticeably higher with
the GMM estimation than with the GLS estimation. In contrast, the standard deviation is not
significant in the GMM specification. The Sargan-Hansen test shows that, in both regressions, the
validity of the instruments cannot be rejected.42
       Table 5 is the counterpart of Table 3. It shows that the interaction eﬀects presented in sub-
section 3.2.2 are also significant in the GMM specification. In sum, these results confirm that
when we correct for biases resulting from unobserved country fixed eﬀects and control for some of
the endogeneity in the explanatory variables, the link between skewness and growth established in
subsection 3.2.1 remains robust and in fact appears even stronger.


3.3      Crisis Indexes and Growth

In subsection 3.1 we showed that our skewness measure coincides closely with several financial crisis
indexes, and we discussed why skewness is better suited to establish the link between systemic risk
  39
     The GMM system estimator has two advantages: (i) it reduces the potential biases and imprecision associated
with the usual GMM diﬀerence estimator; and (ii) it allows us to exploit simultanously the between and within
country variations to estimate the eﬀects of the moments of credit growth on GDP growth.
  40
     We compute robust two-step standard errors by following the methodology proposed by Windmeijer (2005) that
corrects the small sample downward bias in the two-step standard errors and therefore allows us to rely on the
asymptotically eﬃcient two-step estimates of the coeﬃcients.
  41
     Since the validity of the moment conditions using internal instruments depends on the weak exogeneity of the
explanatory variables, the Sargan-Hansen test is also, by construction, a test of this assumption.
  42
     The second order serial correlation tests indicate that second order correlation can be safely rejected.



                                                       21
and growth in large panels. Here we show that, for the subsamples covered by crisis indexes, the
same link is also evident when we replace skewness with crisis indexes in our growth regressions.
       We consider three banking crisis indexes (Caprio-Klingebiel, Demirguc-Detragiache and a con-
sensus index), a sudden stop consensus index and a currency crisis consensus index.43 For each
crisis index we set a dummy equal to one if the country has experienced a crisis during the decade
and zero otherwise. Using a crisis dummy computed over ten years allows us to capture the aver-
age medium-run growth impact of crises rather than just the growth shortfall experienced during
a crisis.44
       The empirical specification is the same as in the panel analysis of Table 2, substituting the crisis
dummies for skewness. Table 6 shows that the three banking crisis dummies enter positively (with
point estimates ranging from +0.22 to +0.26) and significantly at the 5% level. Thus, we find that
countries that experienced a systemic banking crisis in a given decade also experience on average a
0.24% annual increase in per-capita GDP growth. Interestingly, this eﬀect is similar in magnitude
to that of a one unit change in skewness (see Table 2). Turning to the other crisis indexes, we find
a similar positive growth eﬀect of sudden stops, but we do not find any significant growth eﬀect
of currency crises.45 Finally, in Table EA1, in the extended appendix we show that the results of
Table 6 persist when the estimation is done with the full set of control variables.


3.4       Skewness and Investment

In our mechanism, systemic risk taking leads to higher mean growth because it helps relax borrowing
constraints and thus allows firms to invest more. Although the link between investment and growth
has been extensively analyzed in the literature, the link between systemic risk and investment has
not. Here we analyze this link by adding the skewness of credit growth to a panel investment
regression. Following Barro (2001), we regress the investment-to-GDP ratio on our controls and
the lagged investment rate, which captures the high degree of serial correlation in the investment
rate. We calculate investment rates in two ways: using real PPP-converted prices and using domestic
prices.
       Table 7, panel A presents the results of the GLS and GMM panel estimations performed over
the period 1970-2000 for the two investment rates using the simple set of control variables.46 The
estimation yields very similar results for the two investment rates. Skewness enters negatively and
is significant at the 1% level in the GLS estimations and at the 5% level in the GMM estimation.
  43
     As described before, consensus indexes are designed to capture systemic crisis events. For each crisis type, they
record episodes that are confirmed by at least two indexes.
  44
     Using panel regression with five-year windows, Barro (2001) finds that a negative contemporaneous link between
crisis and growth can coexist with a positive link when the same crisis dummy is lagged by one five-year interval.
  45
     Aghion, Bachetta, Rogoﬀ and Ranciere (2006) also find that, on average, there is no significant growth eﬀect
associated with exchange rate regime collapses.
  46
     The specification with lagged investment prevents us from estimating the investment regression over 1960-2000.
In Table EA2 in the extended appendix, we present similar results obtained with the extended set of control variables.


                                                         22
Furthermore, investment is positively correlated with the mean of credit growth and negatively
with the standard deviation. The eﬀect of skewness on investment is slightly larger in the GMM
estimation. In the GMM (GLS) estimation, a one unit increase in skewness is associated with a
1.1 (0.77) percentage point direct eﬀect on the investment rate at domestic prices.47
       In order to relate the investment eﬀects to growth outcomes, we present in Table 7, panel B,
a set of growth regressions in which the investment rate replaces the moments of credit growth.
Investment enters significantly at the 1% level with point estimates close to 0.2, a standard value
in the growth literature (e.g., Levine and Renelt (1992)). By combining the eﬀect of skewness on
investment (0.77) with the corresponding eﬀect of investment on growth (0.22), one obtains −0.17.
This figure is of the same order of magnitude as the direct eﬀect of skewness on growth in the panel
regression presented in Table 2 for the same sample period ( − 0.24), although it is slightly lower.48
       The identification of a negative link between skewness and investment and a positive link be-
tween investment and growth reinforces the support we have found for our theoretical mechanism
where systemic-risk taking aﬀects growth through an investment channel.


3.5      Robustness Tests

Here, we examine whether the negative link between skewness and growth is robust to an alternative
set of control variables, alternative samples, alternative country groupings and the elimination of
outliers.

Extended Set of Control Variables. Table 8 presents the panel estimates obtained with the extended
control set for the three estimation periods. The coeﬃcients of the moments of credit growth are
very similar across all the panel regressions. In particular, skewness enters significantly at the 1%
level with point estimates that range between -0.26 and -0.20. The average point estimate of - 0.24
is close to the average panel estimate of -0.28 in Table 2. Notice also that in most of the regressions,
the control variables enter with the expected sign and their point estimates are significant.49

Alternative MEC Sets.           We have shown that the negative link between skewness and growth
is significantly stronger in the set of financially liberalized countries with a medium degree of
contract enforceability. Now we show that this is robust to alternative definitions of the MEC set.
The baseline MEC set includes all countries with a law and order index ranging between 2 and
  47
      This number amounts to a long run eﬀect of 2.9 (2.7) percentage points, given the dynamic nature of the
                                                                α
investment regression. This long run eﬀect is computed as 1−β      with α the skewness coeﬃcient and β the coeﬃcient
of the lagged investment rate.
   48
      Note that by combining the two coeﬃcients, we only consider the direct eﬀect of skewness on investment and
ignore the additional dynamic eﬀect stemming from the persistence in the investment rate. More importantly, this
figure (−0.17) is not an estimate of the indirect eﬀect of skewness on growth through an investment channel. Such an
estimation would require us to estimate jointly a growth and an investment equation in a dynamic set-up and goes
beyond the purpose of this section.
   49
      An exception is initial secondary schooling that is only significant with the simple set of controls.



                                                        23
5. In the three regressions presented in Table 9, we exclude successively from the MEC set: (i)
countries with an index of 2, (ii) countries with an index of 2 or 3, and (iii) countries with an index
equal to either 2 or 5. In the first regression, the negative link between skewness and growth is only
present in the MEC_FL set, while in the two other regressions, this negative link is at least three
time larger in this set.50 This robustness test supports the empirical validity of the identifying
restrictions imposed by our theoretical mechanism.

The Full Sample of Countries.         In order to interpret the link between skewness and growth as the
result of endogenous systemic risk taking, in our benchmark estimation we have controlled for two
other main sources of skewness: war and large terms-of-trade shocks. These shocks are exogenous
and we do not expect them to reflect the relaxation of financial bottlenecks induced by systemic risk
taking. Nevertheless, to investigate whether the eﬀect of negative skewness on growth is observed
in an unconditional sample, we re-estimate the panel regression presented in Table 2 including the
full sample of 83 countries for which we have available data. Table 10 shows that skewness still
enters negatively and remains statistically significant at the 1% level, although the magnitude of
the average point estimate is reduced from -0.28 to -0.21.

Outliers.   To test whether the link between skewness and growth may be driven by outliers, we
consider the GLS panel regression performed with the simple control set over 1961-2000 (regression
4, Table 2). There are 13 country-decades whose residuals deviate by more than two standard
deviations from the mean.51 As Table 11 shows, the exclusion of outliers does not change our results.
In particular, the coeﬃcient on skewness ranges between -0.30 and -0.35, excluding individual
outliers, and is -0.24 when all outliers are excluded. These estimates are significant at the one
percent confidence level and are quite similar to our average benchmark estimate of -0.33.


4        Related Literature

A novelty of this paper is to use skewness to analyze economic growth. In the finance literature,
skewness has been used to capture asymmetry in risk in order to explain the cross-sectional varia-
tion of excess returns. If, holding mean and variance constant, investors prefer positively skewed to
negatively skewed portfolios, the latter should exhibit higher expected returns. Kraus and Litzen-
berger (1976) show that adding skewness to the CAPM model improves its empirical fit. Harvey and
Siddique (2000) find that coskewness has a robust and economically important impact on equity
risk-premia even when factors based on size and book-to-market are controlled for.52 Veldkamp
    50
     The significant link between skewness and growth outside the MEC_FL set is the consequence of having a more
restrictive definition of the MEC set: it excludes some countries for which the systemic risk-taking mechanism may
be at play.
  51
     The 13 outliers are: Bolivia (60s), Niger (70s and 80s), Senegal (70s), Jordan (80s), Papua New Guinea (80s),
Brazil (70s), Indonesia (70s), Singapore (70s), Bostwana (80s), Korea (80s), Japan (60s) and China (90s).
  52
     Coskewness is the component of an asset’s skewness that is related to the skewness of the market portfolio.


                                                       24
(2005) rationalizes the existence of skewness in assets markets in a model with endogenous flows
of informations. In the macroeconomic literature, Barro (2006) measures the frequency and size of
large GDP drops over the twentieth century and shows that these negatively skewed patterns can
explain the equity premium puzzle.
   In our empirical analysis, the negative link between skewness and growth coexists with the
negative link between variance and growth identified by Ramey and Ramey (1995). The contrasting
growth eﬀects of diﬀerent sources of risk are also present in Imbs (2004), who finds that aggregate
volatility is bad for growth, while sectorial volatility is good for growth.
   Most of the empirical literature on financial liberalization and economic performance focuses
either on growth or on financial fragility and excess volatility. On the one hand, Bekaert, Harvey and
Lundblad (2005) find a robust and economically important link between stock market liberalization
and growth; Henry (2002) finds similar evidence by focusing on private investment; while Klein
(2005) finds that financial liberalization is growth enhancing only among middle-income countries.
On the other hand, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1998) and Kaminsky and Schmukler (2002) show
that the propensity to crisis and stock market volatility increase in the aftermath of financial
liberalization. Our findings help to integrate these contrasting views.
   Obstfeld (1994) demonstrates that financial openness increases growth if international risk-
sharing allows agents to shift from safe to risky projects with a higher return. In our framework,
risky projects have a lower expected return than safe ones. The growth gains are obtained because
firms that take on more risk can attain greater leverage.
   In our paper, liberalization policies that discourage hedging can induce higher growth because
they help ease borrowing constraints. Tirole (2003) and Tirole and Pathak (2004) reach a similar
conclusion in a diﬀerent setup. In their framework, a country pegs the exchange rate as a means
to signal a strong currency and attract foreign capital. Thus, it must discourage hedging and
withstand speculative attacks in order for the signal to be credible.
   By focusing on the growth consequences of imperfect contract enforceability, this paper is con-
nected with the growth and institutions literature. For instance, Acemoglu et. al. (2003) show that
better institutions lead to higher growth, lower variance and less frequent crises. In our model,
better institutions also lead to higher growth, and it is never optimal for countries with strong
institutions to undertake systemic risk. Our contribution is to show how systemic risk can enhance
growth by counteracting the financial bottlenecks generated by weak institutions.
   The cycles in this paper are diﬀerent from schumpeterian cycles in which the adoption of new
technologies and the cleansing eﬀect of recessions play a key role, e.g. Aghion and Saint Paul (1998),
Caballero and Hammour (1994) and Schumpeter (1934). Our cycles resemble Juglar’s credit cycles
in which financial bottlenecks play a dominant role. Juglar (1862) characterized asymmetric credit
cycles along with the periodic occurrence of crises in France, England, and the United States during


                                                  25
the nineteenth century.


5    Conclusions

Our finding that fast growing countries tend to experience occasional crises sheds light on two
contrasting views of financial liberalization. In one view, financial liberalization induces excessive
risk taking, increases macroeconomic volatility and leads to more frequent crises. In another view,
liberalization strengthens financial development and contributes to higher long-run growth. Our
findings indicate that, while liberalization does lead to systemic risk taking and occasional crises,
it also raises growth rates, even when the costs of crises are taken into account.
    In order to uncover the link between systemic risk and growth, it is essential to distinguish
between booms punctuated by rare, abrupt busts and up-and-down patterns that are more frequent
or more symmetric. While both of these patterns will increase variance, only the former causes a
decline in skewness. This is why we use the skewness of credit growth, not variance, to capture
the volatility generated by crises. An innovation in this paper is the use of skewness as a de facto
indicator of financial systemic risk in order to study economic growth.
    We analyze the relationship between systemic risk and growth by developing a theoretical
mechanism based on the existence of financial bottlenecks. In countries with institutions that are
weak —but not too weak, financial liberalization may give rise to systemic risk, enabling financially
constrained firms to attain greater leverage and to increase investment and growth along a path
without crises. This is the leverage eﬀect. We show that in the set of financially liberalized countries
with moderate institutional problems, the leverage eﬀect is strong enough that the gains from larger
investment will dominate the losses from occasional financial crises.
    The data strongly supports the empirical hypotheses associated with these theoretical results:
over the last four decades, the link between skewness and growth is strongest in financially liber-
alized countries with a moderate degree of contract enforceability. Furthermore, investment is the
main channel through which skewness aﬀects growth.
    We would like to emphasize that the fact that systemic-risk can be good for growth does not
mean that it is necessarily good for welfare. Furthermore, as the decreasing returns version of
the model demonstrates, systemic risk taking is not a strategy for increasing growth that can be
pursued in the very long-run. Once a country becomes rich enough, it must shift to a safe path.
    Finally, within the model there are several policies that could increase investment without
incurring crisis costs. A major improvement in the contract enforceability environment eliminates
financial bottlenecks. However, it often takes a long time for this institutional reform to be achieved.
An alternative policy is to grant failure-unrelated subsidies to firms. However, in the real world,
such a policy might lead to cronyism and rampant corruption.


                                                  26
References

 [1] Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen, 2003, “Institutional Causes,
    Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
    50, 49:103.

 [2] Aghion, P., and G. Saint Paul, 1998, “On the Virtues of Bad Times,” Macroeconomics Dy-
    namics, 2(3), 322-344.

 [3] Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Ranciere, and K. Rogoﬀ, 2006, “Exchange Rate Volatility and
    Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development,” NBER Working Paper 12117.

 [4] Arellano, M., and O. Bover, 1995, “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of
    Error-Components Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 68(1): 29-51.

 [5] Barro, R., 2001, “Economic Growth in East Asia Before and After the Financial Crisis,” NBER
    Working Paper 8330.

 [6] Barro, R., 2006, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quaterly
    Journal of Economics, 121(3), 823-866.

 [7] Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2000, “A New Database on Financial Development
    and Structure,” World Bank Economic Review, 14 (3), 597-605.

 [8] Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and R. Lundblad, 2005, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?”
    Journal of Financial Economics 77, 3-56.

 [9] Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, 2000, “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative
    Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Taylor and Woodford eds.

[10] Blundell, R., and S. Bond, 1998, “Initial Conditions and Moment Conditions in Dynamic Panel
    Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 87, 115-143.

[11] Caballero, R., and M. Hammour, 1994, “The Cleansing Eﬀect of Recessions,” The American
    Economic Review, 84(5), 1350-1368.

[12] Harvey, C., and A. Siddique, 2000, “Conditional Skewness in Asset Pricing,” The Journal of
    Finance, 55(3), 1263-1295.

[13] Hauk, W., and R. Wacziarg, 2004, “A Monte Carlo Study of Growth Regressions,” NBER
    Technical Working Paper 0296.

[14] Henry, P., 2002, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms,” Journal of
    Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 301-334.

                                                27
[15] Imbs, J., 2004, “Growth and Volatility,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[16] Juglar, C., 1862, Des Crises Commerciales et Leur Retour Periodique en France, en Angleterre
    et aux Etats-Unis, Guillaumin Editeur, Paris.

[17] Kaminsky, G., and C. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance
    of Payments Problems,” The American Economic Review, 89(3), 473-500.

[18] Kaminsky, G., and S. Schmukler, 2002, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Eﬀects of
    Financial Liberalization,” mimeo.

[19] Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” The Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
    211-248.

[20] Klein, M., 2005, “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional Quality and Economic Growth:
    Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 11112.

[21] Kraus, A., and D. Litzenberger, 1976, “Skewness Preference and the Valuation of Risky As-
    sets,” The Journal of Finance, 31, 1085-1100.

[22] Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000, “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality
    and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 31-77.

[23] Obstfeld, M., 1994, “Risk-Taking, Globalization, and Growth,” American Economic Review ,
    84, 1310-1329.

[24] Rajan R., and L. Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic
    Review, 88(3), 559-586.

[25] Ramey, V., and G. Ramey, 1995, “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link between Volatility and
    Growth,” American Economic Review, 85(5), 1138-51.

[26] Ranciere, R., A. Tornell and F. Westermann, 2003, “Crises and Growth: A Re-evaluation,”
    NBER Working Paper 10073.

[27] Schneider, M., and A. Tornell, 2004, “Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
    Crises,” The Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 883-913.

[28] Schneider, M., and A. Tornell, 2005, “Concentrated Ownership and Bailout Guarantees,”
    mimeo.

[29] Schumpeter, J., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University Press.

[30] Tirole, J., 2003, “Ineﬃcient Foreign Borrowing: a Dual-and-common Agency Perspective,”
    American Economic Review, 93(5), 1678-1702.

                                               28
[31] Tirole, J., and P. Pathak, 2004, “Pegs, Risk Management, and Financial Crises,” mimeo.

[32] Tornell, A., and F. Westermann, 2002, “Boom-Bust Cycles: Facts and Explanation,” IMF
        Staﬀ Papers, 49.

[33] Veldkamp, L., 2005, “Slow Boom, Sudden Crash,” Journal of Economic Theory, 124(2), 230-
        257.

[34] Windmeijer, F., 2005, “A finite sample correction for the variance of linear eﬃcient two-step
        GMM estimators,” Journal of Econometrics, 126(1): 25-51.


A        APPENDIX

A.1       Decreasing Returns Technologies

Here, we present a decreasing returns version of the model, and show that systemic risk may
accelerate growth in a transition phase, but not indefinitely. At some point, an economy must
switch to a safe path. Here, we show that there is a threshold for internal funds w∗ such that for
w < w∗ , the economy is in a “fragile phase” where, as in the Ak model, there are two equilibria:
safe and risky. Meanwhile, for w > w∗ , the economy is in a “non-fragile phase” in which only the
safe equilibrium exists. We then show that in the fragile phase, expected growth is greater in the
risky equilibrium than in the safe one.53
       The setup is like that in Section 2 where the safe and risky technologies are similar to those
                                                                                  r
in (1) except that the linear production functions are replaced by concave ones: qt+1 = Ωt+1 f (It )
     s
and qt+1 = g(It ). To capture the parameter restrictions, in (7) we assume that the safe production
function is proportional to the risky one g(I) ≡ χ · f (I) and use the following parametrization.


                        f (I) = I λ ,   g(I) = χ · I λ ,    λ ∈ (0, 1), 0 < u < χ < 1                    (18)


Since u < χ, the risky technology yields more than the safe technology in the good state but has
a lower expected return. This captures the same idea as uθ < σ < θ. Meanwhile, the condition
analogous to 1 + r < uθ only holds for low levels of capital because f (I) is concave.
       We assume that at any point in time, either the risky or the safe technology can be used but
that both cannot be used simultaneously, and that when a majority of firms is insolvent a bailout
is granted to the lenders of insolvent firms that did not divert funds. The rest of the model is as in
Section 2. Under these assumptions one can derive the following proposition, which is the analogue
of Proposition 1.2 (the proof is in the extended appendix).
  53
    The model we present here follows Schneider and Tornell (2005), who consider a decreasing returns setup to
explain why rich countries do not experience severe financial crises.



                                                       29
Proposition A.1 (Symmetric Credit Market Equilibria (CME)) Borrowing constraints arise
in equilibrium only if the degree of contract enforceability is not too high (h < ζ t+1 δ −1 ). If this con-
dition holds, then:

   • For all levels of w there exists a ‘safe’ CME in which all firms only invest in the safe technology
      and a systemic crisis in the next period cannot occur: ζ t+1 = 1.

                                                          ˜ r , I),
   • There is a unique threshold for internal funds w∗ ∈ (I/m   ˜ such that there also exists a
      risky CME in which ζ t+1 = u if and only if w < w∗ and h ∈ (h, h̄), where h is given by (31).

                                                                                        ˆ s and
   • In the safe and risky CME borrowing constraints bind for internal funds lower than I/m
     ˜ r , respectively. Investment is given by
     I/m
        ⎧                                ⎧
        ⎨ ms w        if w <   Iˆ        ⎨ mr w      if w <   I˜                   ˆ =1+r
                                                                              g 0 (I)
                               ms                             mr
   Is =                             Ir =                              where               .
        ⎩ Iˆ                   Iˆ        ⎩ I˜                 I˜                   ˜ =1+r
                      if w ≥   ms                    if w ≥   mr              f 0 (I)
   This proposition identifies two levels of capital: the ‘eﬃcient level’ Iˆ which is the one that
would be attained in a standard neoclassical economy, and the ‘Pangloss level’ I, ˜ which equalizes
the marginal return of the risky technology in the good state to 1 + r. Clearly, I˜ is larger than I.
                                                                                                   ˆ
                                                               ˜ r (I/m
   In a risky (safe) CME, borrowing constraints bind up to w = I/m  ˆ s ). As long as borrowing
constraints bind, investment is equal to the one in the Ak setup: I j = wmj . However, when
borrowing constraints cease to bind, investment remains unchanged as w increases.
   The key point made by Proposition A.1 is that while a safe CME always exists, a risky CME
exists only for levels of internal funds lower than w∗ . This threshold, however, is high enough so
that whenever borrowing constraints bind, a risky CME exists. This is because w∗ is larger than
˜ r . The intuition is the following. As in the Ak setup, there is a leverage eﬀect and an eﬃciency
I/m
eﬀect. At low levels of w the increase in leverage more than compensates for the lower expected
productivity of the risky technology. This advantage, however, weakens as w increases because
there are decreasing returns in production. Thus, at some point, w∗ , the advantage disappears and
the risky CME ceases to exist.
   Proposition A.1 implies that an economy cannot be on a risky path forever. A switch to a safe
                                                      ˜ This result contrasts with that in the Ak
phase must happen before w reaches the Pangloss level I.
setup.
   Next, we derive a result analogous to Proposition 2.2 by comparing the expected growth rate
of an economy that travels from a risky to a safe phase —a “risky economy”— with an economy that
is always on the safe path —a “safe economy.” We assume that a risky CME is played whenever it




                                                    30
exists —i.e., for all w < w∗ . Thus, in a risky economy internal funds evolve as follows:
                    ⎧
                    ⎪
                    ⎪ at+1                                   if wt < w∗ and Ωt+1 = 0
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                    ⎪                                                ˜ r and Ωt+1 = 1
                    ⎪                     r       −1     r
                    ⎨ [1 − d − τ ][f (wt m ) − u hm wt ]
                    ⎪                                        if wt < I/m
            r                         ˜ − δ −1 [I˜ − wt ]]            ˜ r , w∗ ) and Ωt+1 = 1
           wt+1   =   [1 − d − τ ][f (I)                     if wt ∈ [I/m                         (19)
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                    ⎪                                                              ˆ s
                    ⎪
                    ⎪ [1 − d − τ ][g(wt ms ) − hms wt ]      if wt ≥ w∗ and w∗ < I/m
                    ⎪
                    ⎪
                    ⎩                 ˆ − δ −1 (Iˆ − wt )]                       ˆ s
                      [1 − d − τ ][g(I)                      if wt ≥ w∗ and w∗ ≥ I/m

The crisis aid payment at+1 is given by (11). In a safe economy internal funds are given by the
                            ˆ s and by the fifth row for wt ≥ I/m
fourth row of (19) for wt < I/m                               ˆ s.
                                                                    ˜ r , borrowing constraints
     Notice that a poor economy behaves like an Ak economy. If wt < I/m
bind and firms have incentives to take on risk as a way to increase leverage. In fact, if we replace
the production function f (I) by θI, we can see that internal funds evolve identically as in Section
2.
     The following proposition compares the expected growth rates in safe and risky symmetric
equilibria γ jt+1 = Et (wt+1
                         j
                             /wt ), j = {risky, safe}.

Proposition A.2 Under the proportional aid assumption (11), there exists a threshold for the de-
gree of contract enforceability h, given in (31) in the extended appendix, such that for any generosity
of aid granted in the case of systemic insolvency, i.e., for any α ∈ (0, 1) :

     1. Systemic risk arises in equilibrium only if wt < w∗ and h ∈ (h, h̄).

     2. Whenever systemic risk arises, it increases the expected growth rate.

     3. If wt reaches w∗ , there is a shift to a safe path. Furthermore, if d ≤ 1 − δ, output converges
                                        ˆ
        to the eﬃcient level qt+1 = g(I).

     This proposition makes two points. First, whenever systemic risk arises, it accelerates expected
growth. Second, systemic risk and the increase in expected growth cannot last forever, but only
during a transition phase. As the economy becomes richer, there must be a shift to a safe path.
The first point follows because the thresholds for wt and h are the same as those in Proposition A.1.
The intuition is the same as in Section 2. The second point follows because as the risky economy
becomes suﬃciently rich, borrowing constraints cease to bind, so the leverage benefits due to risk
taking go away. Recall that on a risky path, borrowing constraints are binding up to w = I/m˜ r,
which is less than w∗ . Finally, under condition d ≤ 1 − δ, the transition curve is always above the
45-degree line in the (wt , wt+1 ) space. Thus, the economy will not cycle between the safe and the
risky phases. Once it reaches the safe phase, it stays there forever. In this case, output converges
     ˆ and the excess of w over Iˆ is saved and thus earns the world interest rate.
to g(I),


                                                    31
A.2       Currency Mismatch

In most middle income countries risky strategies have been undertaken via currency mismatch.
This occurs when firms that sell to the domestic market borrow in foreign currency. If there is
suﬃcient real exchange rate variability, currency mismatch generates insolvency risk as a sharp
depreciation can bankrupt firms through a balance sheet eﬀect. This variability, in turn, may
arise if there is enough dollar debt in the books. The risky technology in the model captures this
phenomenon by hardwiring insolvency risk in the model.
      In order to explicitly model currency mismatch, we need to consider nontradables (N-) and
tradables (T-) sectors and endogenize their relative price: the real exchange rate. The derivation
and the intuition, however, is significantly more involved because the source of insolvency risk —
suﬃcient real exchange variability— must be endogenously derived. This more complicated setup
has been worked out by Ranciere et.al. (2003). A mechanism similar to ours is at work in this
two-sector model. In particular, systemic risk arises and is growth enhancing when crises are rare
and there is a medium degree of contract enforceability.


A.3       Simulations

The behavior of the model economy is determined by seven parameters: θ, σ, d, r, u, α, h. We set the
probability of crisis (1 − u) equal to the historical probability of a systemic banking crisis. Using
the crisis index of Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) we find that 1 − u = 4.13% across our sample of 83
                                                                            1+growth lucky times
countries over the period 1981-2000.54 Since in our model α =               1+growth crisis times ,   we estimate α
using the following algorithm. First, we find the minimum annual growth rate during each systemic
banking crisis in our sample and then we average these growth rates: we obtain gc = −7.23% with
a standard deviation of σ gc = 5.83%. Second, we compute the average growth rate in non-crisis
years: gn = 1.43% with a standard deviation σ gn = 4.11. Third, we consider a drop from a boom
(gn + 2σ gn ) to a severe bust (gc − 2σ gc ) and obtain α = 0.79. In our benchmark simulation, we set
α even more conservatively at α = 0.5. The interest rate r, is set to the average Fed funds rate
during the nineties: 5.13%.
      Given the values of r and u, we determine the range for the degree of contract enforceability
h over which risky and safe equilibria exist: h ∈ (h = 0.48, uδ −1 = 1.006). In our benchmark
simulation, we set h = 0.5. Finally, the technological parameters (θ,σ) and the payout rate d
do not have an empirical counterpart and are irrelevant for the existence of equilibria. We set
d = 10% and the return to the safe technology to 10% (σ = 1.1). We then set θ = 1.12 so as to
satisfy the restriction 1 + r < θu < σ < θ. The following table summarizes the parameters used in
our benchmark simulation presented in Figures 2-4.
 54
      If we use the banking crisis index of Detriagache and Demirguc-Kunt, we find 1 − u = 3.94%.




                                                         32
Parameters                          baseline value


Safe Return                          σ = 1.10
Risky High Return                    θ = 1.12
World Interest Rate                  r = 0.0513
Dividend Rate                        d = 0.10
Financial Distress Costs             α = 0.50
Probability of crisis                1 − u = 0.0418
Degree of Contract Enforceability    h = 0.50




                                            33
Figure 1: Safe vs. Risky Growth Path: A Comparison of India and Thailand, 1980–2002

                                  Real Credit                                                                        GDP per capita

  14                                                                                    2.8

  12                      India           Thailand                                                      India          Thailand
                                                                                        2.4
  10

                                                                                        2.0
  8

  6
                                                                                        1.6

  4
                                                                                        1.2
  2

  0                                                                                     0.8
       80         82      84   86    88     90    92        94   96   98    00    02          80   82   84      86    88    90     92   94   96    98        00   02


 Note: The values for 1980 are normalized to one. The figures display annual credit and per-capita GDP series.



                                                 Figure 2: Model Economy: Growth and Crises

                 5



                                                                                                                                 RISKY: 2 CRISES
                 4




                                                                                                                                  RISKY: 4 CRISES
                 3
       LOG (W)




                 2
                                                                                                                           SAFE



                 1                                                                                                                 RISKY: 6 CRISES




                 0




                 -1
                      0             10                 20              30        TIME   40              50             60               70              80


       parameters : σ = 1.10 θ = 1.12 r = 0.051 d = 0.10 α = 0.5 1 − u = 0.0418 h = 0.5
                                                  Figure 3: Risky vs. Safe: The Role of Contract Enforceability

                             3.5




                                          3
                                                                                                                                     h=0.7


                             2.5
Log(Wrisky)- Log( Wsafe )




                                          2


                                                                                                                                     h=0.6
                             1.5




                                          1

                                                                                                                                      h=0.5
                             0.5




                                          0




                            -0.5
                                              0             10        20        30        40                50        60        70             80
                                                                                                    TIME

                                          parameters : σ = 1.10 θ = 1.12 r = 0.051 d = 0.10 α = 0.5 1 − u = 0.0418

                                                           Figure 4: Risky vs. Safe: Financial Distress Costs

                                                  3




                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                      a = 0.8


                                                  2
              Log(Wrisky)- Log( Wsafe )




                                                                                                                                          a = 0.65
                                              1.5




                                                  1


                                                                                                                                          a = 0.5
                                              0.5




                                                  0




                                          -0.5
                                                      0          10        20        30        40                50        60        70             80
                                                                                                     TIME

                                                      parameters : σ = 1.10 θ = 1.12 r = 0.051 d = 0.10 h = 0.5 1 − u = 0.0418
                       Figure 5: Kernel Distributions of Real Credit Growth 1980-2002


           Kernel Density (Epanechnikov, h = 0.1000)                    Kernel Density (Epanechnikov, h = 0.1000)
6                                                             4

5
                                                              3
4

3                                                             2

2
                                                              1
1

0                                                             0
    -.4    -.3   -.2    -.1    .0     .1   .2     .3     .4       -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1      .0      .1   .2   .3   .4
                              India                                                       Thailand

                               Moments of real credit growth (1980-2002)


                                                 India                               Thailand

          Mean                                   0.064                               0.094
          Standard Deviation                     0.055                               0.126
          Skewness                               0.132                               -0.824
        Figure 6: Measuring Systemic Risk: Skewness and Crisis Indexes

                     Panel A: Real credit growth rates in Thailand (1980-2000)
              .3


              .2


              .1


              .0


             -.1


             -.2
                           80             82           84         86     88              90     92          94         96     98     00


                   Panel B: Histograms and kernel distributions of credit growth rates in Thailand (1980-2000)

                                   A) All years                                          B) Without de jure Crises                                    C) Without outliers
                                                                                           years excluded: 1985-1987; 1998-2000                         years excluded: 1980; 1998-2000
        5                                                                     5                                                       5


        4                                                                     4                                                       4


        3                                                                     3                                                       3


        2                                                                     2                                                       2


        1                                                                     1                                                       1


        0                                                                     0                                                       0
            -0.2          -0.1       -0.0        0.1        0.2    0.3            -0.1         0.0          0.1        0.2     0.3     0.00      0.05         0.10    0.15   0.20        0.25


        4                                                                     5                                                       5


                                                                              4                                                       4
        3

                                                                              3                                                       3
        2
                                                                              2                                                       2

        1
                                                                              1                                                       1


        0                                                                     0                                                       0
                    -.2      -.1     .0     .1         .2    .3                          -.1    .0     .1         .2     .3               -.3   -.2     -.1      .0    .1    .2     .3          .4

                                              A)                                                      (B)                                                               (C)
        Mean                                 0.103                                                   0.152                                                              0.153
        Std. Dev.                            0.123                                                   0.081                                                              0.067
        Skewness                            -0.900                                                   -0.994                                                             -0.196

Note: The de jure crises are identified by the consensus banking crisis index described in subsection 3.1. The outliers are the four negative
extreme observations.
                    Figure 7: Growth Residuals vs. Moments of Credit Growth




                                                                                                                                                                            6




                                                                                           6
                                                                          CHN




      6
                                                                    IRL
                                                                  BWA
                                                                          KOR




                                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                           4
                                                                 SGP   THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN




      4
                                                                      IDN                                                                                                                                       BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                           PRT         MYS                                            CHN




                                                                                                   2
                                                             BEL




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                            CHL       GBR
                                                         TUR             NZL                                                                                                                                   SGP MEX
                                                          IND         BGD                                                      BWA                                                                                KOR              IRL
                                                               BRA
                                                                 AUS                                         KORSGP          IRL                                                                          THA          BFA
                                                       DOM                                                                                                                                    IDN SEN
                                                         TUN                                                                            MWI                                                                       CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR PRT




      2
                                        MEX BFA            NOR       ISL                                              PRT
                                                  DEU                                                         JPN
                                                                                                            DEU                                                                                                 DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SWE GMB    URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIN IND
                                                JPN
                                                  ITA
                                                DNKESP NLD        MAR                                            IND                                                                                  ARG




                                                                                        0
                                                FIN  CRI                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                       CHL THA                                                                                  USA ESP DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CRIFRA
                                             URYAUT                                                          AUT
                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                               FRAESP                BFA                                0                                    ZWE MYSPNG AUTITA
                                               USA          ISR                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                  TUNFINSWEDNK TUR                  MEX                                                                    TUN DEU
                                              FRA CAN
                                             SWE                                                                                                                                                                       NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAN                      BEL
                                                                                                                   MYS PNG SEN
                                                                                                                                                                      growth residuals
                                                                                                                   NOR
                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                 NLD




                                                                                     growth residuals




growth residuals
                                                                   BOL                                               GRC         DOM                                                                         NER         GRCBRA
                                               GRC    COL                                                     CHE AUS                  URY
                                                                                                                                      GMB                                                                                   NLD
                    MWI                                                                                                     GBR                                                                             ISRKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COL       CHE
                                          PNGZWECHE                                                                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                              PAN                                               ISR     BGD        ARGCRI                                                                                                 GBR
                                     GMB                                                                                COL           ZWE     IDN                                                                  MDG         BGD
                                    SEN ARG
                                                        JAM




      0
                                                       PRY                                                               MDGKEN
                                                                                                                        ISL         NER




                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                                            MAR      NZL                                                                      JAM              ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAR
                                                      HND                                                                                            BRA                                                   PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOL                                    NZL
                                           KEN                                                                                                                                                                           PRY
                                                                                                                                                                            -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HND
                                                                                                                        HND PRY
                                                                                                                         PAN JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          JOR
                                                     JOR                                                              JOR




                                                                                           -4
                              MDG




      -2
                        NER                                                                                                                                BOL
                                                                                                                                                                            -4




                   -5               0             5           10                15                      0          10          20            30                  40                      -3     -2      -1    0      1      2             3           4
                                        mean of credit growth                                                  standard deviation of credit growth                                                    skewness of credit growth

                   Note: The partial linear plots are based on the estimation results of regression 3, Table 2.
Table 1
Skewness, Crises, and Extreme Observations

Panel A: Extreme observations, coded crises and skewness
Sample: 29 countries with negative skewness (1981-2000)
                                                                    Complete credit growth
                   Lowest extreme observations                                                                           Credit growth distributions without extreme observations
                                                                       distributions
                                                                                                                                    Share of countries with       Share of countries with skewness >0 or
   Observations eliminated          Percentage of crisis years         Average skewness               Average skewness
                                                                                                                                       skewness >-0.2               reduced by 80% in absolute value
               2                              90%                            -0.70                           0.16                            79%                                   65%
               3                              79%                            -0.70                           0.36                            90%                                   87%

Note: Panel A assesses whether extreme credit growth observations drive negative skewness. We consider the countries with negative skewness, and for each country we eliminate the 2 (or 3) lowest
credit growth observations. We then compute the effect of these extreme observations on skewness and determine whether they are coded as a crisis by any of the ten crisis indexes we list in the extended
appendix. Average skewness figures correspond to cross-country averages across the sample of 29 countries with negative skewness. The sample period is 1981-2000.
Source: Table EA4 in the extended appendix.

Panel B: Observations with highest impact on skewness, coded crises and skewness
Sample: 29 countries with negative skewness (1981-2000)
                                                                    Complete credit growth
         Observations with highest impact on skewness                                                        Credit growth distribution without observations with highest impact on skewness
                                                                        distribution
                                                                                                                                    Share of countries with        Share of countries with skewness>0 or
   Observations eliminated          Percentage of crisis years         Average skewness               Average skewness
                                                                                                                                       skewness >-0.2                reduced by 80% in absolute value
               2                              75%                            -0.70                           0.22                             86%                                   72%
               3                              79%                            -0.70                           0.45                             97%                                   97%
Note: Panel B considers the possibility that negative skewness can also be affected by non-extreme credit growth observations. We look at the countries with negative skewness, and for each country we
eliminate the 2 (3) observations whose omission results in the highest increase in skewness. The sample period is 1981-2000.

Panel C: Consensus crisis years and skewness
Sample: 35 countries with at least one consensus crisis (1981-2000)
  Number of countries with
   increased skewness after                            Average skewness
  elimination of crisis years
                                                                  Distribution without crisis
                                     Complete distributions                  years
              32                              -0.41                           0.32
Note: Panel C assesses whether the exclusion of crises increases skewness. For each country we exclude consensus crises and compute the effect on skewness. Average skewness figures correspond to
cross-country averages across the sample of 35 countries with at least one consensus crisis. Consensus crises are meant to capture truly severe crises. They are defined in subsection 3.1. The sample period
is 1981-2000.
Source: Table EA5 in the extended appendix.
Table 2
Skewness and Growth: Baseline Estimations
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                               1961-2000            1971-2000           1981-2000         1961-2000       1971-2000        1981-2000
Estimation technique                                                    OLS                                                  FGLS
Unit of observations                                                Cross-section                               Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                        [1]                  [2]               [3]               [4]              [5]              [6]
Moments of real credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                            0.339    ***         0.348    ***       0.313   ***       0.156   ***     0.149    ***     0.159    ***
                                                       0.05                0.056             0.053             0.011            0.011            0.012
Real credit growth - standard deviation             -0.032               -0.068    **       -0.071   **       -0.049   ***     -0.064   ***     -0.048   ***
                                                      0.024                 0.03             0.029              0.01            0.009            0.009
Real credit growth - skewness                       -0.274    **         -0.334    **       -0.315   **       -0.333   ***     -0.244   ***     -0.268   ***
                                                      0.129                0.131             0.143             0.073            0.075            0.071


Control variables:
Initial secondary schooling                          0.031    **          0.024    *         0.019             0.016   ***     0.021    ***     0.026    ***
                                                      0.013                0.013             0.018             0.004            0.004            0.003
Initial income per capita                           -0.222               -0.283             -0.344            -0.022           -0.182   *       -0.209   ***
(in logs)                                             0.247                0.273             0.348             0.093            0.095            0.062


No. countries / No. observations                     58/58                58/58              58/58            58/209          58/166           58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: Regressions 1 to 3 are cross-section regressions estimated by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported.
Regressions 4 to 6 are panel regressions estimated by Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS). All the FGLS specifications include time effects.
Coefficients for period dummies are not reported.
Table 3
Skewness and Growth: Country Grouping Estimations
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                      1981-2000                   1961-2000              1971-2000
Unit of observations                                                                     Non-overlapping 10 year windows
Financial liberalization indicator                                      De facto              De jure (Quinn )        De jure (Mody)
                                                                             [1]                           [2]                   [3]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                                  0.105    ***                 0.091   ***            0.091    ***
                                                                            0.018                       0.025                   0.033
Real credit growth - standard deviation                                   -0.058    ***                -0.077   ***           -0.098    ***
                                                                            0.009                       0.014                   0.016
Real credit growth - skewness                                             -0.011                       -0.081                 -0.019
                                                                            0.085                       0.109                   0.133

Moment of credit growth interacted:
Mean credit growth * MEC_FL                                                0.131    ***                 0.170   ***            0.151    ***
                                                                            0.034                       0.044                   0.055
Standard deviation of credit growth * MEC_FL                               0.047    **                  0.020                  0.043
                                                                            0.018                       0.028                   0.030
Skewness of credit growth * MEC_FL                                        -0.802    ***                -0.750   ***           -1.002    ***
                                                                            0.165                       0.244                   0.275

MEC_FL                                                                    -0.145                       -0.026                 -0.048
(Medium contract enforceability*financial liberalization)                   0.230                       0.376                   0.412

Control variables:
Initial secondary schooling                                                0.019    ***                 0.013   ***            0.000
                                                                            0.006                       0.005                   0.008
Initial income per capita                                                 -0.236    *                  -0.164                 -0.074
(in logs)                                                                   0.140                       0.123                   0.152


Skewness (fully liberalized MEC countries; FIN_MEC=1):
Coefficient                                                               -0.810                       -1.020                 -0.850
Standard error                                                             0.120                        0.040                  0.210
F-test Ho: Coefficient=0 (P-value)                                         0.000                        0.000                  0.000

No. countries / No. observations                                          58/114                        32/96                49/163

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: See Section 3.2 for the construction of the composite index of medium enforceability of contracts and financial liberalization
(MEC_FL). Coefficients for period dummies are not reported.
Table 4
Skewness and Growth: GMM System Estimations
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                             1971-2000
Unit of observations                                                Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                [1]                             [2]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                      0.26 ***                          0.24 ***
                                                              0.039                             0.044
Real credit growth - standard deviation                      -0.109                             -0.15
                                                              0.089                             0.104
Real credit growth - skewness                                -0.601 ***                        -0.589 **
                                                              0.163                             0.222


Set of control variables                                 Simple set                        Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                            58/166                            58/166

SPECIFICATION TESTS (p -values)
(a) Sargan-Hansen Test:                                        0.13                              0.18
(b) Second-order serial correlation:                           0.29                               0.3

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: 2-step system GMM estimates are reported. Robust standard errors are computed using Windmeijer's (2005)
small sample correction. In regression 1, all regressors are treated as endogenous. In regression 2, all regressors are
treated as endogenous with the exception of skewness. Appropriate lagged levels (differences) are used as instruments
to estimate the difference (level) equation. All GMM system regressions include time effects and country fixed effects.
The coefficients for the control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) and period dummies are
not reported.
Table 5
Skewness and Growth: Country Groupings GMM System Estimations
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Financial liberalization indicator                                      De jure (Quinn)         De jure (Mody)
Estimation period                                                                       1971-2000
Unit of observations                                                         Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                                    [1]                    [2]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                                         0.042                    0.129
                                                                                   0.063                    0.082
Real credit growth - standard deviation                                          -0.135 ***               -0.126 **
                                                                                   0.026                     0.05
Real credit growth - skewness                                                      0.04                   -0.037
                                                                                   0.134                    0.218


Moment of credit growth interacted:
Mean credit growth * MEC_FL                                                       0.278 **                 0.132
                                                                                   0.113                    0.142
Standard deviation of credit growth * MEC_FL                                      0.095                    0.075
                                                                                    0.06                    0.093
Skewness of credit growth * MEC_FL                                               -1.007 ***               -1.222 ***
                                                                                   0.344                    0.437


MEC_FL                                                                           -1.899 *                 -0.697
(Medium contract enforceability*financial liberalization)                          1.028                    2.063


Set of control variables                                                      Simple set              Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                                                 49/144                   32/93

SPECIFICATION TESTS (p -values)
(a) Sargan-Hansen Test:                                                            0.32                     0.35
(b) Second-order serial correlation:                                               0.28                     0.23

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: 2-step system GMM estimates are reported. Robust standard errors are computed using Windmeijer's (2005) small
sample correction. The coefficients for the control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) and
period dummies are not reported.
Table 6
Crisis Indexes and Growth
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                                            1981-2000
Unit of observations                                                               Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                              [1]                [2]              [3]              [4]                     [5]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                   0.178 ***          0.165 ***          0.165 ***          0.159 ***          0.164 ***
                                                             0.005              0.007              0.007               0.01              0.008
Real credit growth - standard deviation                    -0.064 ***          -0.06 ***         -0.061 ***          -0.06 ***         -0.057 ***
                                                             0.007              0.007              0.007              0.007              0.006


Crisis indexes:
Banking crisis: Caprio Klingebiel index                     0.258 **
                                                             0.127
Banking crisis: Detragriache et al. index                                      0.223 **
                                                                                0.105
Banking crisis: Consensus index                                                                   0.228 **
                                                                                                    0.11
Sudden stop: Consensus index                                                                                         0.464 **
                                                                                                                      0.201
Currency crisis: Consensus index                                                                                                        0.072
                                                                                                                                         0.169


Set of control variables                               Simple set         Simple set         Simple set         Simple set         Simple set
No. countries / No. Observations                          58/114             58/114             58/114             58/114             58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Note: A crisis index is equal to one if a country-decade experienced a crisis, zero otherwise. See Section 3.1 for the construction of the consensus
crisis indexes. The coefficients for the control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) and period dummies are not reported.
Table 7
Panel A: Investment and Skewness Regressions
Dependent variables: Domestic price-investment rate, PPP-investment rate
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Dependent variable                                      Domestic price-investment rate                          PPP-investment rate
Estimation period                                                                                1971-2000
Estimation technique                                           FGLS          GMM system                   FGLS                   GMM system
Unit of observations                                                           Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                     [1]             [2]                    [3]                              [4]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                       0.332 ***            0.499 ***                   0.271 ***                  0.39 ***
                                                                    0.036                0.096                    0.028                    0.091
Real credit growth - standard deviation                        -0.081 ***            -0.125                     -0.073 ***               -0.159
                                                                    0.024                0.175                    0.023                    0.137
Real credit growth - skewness                                  -0.765 ***            -1.127 **                  -0.737 ***               -1.207 **
                                                                    0.191                0.543                    0.149                    0.603


Lagged investment rates:
Lagged investment rate (domestic price)                         0.718 ***            0.608 ***
                                                                    0.036                0.104
Lagged investment rate (PPP)                                                                                     0.753 ***                0.548 ***
                                                                                                                  0.031                    0.132
Control set of variables                                   Simple set            Simple set                  Simple set               Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                              57/163                57/163                      57/163                   57/163

SPECIFICATION TESTS (p -values)
(a) Sargan-Hansen Test:                                                                  0.16                                               0.14
(b) Second-order serial correlation:                                                     0.23                                               0.24

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Note: The coefficients for the control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) and period dummies are not reported.

Panel B: Growth and Investment Regressions
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                                        1971-2000
Estimation technique                                           FGLS          GMM system                   FGLS                   GMM system
Unit of observations                                                           Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                   [1]               [2]                    [3]                              [4]
Investment rate domestic price                                  0.217 ***         0.224 ***
                                                                    0.015                0.041
Investment rate PPP price                                                                                        0.166 ***                 0.17 ***
                                                                                                                 0.011                    0.046

Control set of variables                                      Simple                Simple                      Simple                   Simple
No. countries / No. observations                              57/171                57/171                      57/171                   57/171

SPECIFICATION TESTS (p -values)
(a) Sargan-Hansen Test:                                                                  0.47                                               0.17
(b) Second-order serial correlation:                                                      0.4                                               0.45

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



Note: The coefficients for the control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) and period dummies are not reported.
Table 8
Skewness and Growth
Robustness: Extended Set of Controls
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                     1961-2000      1971-2000        1981-2000
Unit of observations                                         Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                             [1]             [2]             [3]
Moments of real credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                  0.133 ***         0.126 ***          0.138 ***
                                                            0.011             0.013              0.01
Real credit growth - standard deviation                   -0.036 ***        -0.037 ***         -0.046 ***
                                                             0.01              0.01             0.009
Real credit growth - skewness                             -0.261 ***        -0.234 ***         -0.226 ***
                                                            0.072             0.073             0.071


Control variables:
Initial secondary schooling                                0.001             0.008               0.01
                                                            0.005             0.006             0.007
Initial income per capita                                  -0.27 *          -0.405 **          -0.217
 (in logs)                                                   0.15             0.162             0.179
Openness to trade                                         -0.045             0.346 **           0.769 ***
                                                            0.147             0.159             0.159
Government consumption as a share of GDP                  -0.042 ***        -0.059 ***         -0.063 ***
                                                            0.014             0.014             0.014
Inflation rate                                            -0.016 ***        -0.015 ***         -0.007 *
                                                            0.004             0.004             0.004
Life expectancy at birth                                   0.083 ***         0.073 ***          0.039 ***
                                                            0.015             0.015             0.014
Black market premium                                      -0.131            -0.178 *           -0.164 ***
                                                            0.081             0.099             0.015
No. countries / No. observations                          58/209            58/166            58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: The specification of the regressions is identical to regressions 4 to 6, Table 2 and includes five
additional control variables: Openness to trade, government consumption as a share of GDP, life
expectancy at birth, and black market premium.
Table 9
Skewness and Growth: Country Groupings Estimations
Robustness: Alternative Definitions of the MEC set
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                                              1981-2000
Unit of observations                                                                   Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                                        [1]             [2]                   [3]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                                            0.084 ***           0.127 ***         0.106 ***
                                                                                      0.019              0.013              0.013
Real credit growth - standard deviation                                             -0.057 ***          -0.066 ***        -0.047 ***
                                                                                      0.011              0.008              0.009
Real credit growth -skewness                                                          -0.01             -0.182 **         -0.172 **
                                                                                      0.098              0.072              0.069


Moment of credit growth interacted:
Mean credit growth * MEC_FL                                                          0.195 ***           0.184 ***         0.312 ***
                                                                                      0.037               0.06               0.06
Standard deviation of credit growth * MEC_FL                                         0.018               0.095 ***        -0.036
                                                                                      0.023              0.026              0.031
Skewness of credit growth * MEC_FL                                                  -0.814 ***          -0.551 ***        -0.625 ***
                                                                                      0.189              0.198              0.195

MEC_FL                                                                              -0.238              -1.453 ***        -0.249
( Medium contract enforceability*financial liberalization)                            0.261              0.561              0.593


Skewness (fully liberalized MEC countries):
Coefficient                                                                           -0.82              -0.73               -0.8
Standard error                                                                        0.16               0.18               0.19
F-test Ho: Coefficient=0 (P-value)                                                        0                  0                  0

Set of control variables                                                         simple set         simple set         simple set
No. countries / No. observations                                                    58/114             58/114             58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: The specification of the regressions is identical to regression 1, Table 3 with alternative definitions of the MEC set.
Countries classified as MEC have a PRS law and order index equal to (i) 3, 4 or 5 (regression 1), (ii) 2, 3 or 4 (regression 2), (iii)
3 or 4 (regression 3). The coefficients for the other control variables (initial income per capita and secondary schooling) are not
reported.
Table 10
Skewness and Growth
Robustness: Full Sample of 83 Countries
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                   1961-2000            1971-2000         1981-2000       1961-2000       1971-2000             1981-2000
Unit of observations                                                                       Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                             [1]               [2]                [3]              [4]            [5]                  [6]
Moments of real credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                  0.14    ***       0.137   ***        0.128    ***    0.115    ***      0.107    ***       0.106   ***
                                                           0.009             0.011               0.008            0.01              0.01             0.011
Real credit growth - standard deviation                  -0.031    ***      -0.038   ***       -0.031    ***   -0.023    ***     -0.026    ***      -0.018   **
                                                           0.007             0.008               0.006           0.008             0.008             0.007
Real credit growth - skewness                            -0.289    ***      -0.213   ***       -0.224    ***   -0.225    ***     -0.196    ***      -0.189   ***
                                                           0.065             0.065                0.05           0.063             0.058             0.067


Control variables:
Initial secondary schooling                               0.005              0.012   **         0.017    **     0.006             0.012    **        0.012   **
                                                           0.006             0.005               0.007           0.004             0.005             0.005
Initial income per capita                                 0.082             -0.182             -0.244    **    -0.472    ***     -0.601    ***      -0.485   ***
                                                           0.122             0.118               0.122            0.12             0.123             0.121
Openness to trade                                                                                               0.327    **       0.481    ***       0.711   ***
                                                                                                                 0.137             0.151             0.158
Government consumption as a share of GDP                                                                        -0.03    ***     -0.034    ***      -0.032   **
                                                                                                                 0.012             0.012             0.014
Inflation rate                                                                                                  -0.01    ***     -0.011    ***      -0.008   **
                                                                                                                 0.004             0.004             0.003
Life expectancy at birth                                                                                        0.117    ***      0.119    ***       0.096   ***
                                                                                                                 0.014             0.016             0.015
Black market premium                                                                                           -0.165    ***     -0.145    **       -0.120   ***
                                                                                                                 0.064             0.059             0.021
No. countries / No. observations                        83/299              83/237             83/161          83/299           83/237              83/161

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: The specifications for regressions 1-3 are identical to regressions 4-6 in Table 2. The specifications for regressions 4-6 are identical to regressions 1-
3, Table 8.
Table 11
Skewness and Growth
Robustness: Outliers
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                                                                                1961-2000
Unit of observations                                                                                                   Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                                                                                                                                          Papua New
Outlier omitted                                                                 None             Bolivia (60s)         Niger (70s)          Senegal (70s)          Jordan (80s)          Guinea (80s)          Niger (80s)
                                                                                 [1]                       [2]                 [3]                    [4]                   [5]                   [6]                  [7]
Moments of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                                        0.16   ***              0.16    ***         0.16    ***              0.16   ***          0.16    ***             0.16   ***         0.15     ***
                                                                                 0.01                     0.01                0.01                    0.01                 0.01                   0.01                0.01
Real credit growth - standard deviation                                         -0.05   ***              -0.05   ***         -0.05   ***             -0.05   ***         -0.05    ***            -0.05   ***         -0.05    ***
                                                                                 0.01                     0.01                0.01                    0.01                 0.01                   0.01                0.01
Real credit growth - skewness                                                   -0.33   ***              -0.31   ***         -0.32   ***             -0.31   ***         -0.35    ***            -0.34   ***         -0.32    ***
                                                                                 0.07                     0.07                0.07                    0.07                 0.07                   0.08                0.07


Set of control variables                                                   Simple set              Simple set           Simple set             Simple set           Simple set              Simple set         Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                                              58/209                  58/208               58/208                 58/208               58/208                  58/208             58/208

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




Estimation period                                                                                                                  1961-2000
Unit of observations                                                                                                   Non-overlapping 10 year windows
Outlier omitted                                  Brazil (70s)         Indonesia (70s)         Singapore (70s)          Korea (80s)        Botswana (80s)           Japan (60s)            China (90s)          all outliers
                                                          [8]                     [9]                    [10]                 [11]                  [12]                  [13]                   [14]                 [15]
Moments of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                               0.16    ***              0.16   ***              0.16    ***         0.15    ***              0.16   ***          0.16    ***             0.15   ***         0.15     ***
                                                         0.01                    0.01                     0.01                0.01                    0.01                 0.01                   0.01                0.01
Real credit growth - standard deviation                -0.05    ***             -0.05   ***              -0.05   ***         -0.05   ***             -0.05   ***         -0.05    ***            -0.05   ***         -0.05    ***
                                                         0.01                    0.01                     0.01                0.01                    0.01                 0.01                   0.01                0.01
Real credit growth - skewness                          -0.34    ***             -0.33   ***              -0.33   ***         -0.31   ***             -0.33   ***         -0.35    ***            -0.30   ***         -0.24    ***
                                                         0.07                    0.07                     0.07                0.07                    0.07                 0.07                   0.07                0.07


Set of control variables                          Simple set               Simple set              Simple set           Simple set             Simple set           Simple set              Simple set         Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                     58/208                   58/208                  58/208               58/208                 58/208               58/208                  57/208             57/196

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Note: The specification of the regressions is identical to regression 4, Table 2. A country-decade is an outlier if the absolute value of its corresponding residual exceeds two standard deviations.
Appendix A.4 Definitions and Sources of Variables used in the Regression Analysis

                       Variable                             Definition and construction                                            Source
GDP per capita                        Ratio of total GDP to total population. GDP is in 1995 constant          World Development Indicators (2003).
                                      US$.
GDP per capita growth                 Log difference of real GDP per capita.                                   World Development Indicators (2003).
Initial GDP per capita                Initial value of ratio of total GDP to total population (in logs). GDP   World Development Indicators (2003).
                                      is in 1995 constant US$.
Secondary schooling                   Ratio of total secondary enrollment, regardless of age, to the           World Development Indicators (2003).
                                      population of the age group that officially corresponds to that level
                                      of education.
Real credit growth                    Log difference of real domestic bank credit claims on the private        Author’s calculations using data from IFS - line 22, and
                                      sector.                                                                  central banks' publications. The method of calculations
                                                                                                               is based on Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1999).
                                                                                                               Domestic bank credit claims are deflated with end of
                                                                                                               the year CPI index.

Investment rate PPP-prices            Ratio of investment to GDP measured in PPP-adjusted prices.              Penn World Tables 6.1

Investment rate domestic prices       Ratio of investment to GDP measured in domestic prices.                  Penn World Tables 6.1


Terms of trade index                  Terms of trade index shows the national accounts exports price           World Development Indicators (2003).
                                      index divided by the imports price index with a 1995 base year.


Terms of trade growth                 Growth rate of terms of trade Index.                                     World Development Indicators (2003).
Government consumption                Ratio of government consumption to GDP.                                  World Development Indicators (2003).
CPI                                   Consumer price index (1995 = 100) at the end of the year.                Author’s calculations with data from IFS.

Inflation rate                        Annual % change in CPI.                                                  Author’s calculations with data from IFS.
Life expectancy                       Life expectancy at birth.                                                World Development Indicators (2003).

Trade openness                        Residual of a regression of the log of the ratio of exports and          Author’s calculations with data from Global
                                      imports (in 1995 US$) to GDP (in 1995 US$), on the logs of area          Development Network (2002)
                                      and population, and dummies for oil exporting and for landlocked
                                      countries.
Black market premium                  Ratio of black market exchange rate and official exchange rate           Author’s calculations with data from Global
                                      minus one (in percentage points).                                        Development Network (2002)



MEC_FL index                          See Section 3 for the construction of the composite index of             Degree of contract enforceability: Law and order index
                                      financial liberalization and medium degree of contract                   from Political Risk Service (2004). Financial
                                      enforceability.                                                          liberalization indexes: see Extended Appendix.

Financial liberalization indexes      See Extended Appendix.                                                   See Extended Appendix.
Crisis indexes                        See Extended Appendix.                                                   See Extended Appendix.
Appendix A.5 Sample of Countries

Algeria                                  Haiti                  Philippines
Argentina                *               Honduras           *   Portugal              *
Australia                *               Iceland            *   Senegal               *
Austria                  *               India              *   Sierra Leone
Bangladesh               *               Indonesia          *   Singapore             *
Belgium                  *               Iran                   South Africa
Bolivia                  *               Ireland            *   Spain                 *
Botswana                 *               Israel             *   Sri Lanka
Brazil                   *               Italy              *   Sweden                *
Burkina Faso             *               Jamaica            *   Switzerland           *
Canada                   *               Japan              *   Syria
Chile                    *               Jordan             *   Thailand              *
China                    *               Kenya              *   Togo
Colombia                 *               Korea, Rep.        *   Trinidad and Tobago
Congo, Dem. Rep.                         Madagascar         *   Tunisia               *
Congo, Rep.                              Malawi             *   Turkey                *
Costa Rica               *               Malaysia           *   Uganda
Cote d'Ivoire                            Mexico             *   United Kingdom        *
Denmark                  *               Morocco            *   United States         *
Dominican Republic       *               Netherlands        *   Uruguay               *
Ecuador                                  New Zealand        *   Venezuela
Egypt                                    Nicaragua              Zambia
El Salvador                              Niger              *   Zimbabwe              *
Finland                  *               Nigeria
France                   *               Norway             *
Gambia, The              *               Pakistan
Germany                  *               Panama             *
Ghana                                    Papua New Guinea   *
Greece                   *               Paraguay           *
Guatemala                                Peru
* Countries in the 58 countries sample
         Extended Appendix to “Systemic Crises and Growth”

A     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 2.1. Consider three plans: A ‘safe plan’ where there is no-diversion and
the firm will be solvent in both states; a ‘risky plan’ where there is no-diversion and the firm
will be solvent in the good state but not in the bad state; and a ‘diversion plan’ where the firm
never repays debt. In a safe plan, the entrepreneur oﬀers 1 + ρt = 1 + r, and lenders lend up to
bt (1 + r) ≤ h(wt + bt ) in order to deter diversion (i.e., qt+1 − bt (1 + r) ≥ qt+1 − h(wt + bt ). Let s
be the share of available funds (w + b = mj w) invested in the risky technology and 1 − s the share
invested in the safe technology s ∈ [0, 1]. It follows that in a safe plan, expected profits are (wlog
set wt = 1):


        good state    π st+1 = [sθ + (1 − s)σ]ms − δ −1 (ms − 1) = {[sθ + (1 − s)σ] − h} ms
                        :
                                                                    1
         bad state : π st+1 = {(1 − s)σ − h} ms , with ms =             .
                                                                 1 − hδ
            Eπ st+1 = {suθ + (1 − s)σ − h} ms = {[s(uθ − σ) + σ] − h} ms


A plan is safe because profits are positive in both states, and therefore a plan is safe when s < 1− σh .
Since uθ < σ, the best safe plan sets s = 0.
    In a risky plan, the interest rate must satisfy u(1+ρt )bt +(1−ζ t+1 )(1+ρt )bt = (1+r). If a bailout
is expected (ζ t+1 = u), then 1 + ρt = 1 + r and the borrowing constraint is ubt (1 + r) ≤ h(wt + bt ).
If no bailout is expected (ζ t+1 = 1), then 1 + ρt = u−1 (1 + r) and the borrowing constraint is
bt (1 + r) ≤ h(wt + bt ). It follows that:


                   good state    :   π rt+1 = [sθ + (1 − s)σ]mr (ζ t+1 ) − [mr (ζ t+1 ) − 1]δ −1
                    bad state    :   π rt+1 = 0,     with mr (ζ t+1 ) = (1 − hδζ −1 )−1
                       Eπ rt+1 = {u[sθ + (1 − s)σ] − h}mr (ζ t+1 )


A plan is risky because the firm is insolvent in the bad state, and therefore a plan is risky provided
          h
s>1−     uσ .   Since θ > σ, the best risky plan sets s = 1 if ζ t+1 = u.
    Consider a diversion plan. Since a firm must be solvent to divert, the promised repayment is
never set greater than Lt+1 ≤ qt+1 . Since lenders will get repaid only if a bailout will be granted,
they only lend up to bt ≤ (1 − ζ t+1 )(1 + r)−1 Lt+1 . Thus, in a diversion plan bt = md wt , with
md (ζ t+1 ) = [1 − (1 − ζ t+1 )δθ]−1 . It follows that young managers’ expected payoﬀs under a safe,



                                                        1
risky and diversion plan are, respectively:


 St+1 = [d−τ ][σ−h]ms wt , Rt+1 = [d−τ ][θu−h]mr (ζ t+1 )wt , Dt+1 = [d−τ ][θu−h]md (ζ t+1 )wt (20)


In a safe symmetric CME, all firms choose a safe plan, and no bailout is expected. In a risky
symmetric CME, all firms choose a risky plan, and a bailout is expected in the bad state. To
show that there always exists a safe symmetric CME note that if all other managers choose the
safe plan, no bailout is expected next period (i.e., ζ t+1 = 1). Thus, md (ζ t+1 = 1) = 1 and
mr (ζ t+1 = 1) = ms . Since θu < σ, (20) implies that if all other managers choose a safe plan, the
manager strictly prefers the safe plan over the other two plans. Next, consider a risky symmetric
CME. If all other managers choose the risky plan, a bailout will be granted in the bad state. Since
mr (ζ t+1 = u) = (1 − hδu−1 )−1 , the manager prefers a risky over a safe plan if and only if

                                                       θu − h        σ−h
                          0 ≤ Et π rt+1 − π st+1 =           −1
                                                                wt −        wt := Z(h)wt                     (21)
                                                     1 − hδu         1 − hδ

It follows from (7) and (8) that Z(h) has three properties: Z(0) = uθ − σ < 0, limh→uδ−1 Z(h) = ∞
              ³        ´2            ³      ´2
and ∂Z(h)
       ∂h   =      1
                   −1
                1−u hδ
                          (δθ − 1) −     1
                                       1−hδ    (δσ − 1) > 0. Thus, for any u < 1 there exists a unique
threshold h ∈ (0, uδ −1 ) such that Et π rt+1 > π st+1 for all h ∈ (h, uδ −1 ), where h is given by (9).
    Next, a risky plan is preferred to a diversion plan if and only if 0 < Rt+1 − Dt+1 = [θu −
h][mr − md ], which is equivalent to: (a) [1 − u]θ < u−1 h. The question is whether (a) can hold
simultaneously with (b) h < h̄ := uδ −1 and (c) uθ > δ −1 . For large enough u, (a) holds for any θ
and any h < h̄. Meanwhile, for u ≤ 0.5 (a)-(c) cannot hold simultaneously. Thus, a risky plan is
preferred to a diversion plan if and only if u is large enough (in particular, u > 0.5). Summing up,
a risky CME exists if and only if h > h and u is large enough, so a risky plan is preferred to a safe
and a diversion plan, respectively.
    Distortionary taxes.        In this case the expected payoﬀ of a non-diverting manager is [d −
τ old ]u[qt+1   − Lt+1 ], while that of a diverting manager is d[uqt+1 − h(wt + bt )]. If τ old ∈ [0, dh/uθ],
the borrowing constraint and the expected payoﬀ of a risky plan are

                                                                                              1
                bt ≤ [mr − 1]wt ,   E(π rt+1 )[d − τ old ] = [uθ − h]dmr wt ,   mr =        δ dh−uθτ old
                                                                                       1−   u d−τ old

The payoﬀ of diversion is the same as in the benchmark case. It follows that a risky plan is preferred
                                                                                       1 dh−uθτ
to a diversion plan if and only if τ < dh/uθ and mr > md ⇔ [1 − u]θ <                  u d−τ .     This condition
holds for large enough u.¤

Proof of Proposition 2.2.          The mean annual long-run growth rate is given by
                   h Q                 i1/T
                       T
E(1 + g ) = limT →∞ Et i=t+1 (1 + gir )
       r                                    . The expression in (13) follows from the fact that
the probability of crisis is independent across time.               Comparing (12) and (13) we have that

                                                           2
E(1 + g r ) > (1 + g s ) for any α ∈ (0, 1) if and only if Eπ r > π s , which is equivalent to h > h
(defined in (9)). Part (2) follows from ∂Z(h)/∂h > 0. The sign of this derivative is established in
the proof of Proposition 2.1.
   To prove the fundability of the guarantees, it suﬃces to show that in a risky equilibrium the
present value of pre-tax dividends during solvent times (dπ t ≡ ytn ) is greater than the bailout costs
(Lt − at ≡ ytc ) for all α ∈ (0, 1). In this case there exists a tax rate τ < d such that (6) holds.
Notice that
                                                                                ∙           ¸
                                     bt−1          (mr − 1)                          mr − 1
                      ytc        ≡ −      − at = −                   n
                                                            wt−1 − αγ wt−1 = −wt 1 +
                                       δ              δ                              αδγ n
                                           d
                      ytn        ≡ dπ t =      wt
                                          1−d
                                           P∞         t
Next, we obtain Y r ≡ E0                      t=0 δ       yt , where yt = ytn under solvency and yt = ytc otherwise. To
                                                                             yt+1
compute this expectation, consider the process                                yt ,   which follows a four-state Markov chain with
transition matrix Φ
           ⎛                        n                                             ⎞                       ⎛                                     ⎞
                      nn           yt+1               h    r      n
                            :=      ytn = (1 − d)(θ − u )m := γ                                                 u 1−u                   0   0
      ⎜                                                                           ⎟                 ⎜             ⎟
      ⎜                             c
                                  yt+1              mr −1 1−d                     ⎟                 ⎜ 0     1−u u ⎟
                      nc                      n
      ⎜                     :=     ytn = −αγ [1 + αδγ n ] d                       ⎟                 ⎜    0        ⎟
    ∆=⎜
      ⎜                             n
                                  yt+1
                                              h           i−1                     ⎟,
                                                                                  ⎟               Φ=⎜             ⎟                                    (22)
      ⎜               cn    :=          = −γ n 1 + mr −1       d                  ⎟                 ⎜ 0  0  1−u u ⎟
      ⎝                             ytc             αδγ n     1−d                 ⎠                 ⎝             ⎠
                                   c
                                  yt+1
                      cc    :=              n                                                         u 1−u  0  0
                                   ytc = αγ

                                                                              wt                                                              wt
To obtain (22), note that if there is no crisis at t,                        wt−1    = γ n , while if there is a crisis at t,                wt−1   = αγ n .
We will obtain Y r by solving the following recursion:

                                        X∞
           V (y0 ,          0)   = E0            δ t yt = y0 + δE0 V (y1 , 1 ), V (yt ,                  t)    = yt + δEt V (yt+1,          t+1 )      (23)
                                           t=0


Consider the following conjecture: V (yt ,                            t)    = yt v( t ), with v( t ) an undetermined coeﬃcient.
Substituting this conjecture into (23) and dividing by yt , we get v ( t ) = 1 + δEt (                                                       t+1 v( t+1 )).

Combining this condition with (22), it follows that v(                                 t+1 )      satisfies


                                  (v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 )0 = (1, 1, 1, 1)0 + δΦ(         nn
                                                                                           v1 ,    nc
                                                                                                        v2 ,   cc
                                                                                                                    v3 ,   cn
                                                                                                                                v4 )0


Notice that v1 = v4 and v2 = v3 . Thus, the system collapses to two equations: v1 = 1 + uδ                                                          nn v    +
                                                                                                                                                        1

(1 − u)δ   nc v       and v2 = 1 + (1 − u)δ                 cc v    + uδ    cn v .   The solution is
                  2                                             2               1


                     1 − (1 − u)δ( cc − nc )                                                1 − (1 − u)[δαγ n + (mr − 1)(1 − d)]d−1
 v1 =                                                                                  =
        (1 − uδ nn )(1 − (1 − u)δ cc ) − (1 − u)uδ 2                          cn nc                 1 − δuγ n − δ(1 − u)αγ n

To derive the second equality substitute                            cn nc   = α (γ n )2 ,         cc − nc      = [αγ n +δ −1 (mr −1)(1−d)]d−1



                                                                              3
and simplify the denominator. This solution exists and is unique provided 1 −δuγ n −δ(1−u)αγ n ≡
1 − δγ r > 0. Since this expression is strictly decreasing in α, it follows that 1 − δγ r > 0 for all
α ∈ (0, 1) iﬀ 1 − δuγ n > 0, which holds iﬀ d is high enough:

                                        θ − hu−1                                 θ − δ −1
                         1 − δ(1 − d)             >0          ⇐⇒     d > d :=                             (24)
                                        1 − δhu−1                               θ − hu−1

The lower bound d is less than one for any h < h̄ ≡ uδ −1 because θ − δ −1 < θ − hu−1 . Next, notice
that since there cannot be a crisis at t = 0, the state at t = 0 is v1 . Therefore, V (y0 ,     0
                                                                                                    ) = v1 y0n .
Substituting y0n = dw we get:

                             d−(1−u)[δαγ n +(mr −1)(1−d)]
                     Yr =               1−δγ r            w        γ r = uγ n − (1 − u)αγ n
                                  (1−d)(δθu−1)mr
                                                                                                          (25)
                         =   w+        1−δγ r     w,               γ n = [1 − d][θ − u−1 h]mr

In the first line, the first term in the numerator represent the average dividend, while the second
term represents the average bailout, which covers the seed money given to firms αγ n wt−1 and the
debt that has to be repaid to lenders. The latter equals the leverage times the reinvestment rate
bt−1 wt−1
wt−1 π t−1 wt−1   = δ −1 (mr − 1)(1 − d)wt−1 . To prove part (3) note that the numerator in the second
line is positive because d ∈ (0, 1) and θu ≥ δ −1 by assumption (7). The denominator is positive
because d > d.¤

Expected present value of managers’ income
   The next corollary shows that if the leverage eﬀect is strong enough, the increase in expected
dividends generated by systemic risk is greater than the associated expected bailout cost.

Corollary A.1 There exists a unique threshold for the degree of contract enforceability b
                                                                                        h < uδ −1 ,
such that the expected present value of dividends net of bailout payments is greater in a risky than
in a safe equilibrium for any aid policy α ∈ (0, 1) if and only if h > b
                                                                       h and d > d.

Proof. We just need to find conditions under which Y r > Y s . First, we know from the proof
of Proposition 2.2 that Y r converges and is given by (25) if d > d and h > h. Second, in a
                                                                                 P
safe equilibrium there is no systemic risk and there are no bailouts. Thus, Y s = ∞    t   s
                                                                                  t=0 δ dπ t . If
δ(1 − d)(σ − h)ms ≡ δγ s < 1, this sum converges to

                           dw           (1 − d)(δσ − 1)ms
                  Ys =            = w +                   w,           γ s ≡ (1 − d)(σ − h)ms             (26)
                         1 − δγ s            1 − δγ s

Recall that a risky equilibrium exists only if h > h, in which case γ s < γ r . Since δγ r < 1 for any
d > d, it follows that Y s converges whenever a risky equilibrium exists and Y r converges. As a
third step we find the values of h for which Y r > Y s for any α ∈ (0, 1). Since Y r is increasing in α



                                                         4
(by (25) ), it suﬃces to compare limα→0 Y r with Y s . It follows that for any α ∈ (0, 1)

                                                        d (σ − uθ)            δ
                     Y r > Y s ⇐⇒ h > b
                                      h ≡ ¡1         ¢                      <
                                              u   − 1 (σδ − 1) + δd(σ − uθ)   u

To show that b
             h < h̄ ≡ δu−1 notice that b
                                       hδu−1 < 1 if and only if (σδ − 1) > d(σδ − uθδ), which is
true because d ∈ (0, 1) and θu ≥ δ −1 by assumption (7).¤

Proof of Proposition A.1. We prove this proposition by comparing three plans: safe, risky and
diversion. In a safe plan the firm invests in the safe technology and it repays debt in both states. In
a risky plan, the firm invests in the risky technology and repays debt if it is solvent. In a diversion
plan, the firm does not repay debt in any state.
    Consider the best safe plan. The borrowing constraint is as in the Ak setup: bt ≤ (ms − 1)wt .
                                      ˆ
It follows from (18) that for any w < I/m the marginal return on investment g 0 (I) is greater than
the return on saving 1 + r. Thus, it is optimal to borrow up to the limit and not to save (it does
not pay to borrow in order to save as both have the same interest rate). Hence, investmetn is the
                                             ˆ
same as that in the model section. For w ≥ I/m    the firm invests Iˆ and only borrows Iˆ − w, so
the borrowing constraint does not bind. For w ≥ Iˆ it saves w − Iˆ and does not borrow. Since
δ −1 bt = δ −1 (m − 1)wt = hmw, in the best safe plan profits are
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎨ g(wm) − hmw                   ˆ
                                                              if w < I/m
                           π s (w) =                                                              (27)
                                     ⎩ g(I)
                                         ˆ − δ −1 (Iˆ − w)           ˆ
                                                              if w ≥ I/m

Consider a risky plan. If a bailout is expected in the bad state but not in the good state, lenders
                                                    ˜ r it is optimal to borrow up to the limit and
set ρ = r and lend up to bt ≤ (mr − 1)wt . For w < I/m
                      ˜
not to save. For w ∈ [I/m,  ˜ the firm sets investment to I˜ and borrows less than the maximum
                           I)
possible. For w ≥ I˜ the firm saves w − I,˜ does not borrow and does not default in any state.
Replacing uδ −1 bt by uδ −1 (mr − 1)wt =hmr wt , we have that expected profits are
                                  ⎧
                                  ⎪        r         r               ˜ r
                                  ⎨ uf (wm ) − hm w
                                  ⎪                          if w < I/m
                       Eπ r (w) =       ˜ − uδ −1 [I˜ − w]
                                    uf (I)                           ˜ r , I)
                                                             if w ∈ [I/m   ˜                      (28)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎩     ˜ + δ −1 [w − I]˜
                                    uf (I)                   if w ≥ I˜

The term uδ −1 appears in the second row becasue for w < I˜ the firm will be solvent in the good
state and insolvent in the bad state. Thus, with probability 1 − u lenders will be repayed by the
bailout. To characterize the CME define the expected profit diﬀerential


                                     Λ(w) := E(π r (w)) − π s (w)




                                                    5
To compute Λ(w) consider the eﬃcient and the panglossian investment levels defined in (??)

                                           1                  1                 1
                               Iˆ = (χλδ) 1−λ ,     I˜ = (λδ) 1−λ , so Iˆ = χ 1−λ I˜                    (29)

            ˆ s > I/m
Notice that I/m   ˜ r if and only if h > h∗ defined in (31). This result implies that for h > h∗
if the borrowing constraint binds under the risky plan, it must also bind under the safe plan. Since
all propositions are stated for “large enough h”, h > h∗ is the relevant case to consider when
                                                                    ˆ s > I/m
comparing π s and Eπ r . That is, we just need to consider the case I/m   ˜ r.


          ⎧
          ⎪
          ⎪ [u[mr (ζ t+1 )]λ − χ[ms ]λ ]wλ − h[mr (ζ t+1 ) − ms ]w                 ˜ r (ζ t+1 )
                                                                           if w < I/m
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎨ uI˜λ − ζ δ −1 [I˜ − w] − χ[ms w]λ + hms w                              ˜ r (ζ t+1 ), I/m
                                                                                                 ˆ s)
                     t+1                                                   if w ∈ [I/m
   Λ(w) =                                                                                               (30)
          ⎪
          ⎪ uI − ζ t+1 δ −1 [I˜ − w] − χIˆλ + δ −1 [Iˆ − w]
              ˜λ                                                                   ˆ s , I)
                                                                           if w ∈ [I/m   ˜
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎩ ˜λ
            uI − χIˆλ + δ −1 [Iˆ − I]˜                                     if w ≥ I˜

Proof of Part 1. In a safe CME no bailout is expected: ζ t+1 = 1. Thus, given that all other firms
choose a safe plan, a manager has no incentive to choose a risky plan. To see this set ζ t+1 = 1 and
mr (ζ t+1 = 1) = ms in (30) and notice that Λ(w) is negative for all w, i.e., Eπ r < π s . Next, note
that only plans that do not lead to diversion are financeable because diversion implies zero debt
repayment in both states. Hence, if ζ t+1 = 1, the best safe plan is optimal for all levels of w.

Proof of Part 2. Lemma A.1 below characterizes Λ(w) for ζ t+1 = u and h > h∗ . It shows that for
                         ˜ r ; Λ(w) < 0 if w ≥ I˜ and that Λ(w) is continuous and decreasing.
high h : Λ(w) > 0 if w ≤ I/m
Thus, there is a unique w∗ , such that Λ(w) < (>)0 ⇐⇒ w > (<)w∗ . Since a bailout is granted only
if there is no diversion, only non-diversion plans that don’t default in the good state are financeable.
Thus, the best risky plan characterized above is optimal for w < w∗ when ζ t+1 = u. This completes
the proof of part 2.


Lemma A.1 (Characterization of Λ(w)) There exists a lower bound h < h̄, defined in (31),
                                                          ˜ r , I),
such that if h > h, there exists a unique threshold w∗ ∈ (I/m   ˜ such that Λ(w) ≥ (<)0 if and
only if w ≤ (>)w∗ .


      h = max{h∗ , h∗∗∗ }                                                                               (31)
                                                (        ¯Ã      µ s ¶λ !      µ     ¶  )
               1−χ
                        1
                                                         ¯        m       1       ms
                       1−λ
                                                         ¯
     h∗ ≡               1    h̄,   h∗∗∗ ≡ inf     h < h̄ ¯ u − χ             −h 1− r >0
              1 − uχ 1−λ                                 ¯        mr      λδ      m

Proof. The proof is in three parts.




                                                         6
                                 ˜ Since h > h∗ , we have that I˜ > Iˆ > I/m
(i) Λ(w) is negative for all w ≥ I.                                      ˆ s . Thus,


                   ˜ = uf (I)
             Λ(w ≥ I)              ˆ − δ −1 [I˜ − I]
                           ˜ − χf (I)             ˆ < f (I)
                                                         ˜ − f (I)
                                                                ˆ − (δu)−1 [I˜ − I]
                                                                                 ˆ <0


                                                                               ˆ < 0. The negative
The first inequality follows from dividing by u and substracting (1 − χu−1 )f (I)
                                                                                               ˜     ˆ
                                                                      ˜ such that f 0 (c) = f (I)−f
                                                                    ˆ I)
sign follows from the mean value theorem. There is a constant c ∈ (I,                               (I)
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                  ˜ Iˆ
                                                                                                  I−
                                       ˆ := (δχ)−1 by (18). Since u < χ, it follows that f (I)
Since f (I) is concave, f 0 (c) < f 0 (I)                                                   ˜ − f (I)
                                                                                                   ˆ <
(δχ)−1 [I˜ − I]
             ˆ < (δu)−1 [I˜ − I].
                               ˆ Hence, Λ(w ≥ I)  ˜ < 0.

                                  ˜ r . First, we find the sign of Λ(I/m
(ii) Λ(w) is positive for all w ≤ I/m                                ˜ r ). Since I/m
                                                                                    ˆ s > I/m
                                                                                          ˜ r , we
                                                                                 1
                  ˜ r , investment in a safe plan is ms [I/m
have that if w = I/m                                     ˜ r ]. Since I˜ = (λδ) 1−λ ,

                                                       Ã
                                                    1 !λ                   1
                                            s (λδ)
                                                λ  1−λ
                                                               r   s (λδ)
                                                                          1−λ
           ϑ ≡   lim Λ(w) = u (λδ)    −χ m     1−λ        − h[m − m ]
                  ˜ r−
               w→I/m                            mr                     mr
                        (Ã    µ s ¶λ !      µ           ¶)
                     1         m       1            m s
             = (λδ) 1−λ   u−χ             −h 1− r                                                   (32)
                               mr      λδ           m

To see that h∗∗∗ , defined in (31), exists note that
                                                                       ½       ¾
                                     1    ©            ª        1  u       1
                     lim ϑ = (λδ)   1−λ    u(λδ)−1 − h̄ = (λδ) 1−λ           −1 >0
                     h→h̄                                          δ       λ

The positive sign follows from λ < 1. Continuity of ϑ in h implies that there is a threshold h∗∗∗
             ˜ r ) > 0 for all h ∈ (h∗∗∗ , h̄). Next, the first and second order derivatives of Λ(w)
such that Λ(I/m
are


                      Λ0 (w)|w<I/m
                               ˜ r        = [u[mr ]λ − χ[ms ]λ ]λwλ−1 − h[mr − ms ]
                       00
                     Λ (w)|w<I/m
                             ˜ r          = λ[λ − 1][u[mr ]λ − χ[ms ]λ ]wλ−2


Note that Λ0 > 0 and Λ00 < 0 for all w < I/m ˜ r if and only if h > h∗∗ , where h∗∗ is defined by
         ¡  r ¢        ¡  ¢
                         χ λ
                            1
ξ(h∗∗ ) = mms |h=h − u
                  ∗∗          = 0. Notice that h∗∗ is lower than h∗∗∗ because ξ(h) equals the first
                                                   1 ©      ¡       ¢ª
                                                                 ms
term in (32). Thus, if h = h∗∗ , (32) equals (λδ) 1−λ 0 − h 1 − m r    , which is negative. Finally,
we have shown that for any h ∈ (h, h̄) : limw→I/m            0             00
                                              ˜ r Λ(w) > 0, Λ (w) > 0 and Λ (w) < 0. Since

limw→0 Λ(w) = 0, Λ(w) is a concave parabola that is zero at w = 0 and has a positive value at
˜ r . Thus, it must be positive in the entire range (0, I/m
I/m                                                     ˜ r ).
                                 ˜ < 0 and Λ(w ≤ I/m
(iii) We have established that Λ(I)                  ˜ r ) > 0. We will show that Λ(w) is
                              ˜ r , I),
continuous and decreasing on [I/m   ˜ so a unique threshold w∗ exists. To show continuity of
              ˆ s note that lim
Λ(w) at w = I/m                                    ˆ s       ˆ     −1 ˆ   ˆ s
                                    ˆ s − Λ(w) − Λ(I/m ) = hI − δ [I − I/m ] = 0. This is
                                     w→(I/m )




                                                      7
        ˆ −1 [1 − 1/ms ] = Iδ
because Iδ                 ˆ −1 [δh] = hI.
                                        ˆ The first order derivative is
                         ⎧           £           ¤
                         ⎨   u                                      ˜ r , I/m
                                 − ms χλ(ms w)λ−1 + hms < 0 if w ∈ (I/m   ˆ s)
                0            δ
               Λ (w) =
                         ⎩   u
                                 −1 <0                              ˆ s , I)
                                                            if w ∈ (I/m   ˜
                             δ     δ


The second line is negative because u < 1. For the first line note that by the definition of I,  ˆ
χλIˆλ−1 = δ −1 . Thus, χλ(ms w)λ−1 > δ −1 for w < I/m
                                                  ˆ s . Also, hms = δ −1 [ms − 1]. Hence, the first
                    £           ¤
line equals uδ − ms χλ(ms w)λ−1 + δ −1 [ms − 1] < uδ − 1 < 0.¤

Proof of Proposition A.2. It is the same as in the model section, and follows directly from
the sign of Λ(w). The expected growth rate in the risky economy is greater than in the safe one
      r /w ) > E (w s /w )) if and only if
(Et (wt+1 t     t  t+1  t


                   r        s
                                         £                                              ¤
              Et (wt+1 ) − wt+1 = [1 − d] Et (π rt+1 ) − π st+1 + [1 − u]απ rt+1 (Ω = 1)
                                         £                                    ¤
                                = [1 − d] Λ(wt ) + [1 − u]απ rt+1 (Ω = 1)

                     r ) > ws
It follows that Et (wt+1                                              r         s
                            t+1 for any α ∈ (0, 1) iﬀ Λ(wt ) := Et (π t+1 ) − π t+1 > 0. Lemma A.1
shows that if ζ t+1 = u and h > h, then Λ(w) > 0 for w ≤ I/m    ˜ r ; Λ(w) < 0 for w ≥ I˜ and
Λ(w) is continuous and decreasing. Thus, there is unique threshold w∗ , such that Λ(w) < (>)0 iﬀ
w > (<)w∗ . This proves parts 1 and 2. For part 3 note that if d ≤ 1 − δ, then wt+1 > wt along
both the safe path and the lucky path along which crises do not occur (i.e., where Ωj+1 = 1 for all
                                                                              ˆ s,
j ≤ t). To see this, suppose there is a switch at t (i.e., wt ≥ w∗ ). If w∗ < I/m


                             wt+1 − wt = [1 − d][g(wt ms ) − δ −1 [ms − 1]wt ] − wt
                    (wt+1 − wt )|d=1−δ = δg(wt ms ) − ms wt > 0

                                      ˆ s because g 0 (I)
Note that δg(wms ) − ms w > 0 for w < I/m              ˆ = δ −1 and g 00 < 0. Next, if w∗ ≥ I/m
                                                                                            ˆ s,


                                                       ˆ − δ −1 (Iˆ − wt )] − wt
                                 wt+1 − wt = [1 − d][g(I)
                                               ˆ − Iˆ > 0
                       (wt+1 − wt )|d=1−δ = δg(I)


If along the safe path wt+1 > wt for d = 1 − δ, the same must hold for d < 1 − δ. Since along the
lucky path realized profits are greater than along a safe path for any wt < w∗ , it must be true that
along the lucky path wt+1 > wt .¤




                                                    8
B     Description of Crisis Indexes

Banking Crisis Indexes.       De Jure indexes of banking crisis are based on surveys of financial press
articles as well as previous academic papers. They are not original country-case studies and therefore
are subjective not only based on the judgment of the index authors but also based on that of the
underlying sources. The most comprehensive survey is provided by Caprio and Klingebiel (2003)
[CK]. They define a systemic crisis as much or all of bank capital being exhausted. CK reports
episodes of systemic banking crisis in 93 countries between the late 1970s and 2000.55 Detriagache
and Demirguc-Kunt (2005) [DD] is a meta-survey that uses crisis information from CK and four
other indexes. Unlike CK, DD reports the unconditional country dataset in which they search for
banking crises over the period 1980-2000.56 In order to distinguish between severe and not severe
(borderline) crises, DD impose one of four restrictions that a country-year must satisfy to be a
crisis: (i) a share of non-performing loans greater than 10% of the banking sector total assets; (ii)
a cost of rescue operations greater than 2% of GDP; (iii) large scale nationalization of banks; (iv)
bank runs or deposit freezes. The third banking crisis index we use is Kaminsky and Reinhard
(1999) [KR] that covers 20 countries over the period 1970-1995.

Currency Crisis Indexes.       They are de facto indexes based on measures of currency pressure, which
is a weighted average of changes over a period of time in exchange rates, reserves and interest rates.
We consider four currency crisis indexes. Glick and Hutchison (2001) [GH] cover 83 countries
from 1970 to 1999. They use a monthly weighted average of the change in the real exchange rate
and reserves losses (where the weight is the inverse of the variance of each series). Garcia and
Soto (2004) [SG] cover 65 countries from 1975 to 2002. They use the same average as Glick and
Hutchison, but with a diﬀerent threshold: there is a crisis if the index is larger than the mean
plus two standard deviations. Frankel and Wei (2004)[FW] cover 58 countries over the period
1974-2000. Their index is a monthly unweighted average of real exchange rate changes and reserves
losses. A crisis is identified if the level of the index is above 15%, 25%, or 35% and when there
is a change in the index of 10%. Furthermore, they have a restriction that there cannot be more
than one crisis in a three-year window. Finally, Becker and Mauro (2006)[BM1] cover 81 countries
from 1960 to 2000. According to their definition, a crisis takes place if : (i) there was a cumulative
nominal depreciation of at least 25% over 12 months, (ii) the nominal depreciation rate is at least
10 percentage points greater than in the preceding 12 months and (iii)at least 3 years have passed
since the last crisis.57
  55
     The majority of the crisis episodes are precisely dated, but several are referred by vague indications such as
“Nigeria, early 1990s.”
  56
     DD consider a sample of 94 countries with data on real interest rate and inflation, excluding communist or
transition economies. The sample of DD covers 52 countries in our sample of 58 countries without wars or large
terms of trade deteriorations.
  57
     The coverage of the currency crisis indexes for our sample of 58 countries without war or large terms of trade
deterioration is: 58(GH), 48(GS), 34 (FW) and 58(BM1).


                                                        9
Sudden Stops.         We consider three sudden stops indexes. Mauro and Becker (2006) [BM2] look
at 77 countries from 1977 to 2000 and define a sudden stop as a situation where the financial
account balance worsens by more than 5 percentage points of GDP compared with the previous
year. Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004)[CIM] examine 26 countries from 1992 to 2000, and identify
a crisis when there is a decline of more than two standard deviations of the individual country
distribution. Frankel and Cavallo (2006) [FC] look at 81 countries and identify a crisis by combining
the definition of CIM with the requirement of a fall in GDP the year of the sudden stop or the
following year in order to ensure that the episode is disruptive.58

       As mentioned in the text, we construct an index of consensus crises that identifies crises that
have been confirmed by at least two banking crises indexes or two currency crisis indexes or two
sudden stop indexes. Table EA5 reports all the consensus crises in our 58 country sample. Table
EA4 reports both consensus crises (labeled CC) and simple coded crises (labeled C) that are
associated with any of the three extreme credit growth observations for each country.


C        Description of Financial Liberalization Indexes

De Facto Financial Liberalization Index.             This index signals the year when a country has liberal-
ized. We construct the index by looking for trend-breaks in financial flows. We identify trend-breaks
by applying the CUSUM test of Brown et. al. (1975) to the time trend of the data. This method
tests for parameter stability based on the cumulative sum of the recursive residuals. To determine
the date of financial liberalization, we consider net cumulative capital inflows (KI).59 A country
is financially liberalized (FL) in year t if: (i) KI has a trend break at or before t and there is at
least one year with a KI-to-GDP ratio greater than 5% at or before t, or (ii) its KI-to-GDP ratio is
greater than 10% at or before t, or (iii) the country is associated with the EU or the G10.60 The 5%
and 10% thresholds reduce the possibility of false liberalization and false non-liberalization signals,
respectively. When the cumulative sum of residuals starts to deviate from zero, it may take a few
years until this deviation is statistically significant. In order to account for the delay problem, we
choose the year where the cumulative sum of residuals deviates from zero, provided that it even-
tually crosses the 5% significance level. The FL index does not allow for policy reversals: once a
country liberalizes, it does not close thereafter. We consider that this approach is appropriate to
  58
      The coverage of the sudden stops indexes for our sample of 58 countries without war or large terms of trade
deterioration is: 53(BM2), 26(CIM) and 57 (FC).
   59
      We compute cumulative net capital inflows of non-residents since 1980. Capital inflows include FDI, portfolio
flows and bank flows. The data series are from the IFS: lines 78BUDZF, 78BGDZF and 78BEDZ. For some countries
not all three series are available for all years. In this case, we use the inflows to the banking system or the inflows of
FDI.
   60
      The G10 is the group of countries that have agreed to participate in the General Arrangements to Borrow
(GAB). It includes Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland.



                                                           10
analyze the decadal eﬀects of liberalization on growth over the period 1980-2000.61

De Jure Financial Liberalization Indexes.         We use two indexes of de jure financial liberalization.
The first index is due to Abiad and Mody (2005) and has been extended by Abiad, Detragiache
and Tressel (2006). This index codes the restrictions on international financial restrictions on
the following scale: 0 (fully repressed), 1 (partially repressed), 2 (largely liberalized), 3 (fully
liberalized). The orginal sources are listed in Abiad and Mody (2005) and include previous surveys,
central bank bulletins and IMF country reports. We have rescaled the index on a zero to one range
by dividing the value of each observation by four. The Abiad and Mody index covers 32 countries
in our sample of 58 countries since the 1970s. The second index is due to Quinn (1997) and has
been updated by Quinn and Toyoda (2003). This index codes the intensity of restriction on capital
account restriction on a zero to 100 scale. The orginal sources are various issues of the IMF’s
Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. We have rescaled the index
on a zero to one range by dividing each observation by 100. The Quinn index covers 49 countries
in our sample of 58 countries since the 1960s.


D        Bailouts

Here, we present stylized facts of ex-post bailouts that support the assumptions of our model. First,
most of the crises in our sample are associated with IMF rescue packages that are large relative
to GDP. Second, bailout packages are in large part designed to insure the repayment of external
liabilities resulting in the bailout of lenders. Third, in most cases governments repay these loans
in full rather quickly. Our model assumes that during a systemic crisis the government can borrow
internationally in order to bail out lenders and that it repays these loans during good times.
       In our sample of 58 countries over the period 1984-2000, we find that 18 of the 28 banking crises
(64%) were associated with an IMF crisis support package in the year of or the year following the
start of the crisis. If we look at the subset of banking crises that coincided with a currency crises
(i.e., twin crises), this share increases to 84%. This share is quite high considering that some crisis
countries opted not to make use of IMF credit (e.g., Finland, Malaysia and Sweden).
       These IMF packages are large relative to GDP: Turkey 1999 (11.19%), Uruguay 1983 (7.96%)
Mexico 1995 (6.39%), Chile 1983 (5.08%), Indonesia 1998 (5.2%) or Korea 1998 (4.14%). Moreover,
international financial assistance comes not only from the IMF, but also from other agencies (e.g.
the Asian Development Bank) or from bilateral sources (e.g. the US Treasury). Jeanne and
Zettelmeyer (2001) report the following total sizes of international bailouts as a percentage of
GDP: Mexico 1995 (18.3%), Thailand 1998 (11.5%), Indonesia 1998 (19.6%) and Korea (12.3%).
  61
   Incomplete data coverage on financial inflows prevents us from computing the de facto index before the 1980s.
Only 11 out of our 58 countries sample have a complete coverage over the 1970s.



                                                      11
        Crises and IMF-Supported Crisis Facilities (Stand-By Arrangement and Exceptional Fund Facility
                                              "Twin"crises      Systemic banking crises       Currency crises
        Number of crises                          19                       28                       54
        Number of crises associated
        with an IMF-supported crisis              16                       18                       39
        package
        Percentage of crises matched
        with IMF-supported crisis                84%                      64%                      72%
        facilities
        Note: Crises are identified by the consensus indexes described in Section 3.1. The 58 countries sample is
        used. The period covered is 1984-2000. To be matched with a crisis, the IMF facility should occur the
        year of the crisis or the year after.




In addition, domestic resources used in bailouts can be also quite large: Malaysia 1998 (13% of
GDP) or Finland 1991-1992 (5% of GDP).62
       Several important features of crisis rescue packages — central bank liquidity support and gover-
ment guarantees — are explicitly designed to insure that external obligations are repaid.63 Liquidity
support provided by central banks allow banks to service their short-term liabilities and usually in-
cludes dollar loans that are used to repay short-term foreign currency denominated debts. Hoelscher
et.al. (2003) report liquidity support in quantities ranging from 2.5 % of GDP (Korea 1998-2000) to
22% of GDP (Thailand 1998-2000). In addition to liquidity support, the government often provides
its guarantee to the external liabilities of the banking sector during a systemic crisis. Hoelscher
et al. (2003) report the presence of such guarantees in many crisis countries including Finland,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Sweden, Thailand and Turkey. As these government
guarantees are implemented only during systemic crises —in contrast to “normal times” where pro-
tection is limited to deposit insurance— and tend to apply to all the foreign currency liabilities of
banks, they are indeed a close equivalent to the systemic bailout guarantees described in our model.
       The third stylized fact is documented by Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2001). They show that, with
the exception of highly indebted poor countries, complete debt cycles by far outweigh incomplete
debt cycles (where the IMF rolls over the debt in the end). The transfer element in crisis lending
for “non-poor” countries is less than 1% of GDP, much less than the actual fiscal cost of crises.
Consider the case of Mexico. The full value of the IMF and BIS loans was disbursed by the end of
1995. By the middle of 1997, Mexico had repaid two thirds of its loans, and had repaid them fully
by early 2000.
  62
     These two figures correspond to the ratio of emergency central bank loans to GDP.
  63
     According to the governor of the central bank of Mexico, Guillermo Ortiz “The emergency financial package with
the U.S. government, the IMF, the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank was designed to avoid
suspending payments on the country’s external obligations (..) and included the following measures: provision of
liquidity in foreign exchange by the central bank to commercial banks to prevent them from becoming delinquent on
their foreign obligations” (Ortiz, 1998).


                                                          12
E      Wars and Large Term of Trade Deteriorations

Out of our sample of eighty-three countries, we construct a restricted sample of 58 countries that
have not experienced an episode of large deterioration in their terms of trade or a severe war
episode over the period 1980-2000. The source for war episodes is the Heidelberg Institute of
International Conflict Research (HIICK). We use the variable “Average Number of Violent Death”
in the HIICK database. A country is classified as having experienced a severe war episode if the
ratio of average violent deaths to average population *100 is above 0.005 for two consecutive years.
We identify twelve war cases: Algeria, Congo Rep., Congo, Dem. Rep, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Iran, Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Sierra Leone, South Africa and Uganda. A country is classified
as having experienced a large terms of trade deterioration if its terms of trade index has suﬀered
a drop of more than 30% in a single year, or an average annual drop larger than 25% (20%) in 2
(3) consecutive years.64 Large terms of trade deterioration cases are: Algeria, Congo, Rep., Congo,
Dem. Rep., Cote d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Ghana, Haiti, Iran, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Syria, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Venezuela and Zambia.



References

[1] Abiad, A., and A. Mody, 2005, “Financial Reform: What Shakes it? What Shapes it?” American
    Economic Review, 95(1), 66-88.

[2] Abiad, A., E. Detragiache, and T.Tressel, 2006, “A New Database of Financial Reforms,” mimeo
    IMF.

[3] Becker T., and P. Mauro, 2006, “Output Drops and the Shocks That Matter,” IMF Working
    Papers 06/172.

[4] Brown, R. L., J. Durbin, and J. M. Evans, 1975, “Techniques for Testing the Constancy of
    Regression Relationships Over Time,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 37,
    149-192.

[5] Calvo, G. A., A. Izquierdo, and L.-F. Mejia, 2004, “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The
    Relevance of Balance-Sheet Eﬀects,” NBER Working Paper 10520.

[6] Caprio, G., and D. Klingebiel, 2003, “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crisis,”
    Research Datasets, The World Bank.
  64
    The Terms of Trade index shows the national accounts exports price index divided by the imports price index
with a 1995 base year. The source is World Development Indicators (2003).




                                                      13
[7] Demirgüç-Kunt A., and E. Detragiache, 1998, “The Determinants of Banking Crises in Devel-
  oping and Developed Countries,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 45(1), 81-109.

[8] Demirgüç-Kunt A., and E. Detragiache, 2005, “Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic
  Bank Distress: A Survey,” IMF Working Paper 05/96.

[9] Frankel, J., and E. Cavallo, 2004, “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries Less Vulnerable
  to Sudden Stops? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” NBER Working Paper 10957.

[10] Frankel, J., and S.-J. Wei, 2004, “Managing Macroeconomic Crises,” NBER Working Paper
  10907.

[11] García, P., and P. Soto, 2004, “Large Hoardings of International Reserves: Are They Worth
  It?” Working Papers Central Bank of Chile 299.

[12] Glick, R., and M. Hutchison, 2001, “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common Are Twins?”
  In Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. R. Glick, R. Moreno, and M. Spiegel, Chapter 2.
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[13] Hoelscher D., and M.Quityn, 2003, “Managing Systemic Banking Crises,” IMF Occasional
  Paper 222.

[14] Jeanne, O., and J. Zettelmeyer, 2001, “International Bailouts —The IMF’s role,” Economic
  Policy, 16(3), 409-433.

[15] Milesi-Ferretti, G-M., and A. Razin, 1998, “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises:
  Empirical Regularities,” NBER Working Paper 6620.

[16] Ortiz Martinez, G., 1998, “What Lessons Does the Mexican Crisis Hold for Recovery in Asia?”
  mimeo.

[17] Quinn, D., 1997, “The Correlated Changes in International Financial Regulation,” Americal
  Political Science Review, 91, 531-551.

[18] Quinn, D., and A. M. Toyoda, 2003, “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Economic
  Growth,” mimeo Georgetown University.




                                              14
Table EA1
Crisis Indexes and Growth
Robustness: Extended Set of Control Variables
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                                                      1981-2000
Unit of observations                                                                         Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                    [1]                  [2]                  [3]                     [4]                     [5]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                      0.138      ***          0.13    ***         0.129    ***            0.136    ***         0.138       ***
                                                                0.008                  0.009                0.009                   0.008                0.008
Real credit growth - standard deviation                        -0.06      ***         -0.06    ***        -0.062    ***           -0.061    ***        -0.057       ***
                                                                0.009                  0.009                0.009                   0.009                0.008


Crisis indexes:
Banking crisis: Caprio Klingebiel index                        0.361      ***
                                                                0.138
Banking crisis: Detragriache et al. index                                             0.248    **
                                                                                       0.112
Banking crisis: Consensus index                                                                            0.254    **
                                                                                                            0.122
Sudden stop: Consensus index                                                                                                       0.464    **
                                                                                                                                    0.191
Currency crisis: Consensus index                                                                                                                         0.11
                                                                                                                                                         0.176



Control set of variables                                Extended set            Extended set         Extended set           Extended set          Extended set
No. countries / No. observations                             58/114                  58/114               58/114                 58/114                58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: The coefficients for control variables (initial income per capita, secondary schooling, inflation rate, trade openness, government expenditures, life
expectancy, black market premium) and period dummies are not reported.

Table EA2
Investment Regression
Robustness: Extended Set of Control Variables
Dependent variables: Domestic price-investment rate, PPP-investment rate
Estimation: Panel feasible GLS
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Dependent variable                                          PPP-investment rate                Domestic price-investment rate
Estimation period                                        1981-2000         1971-2000             1981-2000            1971-2000
Unit of observations                                                          Non-overlapping 10 year windows

Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                      0.223      ***         0.218    ***          0.26    ***            0.263    ***
                                                                0.023                  0.027                0.038                   0.036
Real credit growth - standard deviation                       -0.065      ***        -0.049    **         -0.083    ***           -0.061    **
                                                                0.019                  0.024                0.026                   0.026
Real credit growth - skewness                                 -0.777      ***        -0.676    ***        -0.448    **            -0.546    ***
                                                                0.145                  0.178                0.197                   0.202


Lagged investment rate:
Lagged investment rate (PPP)                                   0.631      ***         0.706    ***
                                                                0.025                  0.031
Lagged investment rate (domestic price)                                                                    0.697    ***            0.718    ***
                                                                                                            0.039                   0.036



Control set of variables                                Extended set            Extended set         Extended set           Extended set
No. countries / No. observations                             57/112                  57/163               57/112                 57/163

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: The coefficients for control variables (initial income per capita, secondary schooling, inflation rate, trade openness, government
expenditures, life expectancy, black market premium) and period dummies are not reported.
Table EA3
Three Stage Least Square Estimation
Dependent variable: Real per capita GDP growth
Estimation: Three stage least square estimation
(Standard errors are presented below the corresponding coefficient.)

Estimation period                                                       1971-2000
Unit of observations                                          Non-overlapping 10 year windows
                                                                  [1]                                    [2]
Moment of credit growth:
Real credit growth - mean                                        0.330 ***                            0.325 ***
                                                                    0.027                              0.031
Real credit growth - standard deviation                         -0.061 ***                           -0.154 ***
                                                                    0.014                              0.026
Real credit growth - skewness                                   -0.669 ***                           -0.498 ***
                                                                    0.151                              0.164


Control set of variables                                    Simple set                           Simple set
No. countries / No. observations                               58/114                               58/114

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



Note: The regression specification is identical to regression 1, Table 2. In regression 1, mean credit growth is
treated as endogenous and instrumented by lagged mean credit growth. In regression 2, mean credit growth
and standard deviation of credit growth are treated as endogenous and are instrumented by the lagged mean
credit growth and lagged standard deviation of credit growth. The coefficients for the control variables (initial
income per capita and secondary schooling) and period dummies are not reported.
Table EA4
Extreme Observations, Coded Crises, and Skewness
Sample: 29 countries with negative skewness (1981-2000)

Country                                 Extreme observation 1                            Extreme observation 2                            Extreme observation 3                                     Skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2 Extreme          3 Extreme
                                                Credit
                                 Year                         Crisis info*        Year       Credit growth Crisis info*            Year        Credit growth Crisis info*         All Years      observations       observations
                                                Growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                   excluded           excluded
Indonesia                        1999            -0.83             CC             1998            -0.29             CC             1991             0.07                            -2.56            1.11               1.14
Senegal                          1994            -0.51             CC             1984            -0.08             CC             1983            -0.08             CC             -2.01            0.77               0.78
Argentina                        1990            -0.55             CC             1983            -0.23             CC             1984            -0.19             CC             -1.59            -0.27              0.25
Jordan                           1989            -0.20             CC             1988            -0.05             CC             1997            -0.01                            -1.11            0.73               0.87
Thailand                         2000            -0.19             CC             1998            -0.12             CC             1999            -0.06             CC             -1.09            -0.71              -0.20
Sweden                           1993            -0.26             CC             1991            -0.08             CC             1994            -0.07                            -1.01            0.15               0.25
Panama                           1988            -0.23             CC             1982            -0.03              C             1983            -0.03              C             -0.94            -0.10              -0.14
Bolivia                          1984            -0.75             CC             1983            -0.74             CC             2000            -0.07                            -0.93            1.51               1.60
Israel                           1983            -0.08             CC             1985            -0.04             CC             1989             0.01                            -0.92            -0.18              -0.04
Niger                            1995            -0.58              C             1994            -0.27             CC             1997            -0.24                            -0.88            0.57               0.85
Zimbabwe                         1984            -0.46             CC             1999            -0.33             CC             1983            -0.20             CC             -0.84            -0.05              0.26
Kenya                            1993            -0.38             CC             1990            -0.09              C             1981            -0.07             CC             -0.62            1.46               1.54
Singapore                        1999            -0.04                            1986            -0.02              C             1985             0.00                            -0.62            -0.36              0.02
Jamaica                          1991            -0.26             CC             1985            -0.16              C             1992            -0.15              C             -0.55            -0.48              -0.43
Gambia                           1986            -0.52             CC             1992            -0.34              C             1987            -0.19              C             -0.53            0.87               1.10
Costa Rica                       1981            -0.41             CC             1982            -0.24                            1995            -0.20                            -0.53            -0.06              0.14
Dominican Republic               1990            -0.32             CC             1984            -0.23             CC             1988            -0.19             CC             -0.53            -0.12              0.25
United States                    1991            -0.06              C             1990            -0.05             C              1992            -0.03              C             -0.48            -0.12              0.13
Botswana                         1985            -0.22             CC             1982            -0.13                            1995            -0.13             C              -0.43            -0.29              -0.09
Finland                          1994            -0.12             CC             1993            -0.12             CC             1992            -0.11             CC             -0.36            -0.25              -0.01
Malawi                           1995            -0.51             CC             1987            -0.45             CC             1993            -0.29                            -0.33            0.42               0.65
Chile                            1983            -0.12             CC             1985            -0.09             CC             1990            -0.08              C             -0.28            0.08               0.76
Korea, Rep.                      1998             0.04             CC             1988             0.05                            1993             0.07                            -0.28            -0.11              -0.04
Madagascar                       1994            -0.25             CC             1981            -0.17             CC             1995            -0.17             CC             -0.22            0.09               0.32
France                           1993            -0.05              C             1994            -0.03              C             1996            -0.03                            -0.20            -0.17              -0.15
Malaysia                         1998            -0.02             CC             1999            -0.01             CC             1987            -0.01             CC             -0.15            -0.08              0.11
Mexico                           1995            -0.49             CC             1982            -0.48             CC             1996            -0.41             CC             -0.14            -0.03              0.15
Turkey                           1994            -0.26             CC             1988            -0.15             CC             1999            -0.15             CC             -0.06            0.13               0.23
Papua New Guinea                 1999            -0.16                            1995            -0.13                            1993            -0.12             C              -0.04            -0.01              0.04
*C refers to a crisis coded by any of the ten crisis indexes we list in the extended appendix; CC refers to a crisis coded by any of the consensus indexes described in Section 3.1.

Note: 17 observations are not associated with a coded crisis and can be explained as follows. First, if we allow a one-year lag, we can explain 4 extreme observations where a credit crunch occurs the year following a coded crisis:
Costa Rica (1982 and 1995), Malawi (1993), and Sweden (1994). Second, 5 additional extreme observations correspond to an actual crisis, but have not been coded by any of the ten indexes we have considered. These include
Papua New Guinea (1995, 1999), where Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1998) report a currency crisis in 1995 and 1998 and the IMF granted rescue packages of 1.2% and 3.2% of GDP in 1995 and 2000, respectively; Jordan (1997),
where a bailout of 4.2% of GDP was granted; Niger (1997), with credit growth of -24%, is the continuation of the 1994-95 crisis discussed above; Bostwana (1982), where Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1988) and the IMF staff
report (IMF, 1982) record a currency and current account crisis as well as a credit crunch. Third, the remaining 8 country-years had indeed no crisis. Six of these observations correspond to the third extreme observation and, in 4
cases, skewness is either positive or substantially reduced after the elimination of two observations: Indonesia (1993), Bolivia (2000), Israel (1989) and Korea (1988).
All credit growth series are required to have 20 observations over the 1981-2000 period. This restriction excludes Colombia, which does not have data for 1986-1987 and 1989-1990, and China, whose credit growth series starts
in 1986.
Table EA5
Consensus Crisis Years and Skewness in 58 Country Sample (1981-2000)

                                                                                                                                              Skewness without   Difference in
       Country                      Banking crises                          Currency crises              Sudden stops    Skewness all years
                                                                                                                                                 crisis years     skewness
Indonesia               1992;1998;1999;2000                        1998;1999                                                   -2.56                 1.09             3.65
Senegal                 1988                                       1981;1994                            1982                   -2.01                 0.96             2.97
Argentina               1982;1990;1995                             1983;1984;1990;1995                                         -1.59                 0.02             1.61
Jordan                  1989                                       1984;1988;1989                       1984;1989;1992         -1.11                 0.63             1.73
Thailand                1985;1986;1987;1998;1999;2000              1998                                 1998                   -1.09                -0.10             0.99
Sweden                  1991;1992;1993                             1993                                                        -1.01                 0.05             1.06
Panama                  1988;1989                                                                       2000                   -0.94                -0.25             0.69
Bolivia                                                            1982;1983;1984;1985                                         -0.93                 0.00             0.93
Israel                  1983                                       1983                                 1983;1985              -0.92                -0.18             0.74
Niger                   1983                                       1981;1994                                                   -0.88                -1.03            -0.15
Zimbabwe                1995;1996;1997;1998                        1983;1984;1998;1999                                         -0.84                 0.15             0.99
Kenya                   1993;1994;1995                             1981                                                        -0.62                 0.46             1.08
Jamaica                 1994;1995;1996;1997;1998;1999;2000 1991;1994                                                           -0.55                -0.32             0.23
Gambia                                                             1982;1984;1986                       1982;1984;1986         -0.53                 0.01             0.54
Costa Rica                                                         1981                                                        -0.53                -0.15             0.38
Dominican Republic                                                 1984;1985;1988;1990;1991                                    -0.53                 0.28             0.81
Botswana                                                           1985                                                        -0.43                -0.30             0.13
Finland                 1991;1992;1993;1994                        1993                                                        -0.36                -0.14             0.23
Malawi                                                             1982;1987;1997                       1981;1995              -0.33                 0.35             0.68
Chile                   1982;1983                                  1982;1983;1985                       1998                   -0.28                 0.11             0.38
Korea, Rep.             1998;1999;2000                                                                                         -0.28                -0.08             0.19
Madagascar              1988                                       1981;1987;1994;1995                  1981                   -0.22                 0.17             0.39
Malaysia                1986;1987;1988;1998;1999;2000                                                                          -0.15                 0.00             0.15
Mexico                  1982;1983;1984;1995;1996;1997              1982;1985;1995                       1995                   -0.14                 0.11             0.25
Turkey                  1982;1991;1994                             1984;1988;1994;1998;1999             1988;1994              -0.06                 0.44             0.50
India                                                              1991                                                         0.07                 0.10             0.02
Spain                                                              1992                                                         0.11                 0.01            -0.10
Uruguay                 1981;1982;1983;1984                        1982;1985;1991                       1983                    0.15                 1.21             1.06
Norway                  1988;1989;1990;1991;1992;1993                                                                           0.23                 0.27             0.03
Burkina Faso            1988;1989;1990;1991;1992;1993;1994 1994                                                                 0.28                 2.21             1.93
Honduras                                                           1990;1994                                                    0.30                 0.76             0.46
Paraguay                1995;1996;1997;1998;1999                   1984;1985;1988;1989                  1988                    0.55                 0.88             0.34
Denmark                                                                                                 1989                    0.63                 0.65             0.02
Brazil                  1990;1995;1996;1997;1998;1999              1982;1985;1987;1990;1991;1995;1996   1983                    0.92                 0.26            -0.66
Morocco                                                            1984;1985;1986                                               1.38                 2.40             1.03
Note: Consensus crises are meant to capture truly severe crises. They are defined in subsection 3.1.
