                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE LIMITS OF FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION

                                              René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 11070
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11070


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




Reese Chair in Banking and Monetary Economics at the Ohio State University and Research Associate at
the NBER. This is the paper version of my American Finance Association presidential address delivered in
Philadelphia on January 8, 2005. I am grateful to Steve Buser, Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, Henrik
Cronqvist, Craig Doidge, Rudi Fahlenbrach, Peter Henry, David Hirshleifer, Andrew Karolyi, Anil Makhija,
John Persons, Andrei Shleifer, Luigi Zingales, Ingrid Werner, and Rohan Williamson for comments and
discussions. I also thank Kuan-Hui Lee and Carrie Pan for research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

 © 2005 by René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Limits of Financial Globalization
René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11070
January 2005
JEL No. F36, F30, G32, G10, G11, G15

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite the dramatic reduction in explicit barriers to international investment activity over the last

60 years, the impact of financial globalization has been remarkably limited. I argue that country

attributes are still critical to financial decision-making because of what I call the twin agency

problems. These twin agency problems arise because rulers of sovereign states and corporate insiders

pursue their own interests at the expense of outside investors. When these twin agency problems are

significant, diffuse ownership is inefficient and corporate insiders must co-invest with other

investors, retaining substantial equity. The resulting ownership concentration limits economic

growth, financial development, and the ability of a country to take advantage of financial

globalization. The twin agency problems help explain why the impact of financial globalization has

been limited and why financial globalization can lead to capital flight and financial crises. The

impact of financial globalization will remain limited as long as these agency problems are

significant.

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

    At the end of World War II, financial markets were closed in most countries, but since then,

many countries have sharply reduced barriers to cross-border trade in financial assets. The

liberalization of trade in financial assets is often called “financial globalization.”

    In neoclassical models, the liberalization has major benefits. It enables investors worldwide

to share risks better, capital to flow where its productivity is highest, and countries to reap the

benefits of their comparative advantage.1

    Using models in which the only friction is the existence of explicit barriers to trading in

financial assets across countries, such as taxes on international trade in financial assets,

economists conclude that financial globalization is beneficial because welfare is higher without

this friction. With complete financial globalization and perfect markets within countries, a

country-irrelevance proposition holds: asset prices, portfolios, and firm financial policies are not

country dependent.

    The empirical evidence for the predictions of these neoclassical models is mixed. Abundant

evidence shows that, so far, the positive impact of financial globalization is limited. A 2003 IMF

study on the effects of financial globalization on developing countries concludes that “Thus,

while there is no proof in the data that financial globalization has benefited growth, there is

evidence that some countries may have experienced greater consumption volatility as a result.”2

Even now, a typical investor’s portfolio is heavily weighted towards stocks from his home

country. A country’s investment is closely tied to the amount it saves. Although neoclassical

models predict large capital flows towards developing countries, net equity flows to these

countries are negative from 1996 through 2004.3 As Obstfeld and Taylor (2003) put it, “Capital

transactions seem to be mostly a rich [country]-rich [country] affair” (p. 175). The country factor

1
  See Stulz (1999a) for a review.
2
  See Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003).
3
  Using data from the World Economic Outlook of the IMF, the sum of net equity flows to less developed
countries from 1996 to 2004 is -67.4 billion U.S. dollars.


                                                   2
is the most important factor in asset returns. A firm’s country of incorporation is a more

important determinant of its financial policies than is its industry. Many of these facts have

become paradoxes that are explored in many papers.

    What I will call the old theory of international finance differs from the rest of academic

finance by allowing for exogenous cross-border barriers to international investment in models in

which the country irrelevance proposition holds when barriers are removed.4 These models

cannot explain why countries remain relevant for finance when explicit barriers to trade in

financial assets are now much lower.5

    In this address, I outline an alternative to the neoclassical model that explains the limited

impact of financial globalization, shows why the country-irrelevance proposition does not hold,

and provides a foundation for a new theory of international finance which recognizes that

countries are relevant even in the absence of cross-border barriers to international investment.

    My model is grounded in the stylized fact of the La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer

(1999) study. These authors find that outside the U.S. and the U.K., diffuse ownership is rare and

firms are typically controlled by large shareholders.6

    In my model, all investors face risks of expropriation by the state and outside investors risk

expropriation by those who control firms, whom I call corporate insiders, since they are

sometimes managers and at other times are controlling shareholders. Efficient contracting dictates

that when the risks of expropriation by corporate insiders and the state are higher, corporate

insiders must co-invest more with other investors in equilibrium. These risks are country-specific,

because, subject to constraints and tradeoffs that depend on country characteristics, such as

history, laws, location, and economic development, those who control a country’s state can

establish, enforce, and break rules that affect investors’ payoffs within that country.



4
  See Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for a review.
5
  This criticism applies to my dissertation, Stulz (1980).
6
  See also Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000), and Faccio and Lang (2002).


                                                   3
    When expropriation risks are significant, the desirability of concentrated ownership limits

economic growth, risk-sharing, financial development, and the impact of financial globalization.

In particular, the limited resources and risk aversion of corporate insiders decrease the extent of

their co-investment response to a reduction in the cost of capital brought about by financial

globalization. Thus, the impact of financial globalization is smaller than it would be in a model

without frictions.

    Corporate insiders appropriate private benefits, thereby expropriating the corporations’

investors, because they maximize their own welfare rather than the welfare of outside investors.

In doing so, they create what I call “the agency problem of corporate insider discretion.” These

private benefits can take many different forms, from corporate planes to outright theft. Through

the rights they grant to investors in corporations and how they protect these rights, states affect

the cost to corporate insiders of extracting private benefits from the firm they control.

    When the cost of appropriating private benefits is low for corporate insiders, diffuse

ownership is dominated by concentrated ownership, since co-investment by corporate insiders

aligns their incentives better with minority shareholders and, therefore, reduces ex-post

expropriation of these shareholders.

    North (1981) distinguishes between a predatory theory of the state and a contracting theory of

the state. With the contracting theory, the state makes it easier for private parties to enter mutually

advantageous contracts and enforces these contracts. The state cannot perform this function when

anarchy and disorder prevail. However, as emphasized by Djankov, Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, and Shleifer (2004), state rulers with powers to fight anarchy and disorder can use these

powers to maximize their own welfare. As they do so, they affect the payoffs of investors and

corporate insiders, benefiting some and hurting others.

    For simplicity, I use the term “expropriation by the state” to denote actions that state rulers

take that reduce the return on corporate investments. State rulers can use the powers of the state to

expropriate investors by actions ranging from outright confiscation to regulations that favour the


                                                  4
constituencies of the current rulers of the state and include redistributive taxes. The discretion of

rulers to use the state for their own benefit creates an agency problem that I call “the agency

problem of state ruler discretion.”

    When this agency problem is significant, corporations with professional managers and

atomistic shareholders are inefficient. The dispersed ownership organizational form is inefficient

because managers can best reduce the risks of expropriation by taking actions that both increase

their discretion and also make it harder to monitor their actions. But once managers have done so,

they are entrenched and can more easily take advantage of atomistic shareholders.

    In contrast, controlling shareholders who are also managers have weaker incentives to

consume private benefits than do professional managers, but far greater incentives to take actions

that decrease expropriation by the state. Therefore, ownership concentration increases as the

importance of the state ruler agency problem increases.

    As the twin agency problems – those associated with corporate insiders and state rulers –

worsen, greater ownership concentration becomes more efficient and corporate insiders must co-

invest more with other investors. The risk-sharing benefit of financial globalization is inversely

related to how much co-investment occurs in equilibrium, because when corporate insiders co-

invest, their portfolios are overweighted in the equity of their firm.

    Strikingly, eliminating a country’s barriers to international investment can lower investment

and economic growth because of the capital flight that takes place when the twin agency

problems are severe.

    However, my analysis shows that the neoclassical model ignores a crucial benefit of financial

globalization, which is that it reduces the importance of the twin agency problems. In particular,

by opening borders, financial globalization provides the means and incentives for corporate

insiders to better protect the rights of their minority investors. Further, open borders shackle the

“grabbing hand,” to use the felicitous expression of Shleifer and Vishny (1999).




                                                  5
    This paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I assess the extent of financial globalization. In

Section 3, I discuss the limits of financial globalization and possible explanations. In Section 4, I

present a one-period model of an all-equity firm in which corporate insiders and state rulers can

expropriate investors. In Section 5, I examine the determinants of state ruler agency costs and

their implications for my model of the all-equity firm. In Section 6, I show that the twin agency

problems affect corporate ownership concentration and explore how the two agency problems

interact. In Sections 7 and 8, I demonstrate how these agency problems help explain the limits of

financial globalization. I focus first on well-known international finance puzzles and then turn to

corporate finance. I explain how financial globalization helps reduce the twin agency problems in

Section 9. Section 10 concludes.


2. The extent of financial globalization

    If financial globalization means a reduction in formal barriers to trade in financial assets, then

the process has been dramatic. Since 1950, the International Monetary Fund has published yearly

information on restrictions on financial transactions. Quinn (1997) has carefully coded this

information to construct an index of openness. The index takes a value of 12 for a country that is

completely open and a value of zero for a country that is completely closed. Quinn’s index shows

that the U.S. is completely open except for a brief period.

    However, the U.S. is an exception. For instance, the index was 3.5 for the U.K. in 1950 and

rose to 12 only in 1979. In 1997, which is the last year for which the index is available for a large

number of countries, only a handful of countries that are not among the developed countries were

fully open.

    For a constant sample of developed countries, the average index increases from 4.16 in 1950

to 11.6 in 1999. For a constant sample of 68 developing countries, the index is at 5.6 in 1973 and

reaches 8.34 in 1997. On average, developing countries today have the same degree of openness




                                                  6
as the developed countries in the late 1970s, but there is more variance in the index among

developing countries in 1997 than there was among developed countries in the late 1970s.

    Kaminsky and Schmuckler (2002) provide another index, which measures the liberalization

of equity investment, the financial sector, and the capital account. For each sector, it identifies

three regimes: fully liberalized, partially liberalized, and repressed. In the index, a value of one

indicates that a sector is repressed and a value of three indicates that it is fully liberalized. The

openness index is the average of the three sector indexes.

    Kaminsky and Schmuckler (2002) compute the index for 28 countries and include both the

highly developed and the less-developed countries. In 1973, the first year for which the index is

available, the average across countries was 1.43. No country is fully liberalized at the start of the

index. By October 2002, the average was 2.82. Only three of the 28 countries were not fully

liberalized: Argentina, Malaysia, and the Philippines.

    A third index, constructed by Edison and Warnock (2003), shows the fraction of a country’s

equity capitalization represented by shares that foreign investors are not allowed to acquire. This

measure exists only for less-developed countries. The index starts in 1989, when only 33% of the

market capitalization was available to foreign investors for the 14 countries for which the authors

report data. By 2000, this fraction, computed across 28 countries, had risen to 76%.

    Instead of measuring barriers to international trade in financial assets to gauge the extent of

financial globalization, I can assess the extent to which trade takes place. I do this in two different

ways. First, updating the data from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), I plot the foreign assets held by

investors in countries for which continuous data is available as a fraction of GDP in Figure 1.

Figure 1 shows a dramatic increase in foreign assets to GDP since 1945 that has accelerated in

recent years.

    Second, Figure 2 plots gross cross-border trading by foreign investors in the U.S. The figure

shows the sum of transactions in long-term securities (stocks and bonds) in the U.S. between

foreign investors and residents from 1977 through 2003. Over that period, the ratio of these


                                                  7
transactions to GDP increased from 5.76% to 344.18%, or by a factor of 60. In contrast, the ratio

of the dollar volume on the NYSE to GDP grew from 7.4% to 88.2%, or by a factor of 12.7 The

increase in cross-border gross flows is consistent with a substantial reduction in barriers to trade

in securities across countries.8


3. The limits of globalization

    With such a dramatic increase in cross-border trading in securities and the disappearance of

many formal barriers to international investment, we would expect countries, per se, to matter

little in finance. However, this is not the case. Countries are very important. The empirical

evidence shows that they matter for:


    Portfolio choice: The fact that investors overweight domestic securities in their portfolios

has been puzzling researchers for at least 30 years.9 This home bias has decreased over time, but

it still remains large. I use the home bias measure of Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004). This

measure is one minus the ratio of the portfolio share of foreign equity for investors in a country

divided by the portfolio share of the equity of that country in the world market portfolio. If

investors hold the world market portfolio and there is no home bias, the measure is zero.

    Figure 3 shows how the home bias measure, in percents, has evolved over time for the U.S.10

In 2001, the portfolio share of foreign equities of U.S. investors was 22% of what it would have

been had these investors held the world market portfolio, so that the home bias measure was 78%.

The measure averaged 63% in 2001 for a sample of 18 developed countries.11

    Figure 3 also shows that the portfolio share of foreign stocks for U.S. investors was trivial

before increasing sharply in the early 1990s, after which it stagnated. It has increased again in

recent years.

7
  NYSE Factbook, different years.
8
  Tesar and Werner (1995) were the first to show that foreign investors have a high turnover.
9
  For reviews of the evidence, see Lewis (1999) and Karolyi and Stulz (2003).
10
   I am grateful to Frank Warnock for providing me with these data.
11
   See Sorensen, Wu, Yosha, and Zu (2004).


                                                     8
       Savings and investment: Feldstein and Horioka (1980) showed that savings and investment

levels were very close for most countries. Their finding gave birth to the Feldstein-Horioka

puzzle. As investors diversify internationally, a country’s saving, which depends on income and

wealth, and a country’s investment, which depends on growth opportunities, should become less

closely related to each other. This expected evolution has happened to some extent, but recent

studies mostly conclude that the puzzle is still strong. Aizenman, Pinto, and Radziwill (2004)

show that across developing countries, the fraction of investment financed by local savings did

not change in the 1990s.

       A related puzzle is the Lucas paradox. Lucas (1990) points out that if production functions

are the same across countries, then neoclassical models imply that the productivity of capital must

be very high in developing countries, since wages are very low in these countries. Using these

models, we might predict large capital flows towards these countries, but such flows do not take

place. Strikingly, in 2000, developed countries’ investment per capita was $6,000, but in

developing countries, investment per capita was only $400.12

       Consumption: In a fully integrated world, investors would share consumption risks across

countries. As a result, the consumption growth of investors who had the same preferences for

goods and faced the same relative prices would be perfectly correlated, regardless of where these

investors are located.13

       Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) were the first to show that consumption growth rates are

even less correlated internationally than are output growth rates. Sorensen, Wu, Yosha, and Zu

(2004) show that income risk-sharing has increased over time, but they do not find evidence that

consumption risk-sharing is increasing.

       Stock returns: Over the last ten years or so, there has been much debate in finance as to

whether countries matter more or less for stock returns than do industries. For a short period of


12
     See Wolf (2004), p. 114-115.
13
     See Stulz (1981) for an early derivation of these conditions.


                                                         9
time, it even looked like industries might matter more than countries.14 However, researchers

quickly discovered that the impression that industries might matter more than countries was due

to the high correlation of internet and telecom stocks across countries in the late 1990s.15 Country

factors are still important for stock returns among developed countries and even more so among

less-developed countries.

     Size of stock market: The ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP varies widely across

countries. This ratio is typically viewed as a measure of financial development.



     All these empirical facts are related and can be explained in one of three ways. First, it could

be argued that even though many barriers to international finance trade have been removed, many

obstacles to international investment remain. There is some truth to that explanation. For instance,

as Ammer, Holland, Smith, and Warnock (2004) show, increasing the accessibility of foreign

shares through ADR programs can have a very significant impact on American investors’

ownership of these shares. However, this explanation can only go so far, given the spectacular

increase in gross flows.

     Second, the simple neoclassical model’s predictions could be inappropriate, because the

model ignores important characteristics of individuals. For instance, individuals might tilt their

portfolios towards domestic assets because of behavioral biases.

     Third, market imperfections could make neoclassical models inappropriate for predicting the

impact of financial globalization.

     A well-known explanation for some of the puzzles I have discussed that relies on a goods

market imperfection is the work of Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001). Their explanation is based on the

fact that investors who live in different countries face different relative prices because of

transportation costs. Such explanations are based on the role of distance, since transportation

14
   Cavaglia, Brightman, and Aked (2000) show that industries became more important than countries at the
end of the 1990s.
15
   See Brooks and Del Negro (2002).


                                                   10
costs increase with distance. Unfortunately, the role of distance cannot explain why borders and

sovereign states are so important for corporate finance.

    More generally, transportation costs or behavioral explanations cannot explain why borders

are important for:


    Corporate ownership: The composition of firm ownership varies systematically across

countries. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) find that, except in countries with

good investor protection, few firms are widely held. Typically, most firms have a family as a

controlling shareholder. In countries that protect shareholder rights well, they find that 47.92% of

firms are widely held, in that no shareholder holds more than 20% of the votes. Using that

criterion (p. 494), these authors find that in countries with poor shareholder rights, only 12.67%

of the firms are widely held.

    Figure 4 reports the distribution of insider ownership across countries for 48 countries in

2002. For each country, I use the data reported on Worldscope to compute the percentage of

market capitalization held by corporate insiders as well as the average of the percentage of firm

equity capitalization held by corporate insiders. These data have important limitations, since the

reporting requirements and accuracy of firm disclosures vary widely across countries. Further,

insider ownership consists of the sum of blocks owned, which may include blocks unrelated to

the controlling shareholders. Nevertheless, using these data, it is clear that most countries have

substantial insider ownership. Not surprisingly, the U.K. and the U.S. are at the extreme left-hand

tail of the ownership distribution. Though the fraction of market capitalization held by insiders in

the U.S. in 2002 is 15.68%, the median for the sample of 48 countries is 50.78%.

    Firm size: Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2001) find that firm size differs systematically

across countries. They examine 15 European countries and conclude that firms are larger in

countries where the judicial system is more efficient.




                                                11
     Capital structure: Studies that find that country factors help explain capital structures

include Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001). These authors examine ten

emerging market countries and conclude that country factors are more important in explaining

capital structures in these countries than are the traditional firm-specific variables used in capital

structure papers. Focusing on developed countries, however, Rajan and Zingales (1995) show that

the qualitative relations between firm-specific variables and capital structure are often the same

across the G-7 countries.

     Fan, Titman, and Twite (2003) consider a sample of 39 developed and developing countries.

They find that “a corporation’s capital structure is determined more by the country in which it is

located than by its industry affiliation.” They also conclude that “countries that are more corrupt

tend to be more levered and use more short-term debt.”

     Governance: Countries explain an extremely large fraction of the variation of governance

indexes across firms. Dyck and Zingales (2003) and Nenova (2003) show that control premia

vary systematically across countries. Further, Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004b) find that

country characteristics explain more than 70% of the variation in the S&P Governance rankings.


4. Investor protection, government expropriation, and co-investment

     Since formal barriers to asset trade cannot explain why corporate finance differs across

countries, some other friction must explain why the country irrelevance proposition fails to hold.

This friction is the existence of country-specific contracting costs that make the importance of the

twin agency problems differ across countries.

     I now present a model that I then use to analyze the implications of the twin agency problems

for the impact of financial globalization. My model builds on recent studies that emphasize the

relation between investor protection and the extraction of private benefits by corporate insiders.16


16
   See Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000); Lombardo and Pagano (2001); La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002); Durnev and Kim (2004); Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002); and
Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004a, 2004b).


                                                 12
However, my model differs from this literature in three important ways. First, it considers the

possibility of state expropriation. Second, it takes into account risk, which is generally ignored in

the literature. An exception is Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Love (2002), who study the impact of

the idiosyncratic risk born by controlling shareholders when investor protection is imperfect on

the firm’s cost of capital. Third, my model uses a more general cost function for the extraction of

private benefits by insiders.

     The model is a one-period model where one good is invested in production by firms that pay

a liquidating dividend at the end of the period. There are two classes of agents. Portfolio investors

can invest only in securities and in the risk-free asset. Entrepreneurs also have access to unique

investment opportunities; they exploit these investment opportunities by starting firms and

becoming corporate insiders.

     When entrepreneurs start a firm, I assume they sell equity to minority shareholders and retain

control of the firm as corporate insiders. Under the assumptions made so far, the firm is an all-

equity firm. We know (see, for instance, Jensen, 1986, and Stulz, 1990) that debt is a useful tool

for controlling agency problems. Later, I briefly discuss its use.

     I assume that corporate insiders have enough discretion to appropriate private benefits, and

that their discretion does not depend on the cash flow rights they control.17 I also assume that the

appropriation of private benefits has a cost that varies across countries, and that countries with

better investor protection make it more expensive for insiders to expropriate investors. Shleifer

and Wolfenzon (2002) interpret the deadweight cost as a punishment for insiders. Alternatively,

La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002) have a cost of appropriation of private




17
   Corporate insiders have many ways to structure their ownership and to assign voting rights to shares to
ensure that they have control. Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2004) discuss the economic importance of
the ways insiders have to control votes in excess of their fractional ownership of cash flows.


                                                    13
benefits that is paid at the firm level and represents the cost of diverting funds from the firm. It

simplifies my analysis to have the cost paid by the insiders on their own account.18

     I assume that expropriation by the state takes place after appropriation of private benefits by

insiders, so that the state does not expropriate private benefits. To the extent that some of these

benefits are nonpecuniary or hidden, it is reasonable to believe that at the very least they are less

subject to expropriation than are cash dividends. I simplify the analysis further by assuming that

state expropriation is not stochastic.

     The payoffs to minority shareholders, and hence the price these shareholders are willing to

pay for shares, fall with the private benefits consumed by corporate insiders. Insiders appropriate

fewer private benefits if they own a larger fraction of the firm’s cash flows, since they pay for

more of their private benefits through a decrease in their share of the liquidating dividend.

Consequently, if they own a larger stake in the firm’s cash flow, they can sell shares at a higher

price and pay less of the deadweight cost of private benefits.

     By investing in the firm, corporate insiders bear risks that they cannot diversify. Therefore,

in determining their optimal holding of firm shares, they trade off the benefit of a decrease in the

cost of appropriating private benefits against the cost of bearing more risk.

     All agents can invest in a risk-free investment opportunity that has a rate of return r. The rate

r fixes the rate of interest, so that I eliminate the impact of financial globalization on the risk-free

rate that Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) focus on. I assume that there is no risky borrowing and

no short-selling of securities.

     I assume that an investment opportunity has decreasing returns to scale and that it requires a

fixed investment. I limit the analysis to the investment opportunity of one entrepreneur who starts

one firm. Let K be the fixed amount of capital invested in that investment opportunity. At the end

of the period, the following sequence of events takes place: the investment opportunity yields a


18
  Since I consider a firm when it first issues securities, there is no loss of generality with this assumption
because, ultimately, the insiders pay the cost anyway.


                                                       14
random cash flow of aK
                     , insiders appropriate private benefits equal to a fraction f of aK
                                                                                        ,

expropriation by the state takes place, and finally the firm is liquidated and pays out a liquidating

dividend. The cash flow is normally distributed with an expected value of aK and a volatility of

σ K .19

     After expropriation by corporate insiders, the cash flows available for distribution are (1 –

α)(1 – f)aK, where a is the insiders’ fractional cash flow ownership. Because of state

expropriation, the shareholders receive only a fraction g of the cash flows net of private benefits,

so that they receive a dividend equal to g(1 – α)(1 – f)aK. In the next section, I endogeneize g.

     Corporate insiders can also invest in securities and in the risk-free asset. The entrepreneurs

who do not take advantage of their unique investment opportunities become portfolio investors.

     I assume that corporate insiders can consume private benefits costlessly up to a fraction c of

the firm’s cash flow. Any expropriation of cash flow in excess of the threshold level c is subject

to a deadweight cost that increases in the dollar amount expropriated and is convex in the fraction

of cash flow expropriated.

     I set the deadweight cost at 0.5b( Max[ f − c, 0]) 2 aK , where b > 0. Investor protection is an

increasing function of b, which is a country-specific constant.

     With my assumptions, the payoff to insiders at the end of the period is:

     P = faK + gα (1 − f )aK − 0.5b( Max[ f − c, 0]) 2 aK                                             (1)

     The insiders choose f to maximize (1). Since they appropriate private benefits after

uncertainty is resolved, uncertainty does not affect the expropriation decision. It is always optimal

for insiders to expropriate at least a fraction c of the cash flow, since they incur no penalty for

doing so and cannot commit not to do so. The solution is:

            1−α g 
     f = c+                                                                                         (2)
            b 

19
  Technically, the assumption of a normal distribution is inconsistent with the limited liability of equity,
but the assumption simplifies the analysis and the inconsistency is irrelevant for the results I focus on.


                                                      15
As in La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002), appropriation of private benefits

falls as b and α increase, because an increase in these variables makes expropriation more

expensive for insiders. Expropriation by the state leads to greater consumption of private benefits

for a given level of firm ownership by insiders, because any money the insiders leave in the firm

will be partially expropriated by the state.

    Minority investors value the firm by discounting the firm’s cash flow at their required

expected return, R, net of expropriation by insiders and by the state. From their perspective, firm

value is:

           1 − α g 
         1 −  c + b   gaK
                       
    V0 =                                                                                    (3)
                   1+ R

Firm value increases with the firm’s required investment, K; with the quality of the firm’s

investment opportunity, ā; with inside ownership, a; and with investor protection from insiders,

b. Further, firm value increases as g increases, i.e., as the state expropriates less.

    A 1% reduction in the rate of state expropriation increases firm value by more than 1%,

because it also decreases the rate of consumption of private benefits. Firm value falls with the

investors’ required expected return, R. For a given level of cash flow ownership by corporate

insiders, firm value does not depend on firm total risk, but instead depends on the firm’s priced

risk, since R increases with the risk premium that investors require to bear the risk of the firm.

    As a increases, insiders expropriate less. Thus, their deadweight cost of expropriation is

lower, but they bear more of the firm’s risk. To model this trade-off, I assume that insiders are

risk-averse with constant relative risk aversion, so that expected utility is:

    E (W ) − 0.5QVar (W )                                                                  (4)

where W is random terminal wealth and Q is a constant.

    To reflect the situation that is common in most countries, I assume that risky securities have

positively correlated returns. For simplicity, I focus on the case in which corporate insiders want


                                                   16
to short the other risky securities to hedge their investment in the firm if they can. In this case,

being unable to sell securities short, corporate insiders invest only in their firm and in the risk-

free asset. Therefore, I assume that corporate insiders do not have access to other risky assets,

since in the case I focus on, they would not hold them anyway.

     If insiders are not too risk-averse and have a small enough stake in their firm, they will want

to hold other risky assets. I discuss this possibility later in this section.

     The amount insiders co-invest with minority investors is the capital invested in the firm

minus the equity sold to minority investors, K – (1 – a)V0. I assume that entrepreneurs cannot

finance the firm entirely from their own initial wealth, W0, so that K > W0. For the firm to start

up, it must be that the corporate insiders can finance the firm’s initial investment with a co-

investment that is no larger than their wealth at time 0, W0. This condition may not be satisfied if

the twin agency problems are sufficiently serious that an investment by insiders greater than W0 is

required for the firm to be able to make an initial investment of K.20

     The impact of an increase in insider ownership on the external funds raised is the sum of two

effects of opposite signs. First, an increase in insider ownership decreases private benefits, so that

the firm’s value increases. Shares can then be sold at a higher price, which increases the proceeds

from selling a given fraction of cash flow rights. Second, when insider ownership increases, a

smaller fraction of the firm is sold, so that the proceeds from selling shares are lower. When

investor protection is poor, the first effect dominates for low levels of insider ownership and the

second effect dominates for high values.21 Otherwise, the second effect always dominates.

     For now, I consider the case in which the insiders can finance their co-investment and the

optimal amount of co-investment is less than W0. With this assumption, it follows that:




20
   The amount of external funds raised, (1 – α)V0, is maximized for a > 0 if b ≤ (1 + g)/(1 - c) and
otherwise for a = 0.
21
   Specifically, when b < (1 + g)/(1 - c).


                                                     17
     E (W ) = E ( P ) + (W0 − [ K − (1 − α )V0 ]) (1 + r )
                                                                                                       (5)
     Var (W ) = Var ( P )

where P is the random variable corresponding to the payoff defined by equation (1). This payoff

is the sum of the dividends and private benefits received by insiders, minus their cost of

extracting private benefits. Under my assumptions, the insiders choose insider ownership, α, to

maximize their expected utility, given by (4), with the expected terminal wealth and the variance

of terminal wealth as shown in (5), the expropriation rate f solved for in (2), and minority

investors who value the firm according to equation (3), subject to the constraints that they cannot

invest in other risky assets, cannot sell shares short, and cannot borrow on personal account. For

entrepreneurs to invest in the firm, their expected utility at the optimum must exceed their

expected utility if they do not invest in the firm. If there is an interior solution for insider

ownership, the expected utility function of insiders is concave in insider ownership.


4.1. Comparative statics of insider ownership

     Since insiders are risk-averse, insider ownership falls with the total risk of the firm and with

the insiders’ degree of risk aversion. An increase in the quality of the investment opportunity

results in an increase in the expected deadweight costs of appropriation of private benefits, so that

optimal insider ownership increases. For a given insider ownership, insiders bear more risk as the

size of the initial investment, K, increases. Therefore, an increase in K is associated with a

decrease in insider ownership.

     An increase in the required expected return on the firm’s equity, R, makes external finance

less advantageous for insiders relative to investing their own wealth, so that the insiders’ cash

flow rights ownership increases.22 Since an increase in the risk-free rate, r, makes external finance




22
  When investor protection is extremely low, however, it is possible for the opposite result to hold. The
condition for this to occur is that b < (1 – 2αg + g)/(1 – c). Note that when investor protection is poor, there
are cases where an increase in α could increase proceeds from external finance.


                                                        18
relatively less costly in exactly the same way that an increase in R makes external finance

relatively more costly, the comparative statics for r are exactly the opposite from those for R.

     An increase in expropriation by the state, i.e., a decrease in g, leads to more expropriation

from minority shareholders for a given level of insider ownership. As long as investor protection

is not too strong, insiders increase their ownership stake following a decrease in g to reduce the

impact of the greater expropriation by the state on their consumption of private benefits.

Consequently, expropriation by the state leads to greater ownership concentration as long as

investor protection is not too strong.23

     An increase in investor protection brought about by an increase in b reduces the benefit of

insider ownership, so insider ownership falls as b increases.24 The effect on ownership of an

increase in c depends on the parameters of the model. When the parameters are such that insider

ownership is high, an increase in c reduces insider ownership. As c increases, the proceeds from

external finance fall for a given level of insider ownership, because insiders receive more private

benefits and the equity is worth less for outsiders. The increase in c therefore increases the risk

born by insiders, which leads them to decrease their ownership stake. For low values of insider

ownership, the derivative cannot be signed unambiguously.

     So far, I have focused on the case in which insiders hold no other risky assets. This case is

appropriate when insiders have a large stake in the firm and are not able to hedge by short-selling

securities. Short-selling and derivatives transactions limit the impact of co-investment on the risk

born by insiders, and make it possible for insiders to hold a larger cash flow stake. Even when

they are possible, such transactions are intrinsically limited because of moral hazard and credit

risk considerations. When insiders have a small stake, they prefer to hold other risky securities.

Hence, for a range of values in the insiders’ stake in a corporation, it is not reasonable to assume


23
   As b increases, there is a range where the sign of the derivative of α with respect to g cannot be
established unambiguously. Eventually, for large b, the derivative is unambiguously negative.
24
   This result requires that R is not too large compared to r, since otherwise the comparative static result
cannot be established unambiguously.


                                                      19
that they cannot invest in other risky securities, but as long as the twin agency problems are

significant, insiders will still be overweight in the equity of their firms.

    The limiting case is the one in which the assumptions of the neoclassical model with perfect

markets and no agency problems hold. The neoclassical model can be obtained by making

investor protection perfect and eliminating expropriation by the state. In this case, both insiders

and non-insiders hold the market portfolio of risky assets, so that firms have the same ownership

regardless of the countries they belong to.


4.2. When do entrepreneurs start firms?

    The expected utility of the entrepreneur if he becomes a corporate insider increases as the

investment opportunity becomes better, the risk-free rate increases, and state expropriation falls.

It falls as the risk-aversion of the insiders increases, as the variance of cash flows increases, and

as the expected rate of return required by insiders increases. Consequently, as expropriation by

the state worsens, entrepreneurs reject more investment opportunities.

    If there is no risk of government expropriation, better investor protection always increases the

welfare of entrepreneurs and makes it more likely that they will take advantage of investment

opportunities. However, with government expropriation, a worsening of investor protection can

make entrepreneurs better off. To understand this result, suppose that insiders can consume one

dollar of private benefits without deadweight costs. By consuming a dollar of private benefits, the

insiders decrease their dividends by αg and their proceeds from selling shares by (1 – α)g. Thus,

they give up $g and receive $1, making a net gain of $1 – $g (assuming r = R). Therefore,

investor protection that makes it impossible for insiders to consume private benefits transfers

wealth from the corporation to the government. As insiders consume more and more private

benefits without deadweight costs (i.e., c increases), they eventually are made worse off because

they can no longer guarantee that outside investors will earn their required expected return and

hence become unable to sell equity to outsiders.



                                                   20
5. Expropriation by the state and corporate finance

    North (1981) writes that “The existence of a state is essential for economic growth; the state,

however, is the source of man-made economic decline.” (p. 20). In my model, the state plays both

roles, one that promotes growth and one that prevents it. First, the state affects the level of

investor protection from corporate insiders and third parties. In a country with better investor

protection, entrepreneurs find it more advantageous to start firms. Second, the state rulers get to

expropriate resources for their benefit.

    By state expropriation, the state rulers can decrease the returns of all firms, but they can also

discriminate across firms so that they decrease the returns of some firms and improve the returns

of others. They can tax cash flows, confiscate assets, forbid some activities, or require bribes to

enrich themselves. Therefore, the term “expropriation” covers a wide range of activities. Though

the experience of Yukos comes to mind, many forms of expropriation take place in developed

countries. For instance, Olson (1984) analyzes how one form of expropriation is due to activities

of interest groups which preserve their ability to extract rents through the use of state powers and

Roe (2003) discusses how German co-participation as well as political interference more

generally reduces the discretion of managers to maximize shareholder wealth and therefore

impacts the governance and ownership of firms.

    In this section, I first examine the determinants of the rate of expropriation by the state. I

assume that the state rulers extract private benefits from their positions, but that it is costly for

them to do so. In a democracy, if rulers reduced the payoffs of investors too much they might not

be re-elected. In a dictatorship, consuming too many private benefits might lead to the rulers’

overthrow. Further, as Olson (2000) points out, excessive current consumption of private benefits

by the rulers decreases the value of their future private benefits. Institutions and the distribution

of political power determine the costs that rulers bear for consuming private benefits.

    The institutions that limit state ruler discretion can be the outcome of history, electoral

processes, or even decisions by dictators. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that civil law


                                                 21
developed to prevent coercion of law enforcers through bribes and violence. Such coercion was

less of a threat in England, which made possible the development of common law. Acemoglu,

Johnson, and Robinson (2001) provide evidence that the nature of institutions in former European

colonies depends on the intensity of settlement by European colonizers.25 In countries where

Europeans did not immigrate in large numbers, they put in place institutions that facilitated the

extraction of resources rather than institutions that protected property rights. In a related paper,

Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) provide evidence that institutions that facilitate contracting are

less important than institutions that protect property rights. Rajan and Zingales (2003) show how

incumbents at times may prefer institutions that limit financial development to preserve their

rents. Perotti and von Thadden (2003) present a model in which shareholder protection is weak

when the median voter does not own much equity. Pagano and Volpin (2004) present a model in

which political parties cater to different voters in different electoral systems and find that investor

protection is weaker in countries with proportional representation than it is in countries with

majority representation.

     To simplify my analysis, I assume that the rulers maximize the expected proceeds from

expropriation, which they get to consume subject to a cost of appropriation. This cost is similar to

the cost of appropriation of private benefits for corporate insiders. I ignore the rulers’ risk

aversion for simplicity and assume that they choose g to maximize the expected value of:

     U = (1 – f)(1– g)ãKβ – 0.5h(1 – g)2(1 – f) ãKβ                                                (6)

     With these assumptions, g is given by:

              1
     g = 1−                                                                                        (7)
              h

     Here, h is an exogenous index of constraints on the state. When h is extremely high, no

expropriation takes place. If h is equal to one, the state expropriates everything and there is no



25
  See also Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2004) for a review of the literature on the role of institutions
and Glaeser, E., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004) for a critique.


                                                    22
production. For a given constraint level on the state, entrepreneurs start a firm only if their

expected utility when they do so exceeds their expected utility if they become portfolio investors.

The expected utility that insiders derive from taking advantage of an investment opportunity

increases with h. Consequently, under my assumptions, there is a threshold for h, H, such that if h

< H, the entrepreneurs do not take advantage of their investment opportunity, because their

participation constraint is not satisfied. A country’s threshold level is inversely related to h, so

that entrepreneurs’ willingness to take advantage of investment opportunities is inversely related

to the level of constraints on the state.

    So far, I have assumed that the state’s rate of expropriation is given and does not depend on

the actions of the firm. Corporate insiders can take actions to reduce the proceeds from

expropriation by the state. As already discussed, they can do so by consuming more private

benefits, but they have many other tools at their disposal to reduce expropriation by the state.

    To reduce the proceeds from expropriation, the insiders who control the firm can make

themselves more essential to the success of the firm. They can do so through the firm’s

investment policies, its contracting policies, and its financing policies. By investing in projects

that depend on their skills and contacts rather than in other projects, the insiders can make it

harder for the state to remove them from their position of control. Further, they put themselves in

a better position to negotiate with the state, since the firm may be worth much less without them.

    In a country with high risk of expropriation, corporate insiders may choose to invest in

projects that would be negative net present value projects in a country where the risk of

expropriation is trivial just because they reduce the risk of expropriation. For instance, insiders

may choose to invest in projects essential to the economy, so that disruption of these projects is

costly to the state. Insiders can also invest in projects that benefit the rulers of the state. By

making themselves useful to the state rulers, they can gain from their connections and reduce the

extent of expropriation by the state.




                                                 23
    Going beyond the model, the extent of expropriation can be related to firm balance sheets in

several ways. Firms may benefit from having extremely complicated and largely impenetrable

financial arrangements. Such arrangements make it riskier for the state to expropriate

shareholders since a financial weakening of the firm resulting from expropriation may have

unforeseen consequences. At the same time, however, such arrangements make it easier for

insiders to expropriate other investors.

    Second, to the extent that debt holders are less likely to be expropriated than shareholders,

debt financing is advantageous.

    Third, the source of debt finance may affect the probability of expropriation. Firms may

choose to borrow from banks close to the state rulers to make expropriation more painful for

them. Short-term debt is more advantageous because predatory actions by the state can lead to the

financial collapse of the firm, making such actions more costly to the state rulers.

    Fourth, the composition of assets can also affect the probability of expropriation. Fixed

tangible assets can serve as collateral for debt. If debt holders are less likely to be expropriated,

then firms benefit from having such assets, which enable them to borrow more.

    Greater transparency and boards dominated by outside directors are often viewed as

hallmarks of good governance. When there are significant risks of expropriation by the state,

neither of these two good-governance attributes are likely to enhance the wealth of shareholders.

While transparency increases firm value, in that it makes it harder for insiders to expropriate from

investors, it also decreases firm value because it makes expropriation by the state easier.

    Desai, Dyck, and Zingales (2003) emphasize that when the state has incentives to force

accurate disclosure to collect taxes, corporate taxation has an indirect benefit for minority

shareholders in that it reduces the extent of expropriation of these investors by corporate insiders.

However, this benefit is a two-edged sword for both investors and the state rulers. Greater

disclosure makes expropriation by the state easier, but it also makes transfers that benefit state

rulers easier to observe. When state rulers try to expropriate them, outside directors with only


                                                 24
small stakes in the firm may not be reliable defenders of minority shareholders. Because they

have small or even negligible stakes in the firm, state rulers can more easily sway these outside

directors by using threats or bribes.

    Dispersed firm ownership is inefficient when expropriation by the state is significant.

Management that makes itself more indispensable to the firm and makes it harder for outsiders to

assess its performance decreases the state’s ability to expropriate shareholders. At the same time,

it also decreases its cost of consuming private benefits, since it becomes less subject to discipline

from the market for corporate control, the labor market, and shareholders (see Shleifer and

Vishny, 1989). Consequently, when management entrenches itself by reducing the possibility of

expropriation by the state, the gains that shareholders make may be offset by losses in the form of

insiders’ appropriation of private benefits. Further, when management has only a small stake in

the firm’s cash flows, it may use its entrenched position to extract the best deal from the state for

itself, rather than to protect shareholders.

    In the presence of expropriation by the state, corporate insiders want to retain operational

control. Doing so makes management and corporate insiders indistinguishable and makes it

harder for the state to expropriate them. By having control, insiders can make decisions that limit

the potential for expropriation. Insiders want to hold a significant stake in the firm’s cash flows to

make it credible that they will aggressively fight expropriation by the state. By having a cash flow

stake, they create incentives to make decisions that benefit minority shareholders. Absent such a

stake, insiders could let the state expropriate minority shareholders in exchange for the right to

appropriate more private benefits granted by the state, which would make outside funds more

costly and possibly make access to outside funds impossible altogether.

    My analysis makes three important simplifying assumptions that should be relaxed in further

work. First, I assume that h is exogenously given. However, this assumption ignores the

possibility (see Olson, 2000) that rulers may also find it optimal to add constraints to the state so

that investment will be higher, thereby increasing proceeds from expropriation.


                                                 25
    Second, my analysis ignores the possibility that the state may be more efficient at delivering

public goods if its rulers have some discretion (see Djankov, Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

and Shleifer (2004)), so that expected cash flows before expropriation may be maximized for

some positive value of h.

    Finally, the rate of expropriation is assumed to be deterministic. Obviously, this is a

simplification. If expropriation is uncertain, however, it remains valuable for corporate insiders to

take actions that minimize the extent of expropriation if it happens. Uncertainty about

expropriation introduces an important complication, which is that it affects the risk that corporate

insiders bear for a given ownership stake. Everything else equal, this greater uncertainty would

lead insiders to have a smaller stake in the firm. On the other hand, for a given level of

uncertainty, firms in countries with more expected expropriation risk would have higher

ownership concentration because ownership concentration reduces expropriation risk. The

prediction that expropriation by rulers of the state leads to higher ownership concentration would

therefore hold even if expropriation is uncertain as long as the impact of ownership concentration

on expected expropriation is sufficiently large. Finally, expropriation uncertainty would make it

less likely that entrepreneurs would start firms.


6. Ownership concentration and the twin agency problems

    The controlling shareholder discretion and the state ruler discretion agency problems both

contribute to ownership concentration. However, in addition, these agency problems reinforce

each other. When the state ruler agency problem is significant, controlling shareholders can

exploit it to their advantage. For instance, by bribing state rulers, they can get away with

expropriation of minority shareholders that would not be possible if the state strictly adhered to

its laws and regulations. Further, corporate insiders who earn rents through control of

corporations do not have incentives to take steps that would reduce the discretion of state rulers

when that discretion helps them protect their rents.



                                                    26
     In this section, I show that both agency problems help explain ownership concentration

across the world. To examine the relation between the twin agency problems and ownership

concentration, I need measures of ownership concentration and variables that explain the

prevalence of the twin agency problems. The data are reported in Table I.

     La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) examine the extent to which corporations in

various countries are widely held. I use their data for the fraction of firms that are widely held,

using the 10% threshold. I also use the 10% threshold for the fraction of firms under family

control. Under these definitions, I define a firm as widely held if the largest block is less than

10% and as family controlled if the largest block is a family block that exceeds 10%.

     I supplement the La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) data with data from

Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000) for Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Thailand.

     Finally, I use data reported by Worldscope for blockholdings in 2002 as a proxy for

ownership by corporate insiders. These data have the problems mentioned earlier when

discussing Figure 4, but they have the advantage of providing a measure of fractional cash flow

ownership by insiders. I use an equally weighted average of blockholdings and a value-weighted

average. I report the results using the equally weighted average. The results using the value-

weighted average are similar, but they are not reported.

     Three types of variables serve as determinants of the intensity of agency problems. First, I use

the anti-director rights index of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV, 1998).

This index measures the legal rights of minority shareholders. A higher value means that

shareholders have more rights. The highest value of this index is 6.26 The weakness of this




26
   LLSV state that the ‘index is formed by adding 1 when (1) the country allows shareholders to mail their
proxy vote to the firm, (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their shares prior to the general
shareholders’ meeting, (3) cumulative voting or proportional representation of minorities in the board of
directors is allowed, (4) an oppressed minorities mechanism is in place, (5) the minimum percentage of
share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for an extraordinary shareholders’ meeting is less than or
equal to 10 percent (the sample median), or (6) shareholders have pre-emptive rights that can be waived
only by shareholders’ vote.” (p. 1123).


                                                     27
measure for my analysis is that it does not take into account the ability of firms to use private

solutions to substitute for weaknesses in the law.

    Second, I use an index that measures the state’s respect for property rights. I use LLSV’s

index of the risk of expropriation by the state. This index measures the threat of outright

confiscation or “forced nationalization.” A higher value of the index means less expropriation

risk. LLSV average the index for the months of April and October between 1982 and 1995 and

normalize it so that its highest value is 10.

    Third, I control for measures of financial development and economic development. For this

variable, I use the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP, stock market turnover, the ratio of

stock and bond market capitalization to GDP, and GDP per capita. The development data are

from Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2004) and are averaged from 1988 through 1999.

    Inspection of Table I shows that a low risk of expropriation, which means a high

expropriation index, is a precondition for diffuse ownership. In results not reported, I find that the

fraction of firms widely held is significantly higher (at better than 1% level) in countries with

below-median expropriation risk (i.e., above-median expropriation risk index). Further, the

fraction of firms with family control, the equally weighted average of insider ownership, and the

value-weighted average of insider ownership are all significantly higher (again, at better than 5%

level) in countries with above-median political risk.

    Table II reports regressions of measures of ownership concentration on the expropriation

index, the anti-director rights index, and a measure of development. The first two panels use the

supplemented data of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999). The advantage of using

these data is that their reliability has been established by the authors at the firm level. The authors

do not provide the fractional ownership of cash flows or of voting rights, but instead only a

dummy variable for whether fractional ownership of voting rights leads to control of the firm.

    In Table II, Panel A, the first regression is a Tobit regression of the fraction of widely held

firms on the anti-director rights and the expropriation indexes. Both of these indexes have


                                                  28
positive, significant coefficients. Thus, a decrease in either of the two proxies for the twin agency

problems decreases the percentage of firms that are widely held in a country.

     The other regressions of Panel A also control for a measure of development. In all the

regressions, an increase in the anti-director rights index makes it more likely that a firm is widely

held. In all the regressions but one, a decrease in the risk of expropriation makes it more likely

that a firm is widely held. The only regression in which expropriation is not significant is the one

in which I control for GDP per capita. The difficulty is that GDP per capita and the expropriation

index are very highly correlated. The correlation is 0.81.27

     The measures of development have mixed results. Stock market capitalization and the sum of

stock market and bond market capitalizations are not significant, but turnover is significant.

     Panel B of Table II shows the results of Tobit regressions of the fraction of family-controlled

firms on the explanatory variables.28 The results are striking. In each regression, the expropriation

index has a negative, significant coefficient, which means that countries with a smaller risk of

expropriation have fewer family-controlled firms. The anti-director rights index is significant

when the measure of financial development is the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP, but

not otherwise. Somewhat strangely, stock market capitalization has a positive, significant

coefficient in that regression.

     Panel C shows OLS regressions of the equally weighted average of inside ownership on the

same independent variables as in Panels A and B. The expropriation index and the anti-director

rights index have significant negative coefficients in all regressions.




27
   In regressions not reproduced here, I replace GDP by the part of GDP not correlated with expropriation.
When I do that, expropriation becomes significant and the GDP variable is not significant. However, if
instead I replace expropriation by the part of expropriation not correlated with GDP, then GDP is
significant and the expropriation variable is not. Finally, if I use only the part of GDP not correlated with
expropriation and the part of expropriation not correlated with GDP, then both variables are significant.
28
   Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2004) provide evidence that there is a relation between the proportion of
family-controlled firms and corruption measures, but they do not control for the anti-director index or
financial development.


                                                     29
    The regressions reported so far in Table II show that there is a significant relation between

ownership concentration and an index of expropriation by the state. Except for the regressions for

family ownership where typically only the expropriation index is significant, both the

expropriation and the anti-director rights indexes are always significant. The regressions therefore

show that ownership concentration is related to the intensity of the twin agency problems.

    An obvious concern about the regressions is that the expropriation index could be low

(expropriation risk high) in countries with high ownership precisely because ownership is

concentrated. In other words, it could be that the inequality that accompanies ownership

concentration leads to greater risks of expropriation.

    To address this issue, I re-estimate the regressions, substituting for the index of expropriation

a measure of the distribution of political power, the PolconV index (Henisz, 2000). The index is a

continuous variable that ranges from zero, indicating a dictatorship, to one, indicating democracy,

and represents the degree to which checks and balances are present in a country’s political

system. It is a proxy for the level of constraints on state rulers.

    I use the 1960 value of the PolconV index, which makes it difficult to argue that

concentration of ownership in 2002 determines the value of that index. The results are reported in

Panel D using the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP as the control for development.

    The PolconV index is significantly related to the fraction of firms with diffuse ownership (I

find the lowest p-value, 0.108, when I control for GDP per capita). Similar results hold for the

fraction of family-controlled firms, except that, as expected, the coefficient has the opposite sign.

Finally, with the equally weighted ownership measure, PolconV has a significant negative

coefficient when the development controls are the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP,

turnover, and the ratio of stock and bond market capitalization to GDP, but not when they are

GDP per capita (results not reported).

    I also estimate univariate regressions that show a strong relation between the ownership

measures and expropriation risk. OLS regressions that use the equally weighted average of inside


                                                   30
ownership (not reported) make it possible to evaluate the explanatory power of the various

variables. With these regressions, the expropriation index and PolconV have adjusted R-squares

of 33.01% and 18.94%, respectively. The adjusted R-square is 9.32% for the anti-director rights

index. The adjusted R-square is 8.25% for the ratio of the sum of stock and bond market

capitalizations to GDP and 16.86% for GDP per capita. It is close to zero for stock market

capitalization to GDP and turnover (adjusted R-square is 2.45% and 0.45%, respectively).

    Finally, with the equally weighted ownership measure, PolconV has a significant negative

coefficient when the development controls are the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP and

turnover, but not when they are the ratio of stock and bond market capitalization to GDP or GDP

per capita (regressions not reported).

    I also estimate univariate regressions that show a strong relation between the ownership

measures and expropriation risk. OLS regressions that use the equally weighted average of inside

ownership (not reported) make it possible to evaluate the explanatory power of the various

variables. With these regressions, the expropriation index and PolconV have adjusted R-squares

of 23.56% and 9.33%, respectively. The adjusted R-square is 2.2% for the anti-director rights

index. The adjusted R-square is roughly 12% for the ratio of the sum of stock and bond market

capitalizations to GDP and for GDP per capita. It is close to zero for stock market capitalization

to GDP and turnover.

    The lesson from these adjusted R-squares is that variables that proxy for expropriation risk

have substantial explanatory power. Other variables of the quality of government or property

rights used in the literature, such as an index of corruption, the country rating, and the LLSV law

and order index, have less explanatory power than does the expropriation index, but have

significant coefficients, as expected. In multiple regressions, these variables remain significant

except, typically, in regressions that control for GDP per capita.




                                                 31
7. The limits of financial globalization and the twin agency problems

    In this section, I show that the central prediction of my analysis, namely, that to reduce the

economic importance of the twin agency problems insiders must co-invest significantly with

outsiders, has important implications for all the international finance puzzles and explains the

limited impact of financial globalization.


7.1. The home bias

    In neoclassical models, investors hold their country’s market portfolio when their country is

completely segmented from world capital markets. Investors move to holding the world market

portfolio when their country becomes completely integrated in these markets.

    Assuming that corporate insiders are typically domestic investors, the twin agency problems

create a home bias in equity portfolios because insiders overweight their portfolios in their firms’

shares.

    To see why, consider the following numerical example. The argument in this example builds

on Dahlquist et al. (2003). Suppose that a country has poor investor protection and/or high state

expropriation, so that ownership is concentrated. Suppose that the stock market wealth of the

country equals its aggregate wealth of 100, that the country’s market represents 1% of world

market wealth, and that insiders own 60% in each firm. In that case, the insiders own 60 in

domestic equity and minority shareholders own 40. After financial globalization, insiders own

fewer shares in their companies because external finance becomes more advantageous. Say that

their holdings of domestic shares drop to 50. The minority shareholders, whom I call portfolio

investors, invest in the world market portfolio, investing 1% in their home country. As a result,

even though the country represents 1% of all world stock market wealth, local investors have

50.5% of their wealth invested in the local market.

    The model has the following implications for the home bias in the absence of barriers to

international investment:



                                                32
    1) Countries with worse governance have a smaller fraction of wealth owned by foreign

investors because insiders have a larger ownership share in such countries.

    2) Smaller countries have a larger fraction of wealth owned by foreign investors and portfolio

investors who live in smaller countries with a smaller share of the world market portfolio invest

proportionally more abroad.

    3) Countries where firm total risk is higher have a larger fraction of wealth owned by foreign

investors since insider ownership is negatively related to firm total risk.

    4) Countries with higher state expropriation have a lower fraction of wealth owned by foreign

investors, all else equal.

    Of course, portfolio investors typically have portfolios that exhibit many biases.

Consequently, many variables may turn out to be useful in explaining the portfolios they hold.

The key point of this analysis is that co-investment puts a constraint on how much risk can be

shared internationally and forces domestic investors to hold more domestic shares than they

would in a neo-classical model.


7.2. The Feldstein-Horioka paradox

    The co-investment that results from the twin agency problems creates a correlation between

saving and investment and hence helps explain the empirical evidence of such a correlation

provided first by Feldstein and Horioka (1980).

    Consider the simplest dynamic version of my model. Firms last one period and investors are

assumed to be myopic. In each period, entrepreneurs receive an investment opportunity and then

decide whether to take it or not. In a neoclassical model, if investment opportunities are not

serially correlated, an entrepreneur’s investment will be unrelated to his past savings. At the

country level, investment and savings will be uncorrelated as long as the country is small.

    With the twin agency problem, entrepreneurs must co-invest. Their wealth depends on the

success of earlier investments. If they did well in the previous period, they are more likely to start



                                                  33
a firm this period because, with higher wealth, they can afford to co-invest more. It follows that

the twin agency problems create a direct link between saving and investment.


7.3. The Lucas paradox

    Remember that the paradox is that neoclassical models imply a high marginal product of

capital in emerging countries, given the wage rates prevailing there.

    Countries where the twin agency problems are more important will have higher physical

productivity of capital than will countries where these problems are less important. In other

words, the physical marginal product of capital will be higher because investment will stop at the

point where it is no longer profitable net of the costs of the twin agency problems.

    To see this, assume that entrepreneurs in two different countries have access to exactly the

same investment opportunity. One country, G, has good investor protection and a low risk of

expropriation. The other country, B, does not have these valuable attributes. In country B, the

return to entrepreneurship from a given level of investment is lower than in country G because:

    1) Corporate insiders must co-invest to reduce the adverse impact of the twin agency

problems. Co-investment is costly because it forces corporate insiders to bear more risk for a

given expected return than they would otherwise. Further, the amount of capital invested is

limited by the entrepreneurs’ resources to co-invest.

    2) The state will expropriate part of the investment opportunity’s return, which reduces the

return on investment.

    3) The agency costs of corporate insider discretion do not disappear in equilibrium. Thus,

more investment leads to more deadweight costs.

    The twin agency problems create a wedge between the return on a dollar of investment in the

two countries, so that the physical marginal product of capital will be higher in country B than in

country G. Earlier papers by Gertler and Rogoff (1990) and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) also

observe that agency costs create a wedge that can help explain the Lucas paradox.



                                                 34
7.4. Consumption

    Since the twin agency problems make it optimal for corporate insiders to co-invest with

outside investors and to overweight the equity of their firms in their portfolios, the consumption

of corporate insiders will be highly correlated with their firms’ return. In contrast, minority

shareholders hold the world market portfolio so that their consumption will be driven by the

return of the world market portfolio. Aggregate consumption is a weighted average of the

consumption of portfolio investors and corporate insiders. Though the consumption of portfolio

investors is perfectly correlated across countries, the consumption of corporate insiders is not. In

countries with greater co-investment, consumption will be more correlated with domestic returns

and less correlated with foreign consumption.

    The model has no labor income. Consumption from labor income would affect the results.

Nevertheless, the twin agency problem would reduce consumption correlation because corporate

insiders cannot share risk to the same extent as portfolio investors.


7.5. Country effects in returns

    The twin agency problems make it possible to understand why country effects are so

powerful in stock returns. This is because any change in the economic importance of the twin

agency problems changes the present value of future cash flows of firms.


7.6. Stock market capitalization and financial development

    The twin agency problems reduce firms’ reliance on outside equity, which makes the equity

market less important in countries where the twin agency problems are significant. As the twin

agency problems decrease in importance in a country, equity markets should acquire a more

significant economic role, so that financial development should be inversely related to the

importance of the twin agency problems.




                                                 35
    Financial globalization follows a U-shape over the last 120 years. Figure 1 shows that U-

shape clearly. In the early 1990s, the world’s foreign assets to GDP ratio returns to its level of a

century ago.

    This U-shape is closely related to what Rajan and Zingales (2003) call the “great reversal.”

They show that the level of financial development, measured, for instance, by the ratio of stock

market capitalization to GDP, also follows a U-shape pattern. In their model, incumbents protect

their rents by repressing financial development. They can only do so effectively when

international trade and capital flows are jointly weak.

    Changes in the importance of the twin agency problems through time can help explain the

“great reversal.” In particular, we would expect the state ruler agency problem to have been more

important in the 1930s than it was in 1900 or 2000 for many countries.


8. The twin agency problems, corporate finance, and financial globalization

    The results in Sections 4 and 5 go a long way in explaining why firms and corporate finance

differ across countries. In these Sections, I showed that ownership is more concentrated when the

twin agency problems are more important. It also follows from my analysis that firms will be

smaller in countries where the twin agency problems are more significant because the wealth and

risk appetite of insiders naturally limits firm size when co-investment is important. I now turn to

how the twin agency problems limit the benefits of financial globalization for firms.


8.1. Financial globalization, firm value, and investment

    Theoretical models of financial globalization investigate the impact of a reduction in barriers

to international investment. Starting with Subrahmanyam (1975), these models show that, in

general, removing barriers to international investment decreases firms’ cost of capital and

improves welfare. As barriers fall, the required expected return on a stock in a country becomes

determined globally. Consequently, risks that were not diversifiable become diversifiable. In

models without frictions other than barriers to international investment, the elimination of these


                                                 36
barriers increases the present value of future cash flows and leads firms to expand as their cost of

capital falls.

     Henry (2000a) shows that a reduction in barriers to international investment increases

shareholder wealth, and Bekaert and Harvey (2000) show that it is accompanied by a drop in the

required expected return on equity. However, as explained in Stulz (1999b), these changes are

smaller than what we would expect to find in a neoclassical setting.29

     There are at least five reasons why the twin agency problems reduce the ability of firms to

take advantage of financial globalization. First, entrepreneurs gain from globalization (assuming

they invest in the firm and their other holdings of risky securities are unimportant) by being able

to sell securities at a higher price. To the extent that the twin agency problems make it optimal for

corporate insiders to co-invest with other investors, the benefit from the decrease in the cost of

capital is naturally reduced for entrepreneurs. Second, investment opportunities that become

valuable when the cost of capital falls require insiders to co-invest and bear more risk. Their

ability to do so is limited by their risk aversion and their wealth. Consequently, the extent to

which corporate insiders can take advantage of these investment opportunities is lower than in the

neo-classical model.30 Third, Section 4 shows that a reduction in the cost of capital can reduce

corporate ownership and increase the consumption of private benefits, which diminishes the

positive impact on firms’ value of a reduction in the cost of capital. Fourth, foreigners seem to be

particularly vulnerable to expropriation by state rulers, which limits the impact of financial

globalization on a firm’s cost of equity when the state ruler agency problem is significant. Fifth,

when that problem is significant, financial globalization can be more easily reversed, in that the

state rulers can erect new barriers to international investment.31



29
   Some authors have documented larger changes. See, for instance, Edison and Warnock (2003).
30
   This last effect could be reduced if, contrary to my assumptions, corporate insiders have a significant
portfolio of shares that increases in value as a result of financial globalization.
31
   See Perrotti and Van Oijen (2001) for the view that liberalizations become credible over time and Martell
and Stulz (2003) for supportive evidence using long-term returns after liberalizations.


                                                    37
    It follows that the neoclassical model overstates the firm value benefit of financial

globalization. A major reason for this is that it ignores the fact that in a world with the twin

agency costs, firms are limited in their ability to take advantage of a reduction in the cost of

capital by the willingness and ability of insiders to co-invest as production expands. The

concentration of ownership caused by the twin agency problems can, therefore, help explain why

the impact on firm value of a reduction in barriers to international investment is smaller than

expected in a neoclassical model.

    I now consider the effect on firm value, minority investors, and corporate insiders of a

decrease in barriers to international investment for an already-established firm. Suppose first that

a reduction in barriers to international investment takes place and that corporate insiders sell no

new shares. In this case, minority investors gain from the increase in the value of their shares. The

fractional ownership is unaffected, so the increase in firm value is as predicted by the neoclassical

model. The corporate insiders do not gain from financial globalization because they own the same

stake in the firm as before. Further, they are concerned about the total risk of that stake, which

has not changed. Thus, their utility is not affected. For the corporate insiders of existing firms to

gain from financial globalization, it must be that they expect to raise more capital following the

reduction in barriers to international investment.


8.2. Firm creation and financial globalization

    So far, in this section, I have assumed that entrepreneurs always invest in their investment

opportunity and focused on the impact of financial globalization on existing firms. However,

financial globalization also impacts firm creation.

    The decision of entrepreneurs on whether to start firms depends on their investment

opportunity set. The expected utility of portfolio investors increases as barriers to international

investment fall, because they can reap greater benefits from international diversification.

Therefore, for entrepreneurs to choose to invest in their unique investment opportunity, it must be



                                                 38
that their expected utility as portfolio investors does not increase so much that becoming portfolio

investors has more value to them than starting a firm. Such an outcome is possible, however.

      To see that financial globalization can decrease the number of firms in the economy and

therefore that it can have an adverse impact on investment, consider the case where the benefit to

entrepreneurs from starting firms is small when the country is segmented because the twin agency

problems are large. Financial globalization has little impact on the benefit of starting a firm in this

case because co-investment is large, so that few funds are raised at the lower cost of capital. It

follows that in this case financial globalization may increase the expected utility of entrepreneurs

if they become portfolio investors more than it increases their expected utility if they start firms.

Therefore, financial globalization may result in fewer firms being created and in capital outflows.


8.3. Private solutions to the twin agency problems

      In Section 5, I discussed the various ways in which corporate insiders could reduce

expropriation by the state. Corporate insiders can also take actions that commit them to lower

consumption of private benefits. First, they can make organizational decisions that reduce their

ability to expropriate. For instance, they can choose to put outsiders on the firm’s board. Second,

they can make financing decisions that achieve the same purpose. Debt can make the

appropriation of private benefits less profitable, since insiders might lose control if the firm

cannot pay the creditors back. Third, insiders can build a reputation for not expropriating minority

investors.32

      Recent empirical evidence shows that the various mechanisms firms can use to commit to

investors that they will get a return on their investments can be effective even when the law offers

limited protection to investors. For instance, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004) show that

ownership of a sample of British firms in existence in 1900 evolved in the same way as the

ownership of a similar sample of firms in existence in 1960, even though the anti-director rights


32
     See Gomes (2000).


                                                  39
index had a value of one from 1900 to 1946 but had reached a value of five by the end of the

century. Allen, Qian, and Qian (2004) show similarly that the informal sector in China has found

many ways to alleviate the problem of China having poor legal mechanisms.

    The usefulness of these approaches to reduce the importance of the agency costs of insider

discretion falls as the agency problem of state ruler discretion becomes more serious. First, these

approaches often rely on private contracting, but private contracting is less reliable when state

rulers have more discretion since they abrogate contracts and prevent their enforcement. Second,

the payoff from investments generally falls as the importance of the state ruler agency problem

increases and, therefore, the payoffs to investments in governance fall also. Third, a predatory

state limits the benefit from corporate transparency by making it valuable for those connected to

the rulers to hide the benefits they get from them, and for those not connected to the rulers to hide

the true state of the firm to make expropriation harder. Fourth, as discussed earlier, insiders’

entrenchment can reduce expropriation by the state.

    It follows that firms find it more difficult to control the agency problem of corporate insider

discretion when the agency problem of state ruler discretion is important. However, when the

agency problem of corporate insider discretion is poorly controlled, it is less profitable for firms

to use external finance. Though the analysis so far has ignored information asymmetries, these

asymmetries will be more important when firms are less transparent. By making the firm less

transparent to reduce expropriation by the state, corporate insiders increase information

asymmetries and, therefore, make it more expensive to access external sources of finance. As

firms use less external finance, they benefit less from financial globalization since financial

globalization benefits firms by lowering the cost of capital on the capital they raise.




                                                 40
9. Does financial globalization decrease the importance of the twin agency problems?

    So far, I have taken the importance of the twin agency problems in a country to be given. An

important benefit of financial globalization is that it creates conditions for the twin agency

problems to become less important over time.


9.1. Financial globalization and the agency costs of corporate insider discretion

    I first demonstrate that financial globalization increases firm incentives to reduce the agency

costs of corporate insider discretion, and then show that financial globalization provides tools

firms can use to do so.


9.1.A. Does financial globalization provide incentives for firms to improve governance?

    Financial globalization reduces the cost of outside finance for firms. As the cost of outside

finance falls, firms will use more of it. Consequently, if it is costly for firms to improve their

governance, they are more likely to do so when they use more external finance. It follows that

financial globalization creates incentives for firms to improve governance. The limitation to

governance improvements is, however, that such improvements may expose firms to more

expropriation from the state. In Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004b), financial globalization leads

to greater investments in governance for a somewhat different reason, namely, that it reduces the

cost of such investments.

    With a new firm, insiders capture the benefit from increased firm-level governance because it

allows them to sell securities at a higher price as long as it does not increase state expropriation

too much. Similarly, if insiders could vote to increase investor protection by the state before they

start a new firm, they will choose to do so if that means an increase in investor protection at no

cost. With such an increase, they optimally invest less in the firm and therefore bear less firm

risk.




                                                41
       Bebchuck and Roe (1999) point out that incumbent corporate insiders do not necessarily

benefit from improvements in corporate governance. The same can be true here, but even

incumbents may choose to improve a firm’s corporate governance as the cost of capital falls.

       Consider first the Bebchuck and Roe (1999) argument. Assume that insiders invested in a

firm when investor protection was low. The minority investors bought the securities assuming

that a significant fraction of cash flows was going to be expropriated by insiders. Just before

insiders can appropriate private benefits after cash flows are realized, the state sharply improves

investor protection. With this higher level of investor protection, insiders expropriate only a small

fraction of cash flows, which makes minority investors better off but reduces insiders’

appropriation of private benefits.

       Now, consider the case in which the cost of capital drops because of financial globalization.

Insiders in existing firms receive a benefit from improvements in investor protection when a

reduction in the cost of capital enables them to profitably increase the scale of the firm or to take

advantage of growth opportunities that would not otherwise have been profitable. In this case, the

firm must raise new capital and does so on better terms with better investor protection. However,

the insiders have to trade off the benefit of raising capital more cheaply against the loss resulting

from their decreased ability to extract private benefits from control. But insiders who raise funds

for the first time instead benefit from the ex ante reduction in private benefits.33

       When investor protection is low, a reduction in barriers to trade in goods and services

increases incentives for the state to increase investor protection. To see why, consider a country

where firms face imperfect competition before trade liberalization. After the reduction in barriers,

firms face greater competition by firms from countries where investor protection is higher.

       Suppose that there is a country that meets the assumptions of the neoclassical model. Insiders

in that country incur no deadweight agency costs. Consequently, firms will drive up the price to

the point where investors earn the required expected rate of return and there are no abnormal

33
     See Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004a) for an analysis of such a trade-off.


                                                       42
profits. When this happens, firms in countries with high agency costs will not be profitable,

because there will not be enough rents to pay for the deadweight agency costs. As a result, to

reduce their deadweight agency costs entrepreneurs will lobby for improvements in investor

protection, or, alternatively, lobby for the country to erect barriers to trade.


9.1.B. Does financial globalization provide tools for good governance?

       Financial globalization provides tools to insiders to reduce the agency costs of corporate

insider discretion. First, they complete markets and reduce the costs of some securities trades.

Second, financial globalization enables insiders to rent investor protection mechanisms from

other countries. Third, it gives insiders access to specialized knowledge and skills.

       In a world where capital markets are segmented, firms are stuck with the institutions of their

country. If the country has weak financial markets or poor securities laws, firms have to live with

them. As barriers to trade in financial assets drop, firms can choose to list on foreign exchanges

and to raise funds abroad.

       Coffee (1999) and Stulz (1999b) discuss how ADR programs permit foreign firms to borrow

U.S. institutions of investor protection. By listing on a U.S. exchange, a foreign firm is subject to

some U.S. securities laws and regulations. It is also monitored by the exchange, the S.E.C., and

other U.S. gatekeepers. Although this monitoring may at times seem weak and tentative, it is

monitoring that otherwise would not have taken place.34


9.2. Financial globalization and the state ruler agency costs

       Financial globalization reduces the state’s ability to expropriate. It gives resident investors an

exit, which raises the insiders’ reservation utility and makes it difficult for state rulers to reduce

barriers to international investment when the risk of expropriation is high, since if they do so,

insiders will export capital. Further, the state rulers cannot with impunity take actions that

increase the risk of expropriation unless they first raise barriers to international investment. It

34
     See Siegel (2004) for a critical view of the extent of this monitoring.


                                                         43
follows that rulers of countries with open borders find it more costly to take steps to expropriate

investors.

    In a related observation, Rajan and Zingales (2003) point out that the ability of incumbents to

protect their rents is much more limited when capital flows are buoyant.

    Rather than expropriating assets directly, state rulers can also direct resources towards some

firms and away from others. For instance, they can make it difficult for some firms to raise funds

or they might increase the cost of funds through rationing. Financial globalization sharply reduces

state rulers’ ability to engage in such practices because it makes foreign sources of capital

available to local firms.

    Capital markets differ in the costs they impose on firms that want to raise funds. Further,

specific segments of capital markets simply do not exist in many countries. U.S. investors take

the existence of a long-term bond market for granted, but very few countries have a liquid long-

term bond market. In many countries, issuing securities is expensive and heavily regulated.

    However, since the 1960s, firms have been able to issue debt and convertible debt on offshore

markets that are unregulated. These markets can dramatically reduce the ability of local regulators

and financial institutions to restrict security issues, and thus they lower the cost of external funds

for firms.

    This discussion makes it clear that financial globalization reduces the ability of those in

control of the state to extract rents. If they attempt to do so, resident investors can put their money

elsewhere, foreign investors can go home, and local firms become uncompetitive. From this

perspective, it is not surprising that financial crises will sometimes occur in those countries where

investor protection is weak and respect for property rights suspect.

    Rather than viewing financial crises as the downside of financial globalization, this view

suggests that the possibility of such crises is intrinsic to the benefits from financial globalization.

Free capital flows make it harder for the state to expropriate investors because it gives investors




                                                  44
an exit. Not surprisingly, investors will use that exit if they feel threatened. The problem in those

cases is not the capital flows, but the fact that investors feel threatened.


10. Conclusion

    Although barriers to international investment have fallen sharply over the last 50 years, the

impact of financial globalization has been limited. Countries still matter a great deal. I argue that

the reason why countries still matter so much is that finance is critically affected by twin agency

problems.

    First, those who control a firm can use their power for their own benefit, which creates what I

call “the agency problem of corporate insider discretion.”

    Second, those who control the state can use their powers to improve their welfare, which

creates what I call “the agency problem of state ruler discretion.”

    These are twin problems rather than two separate problems. They prosper together because

they feed on each other. As these agency problems worsen, concentrated ownership becomes

more efficient than diffuse ownership. To show this, my analysis exploits a simple one-period

partial equilibrium model and focuses mostly on new firms. I do not directly model the agency

problem of state ruler discretion and the actions firms can take to affect state expropriation. State

expropriation can take many forms, but for simplicity, in my model I assume that it is

deterministic and I do not distinguish among forms of expropriation. I consider all equity firms

and analyze only portfolio equity flows.

    All these issues should, and hopefully will, be addressed in future work, but the central role

of the twin agency problems in fostering ownership concentration will remain.

    When concentrated ownership is optimal, insiders must co-invest with outsiders. Co-

investment constrains the benefits from financial globalization because it makes it harder for risks

to be shared internationally and for capital to be invested where it is most productive.

    Co-investment has the following implications:



                                                   45
    1) Corporate insiders bear a significant amount of their firm’s risks.

    2) Firm size is constrained by corporate insiders’ wealth and their appetite for risk.

    3) Co-investment decreases the extent to which firms raise equity externally, which makes

equity markets less active and resilient.

    4) Co-investment forces corporate insiders to overweight their firms’ equity in their

portfolios, so that fewer risks can be shared across countries.

    5) Since corporate insiders’ consumption depends heavily on the success of their firms,

consumption is imperfectly correlated across countries, so that investors have to forgo risk-

sharing opportunities.

    6) Since corporate insiders can co-invest more when they are wealthier, a country’s savings

and investment tend to be correlated, which prevents the country from taking full advantage of

investment opportunities when savings are low.

    7) Co-investment limits the impact on firm investment of a decrease in the cost of equity

capital, such as the decrease brought about by financial globalization, because an increase in firm

investment requires that insiders co-invest more and bear more risk.

    My analysis also makes predictions about other aspects of corporate finance. In particular,

countries where the twin agency problems are severe should be expected to have higher leverage

and a higher proportion of short-term debt than countries where these problems are more benign.

Further, investment in corporate governance is less profitable in countries where the agency

problem of state ruler discretion is significant, because many activities that entrench corporate

insiders help reduce the risk of expropriation from the state.

    This address shows that the twin agency problems help explain important paradoxes in

international finance, and help us to understand why finance differs across countries and across

time. These problems determine how well investors can share risks across countries and can

separate savings decisions from investment decisions. Any investigation of these problems shows

how special the U.S. and the U.K. are in having successfully controlled these problems relatively


                                                 46
well. In most other countries, these problems have not been controlled so well. As long as these

problems are not controlled better, they limit the impact of financial globalization. As progress is

made in controlling these problems, the world will reap greater and greater benefits from

financial globalization.




                                                47
References

Acemoglu, D., and S. Johnson, 2003, Unbundling institutions, unpublished working paper,
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson, 2001, The colonial origins of comparative
   development: An empirical investigation, American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson, 2004, Institutions as the fundamental cause of
   long-run growth, Handbook of economic growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds.,
   forthcoming.

Ahearne, A., W. Griever, and F. Warnock, 2004, Information costs and home bias: an analysis of
   US holdings of foreign equities, Journal of International Economics 62, 313-336.

Aizenman, J., B. Pinto, and A. Radziwill, 2004, Sources for financing domestic capital – Is
   foreign saving a viable option for developing countries?, NBER Working Paper 10624,
   NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Allen, F., J. Qian, and M. Qian, 2004, Law, finance, and economic growth in China, Journal of
    Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Ammer, J., S.B. Holland, D. Smith, and F. Warnock, 2004, Look at me now: The role of cross-
  listing in attracting U.S. shareholders, unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Board of
  Governors, Washington, D.C.

Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland, 1992, International real business cycles, Journal of
   Political Economy 100, 745-775.

Bebchuck, L. A., and M. J. Roe, 1999, A theory of path dependence in corporate ownership and
   governance, Stanford Law Review 52, 127-170.

Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets, Journal of
   Finance 55, 565-613.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R. and Lundblad, C.T., 2001, Does financial liberalization spur growth?,
   working paper, Duke University, North Carolina.

Booth, L., V. Aivazian, A. Demirguc-Kunt and V. Maksimovic, 2001, Capital structures in
   developing countries, Journal of Finance 56, 87-130.

Brooks, R., and M. Del Negro, 2002, The rise in comovement across national stock markets:
   Market integration or IT bubble?, working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta,
   GA.

Cavaglia, S., Brightman, C. and M. Aked, 2000, The increasing importance of industry factors,
   Financial Analysts Journal (September/October), 41-54.

Claessens S., S. Djankov, and L.H.P. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and control in


                                                48
    East Asian corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.

Coffee, J., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
   governance and its implications. Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.

Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and
   the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 87-110.

Desai, M.A., A. Dyck, and L. Zingales, 2003, Corporate governance and taxation, unpublished
   working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Djankov, S., E. Glaeser, R. L. Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2004, The new
   comparative economics, unpublished working paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004a, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth
   more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004b, Why are countries so important for corporate
   governance?, working paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Durnev, A., and Kim, E.H., 2004, To steal or not to steal: firm attributes, legal environment, and
   valuation, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Dyck, A., and L. Zingales, 2003, Private benefits of control: an international comparison, Journal
   of Finance, forthcoming.

Edison, H., and F. Warnock, 2003, A Simple Measure of the Intensity of capital controls, Journal of
    Empirical Finance 10, pp. 81-103.

Faccio, M. and L.H.P. Lang, 2002, The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations,
   Journal of Financial Economics 65, 365-395.

Fan, J.P.-H., Titman, S. and Twite, G.J., 2003, An international comparison of capital structure
    and debt maturity choices, unpublished working paper, University of Texas, Austin, TX.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka, 1980, Domestic saving and international capital flows, Economic
    Journal 90, 314-329.

Fisman, R., 2001, Estimating the value of political connections, American Economic Review 91,
    1095-1102.

Franks, J., C. Mayer, and S. Rossi, 2004, Ownership: Evolution and regulation, unpublished
    working paper, London Business School.

Gertler, M., and K. Rogoff, 1990, North-South lending and endogenous domestic capital market
   inefficiencies, Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 245-266.

Glaeser, E. I., and A. Shleifer, 2002, Legal origins, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1193-
   1229.




                                                49
Glaeser, E., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2004, Do institutions cause
   growth?, Working Paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Gomes, A., 2000, Going public without governance: Managerial reputation effects, Journal of
   Finance 55, 615-646.

Henisz, W. J., 2000, The institutional environment for economic growth, Economics and Politics
   12, 1-31.

Henry, P.B., 2000a, Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market equity
   prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.

Henry, P.B., 2000b, Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?, Journal of
   Financial Economics 58, 301-334.

Himmelberg, C.P., R.G. Hubbard, and I. Love, 2002, Investor protection, ownership, and the cost
   of capital, unpublished working paper, Columbia University, New York, NY.

Jensen, M. C., and W. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs,
    and capital structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Jensen, M. C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
    Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Johnson, S., P. Boone, A. Breach, and E. Friedman, 2000, Corporate governance in the Asian
   financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186.

Johnson, S., and T. Mitton, 2003, Cronyism and capital controls: Evidence from Malaysia,
   Journal of Financial Economics 67, 351-382.

Kaminsky, G., and S. Schmuckler, 2002, Short-run pain, long-run gain: The effects of financial
   liberalization, mimeo, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Karolyi, A. and R. Stulz, 2003, Are assets priced locally or globally? The Handbook of the
   Economics Economics of Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz, eds., North-
   Holland Publishers, New York, NY.

Kumar, K. B., R. G. Rajan, and L. Zingales, 2001, What determines firm size?, unpublished
   working paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, Law and finance, Journal of
    Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,
    Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor protection and
   corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

Lewis, K. K, 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of
   Economic Literature 37, 571-608.


                                              50
Lombardo, G. and M. Pagano, 2001, Law and equity markets: A simple model, in Corporate
   Governance Regimes: Convergence and Diversity, edited by J. McCahery, P. Moerland, T.
   Raaijmakers and L. Renneboog, Oxford University Press, 2002, 343-362.

Lucas, R. E. Jr., 1990, Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor countries?, American
   Economic Review 80, 92-96.

Martell, R., and R.M. Stulz, 2003, Equity market liberalizations as country IPOs, American
   Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 93, 97-101.

Morck, R., D. Wolfenzon, and B. Yeung, 2004, Corporate governance, economic entrenchment,
   and growth, unpublished paper.

Nenova, T., 2003, The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-country analysis,
   Journal of Financial Economics 68, 325-351.

North, D. C., 1981, Structure and change in economic history, W.W. Norton and Company, New
   York, NY.

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff, 2001, The six major puzzles in international macroeconomics: Is
   there a common cause?, in B. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, editors, 2000 NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor, 2003, Globalization and capital markets, in Globalization in
   historical perspective, M. D. Bordo, A. M. Taylor, and J. G. Williamson, editors, NBER,
   University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.

Olson, M., 1984, The rise and decline of nations: Economic growth, stagflation, and social
   rigidities, Yale University Press, New Haven, CN.

Olson, M., 2000, Power and prosperity, Basic Books, New York, NY.

Pagano, M., and P. Volpin, 2004, The political economy of corporate governance, American
   Economic Review, forthcoming.

Perotti, E. C., and P. Van Oijen, 2001, Privatization, Political Risk and Stock Market
    Development in Emerging Economies, Journal of International Money and Finance 20, 43-
    69.

Perotti, E. and E. von Thadden, 2003, The political economy of bank and market dominance,
    ECGI – Finance Working Paper # 21/2003, Brussels, Belgium.

Pinkowitz, L. R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2004, Do firms in countries with poor protection
    of investor rights hold more cash?, NBER working paper, Cambridge, MA.

Prasad, E., K. Rogoff, S.-J. Wei, and M.A. Kose, 2003, Effects of financial globalization on
    developing countries: Some empirical evidence, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
    D.C.




                                             51
Quinn, D., 1997, The correlates of change in international financial regulation, American Political
   Science Review 91, 531-551.

Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence
    from international data, Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales, 2003, The great reversals: The politics of financial development in
    the Twentieth Century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.

Roe, M., 2003, Political determinants of corporate governance, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1989, Management entrenchment: The case of manager-specific
    investments, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 123-140.

Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1999, The grabbing hand, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
    MA.

Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
    Financial Economics 66, 3-27.

Siegel, J., 2004, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting U.S. securities laws?,
         Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Sorensen, B.E., Y.-T. Wu, O. Yosha, and Y. Zhu, 2004, Home bias and international risk sharing:
    Twin puzzles separated at birth, working paper, University of Houston, Houston, TX.

Stulz, R. M., 1980, Essays on international asset pricing, dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of
    Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Stulz, R. M., 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
    383-406.

Stulz, R. M., 1990, Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies, Journal of Financial
    Economics 26, 3-28.

Stulz, R. M., 1999a, International portfolio flows and security markets, in International Capital
    Flows, edited by Martin Feldstein, University Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 257-293.

Stulz, R. M., 1999b, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
    Corporate Finance 12, 1999, 8-25.

Subrahmanyam, M. G., 1975, On the optimality of international capital market integration,
   Journal of Financial Economics, 1975, v2(1), 3-28.

Tesar, L. and I. M. Werner, 1995, Home bias and high turnover, Journal of International Money
   and Finance 14, 467-493.

Wolf, M., 2004, Why globalization works, Yale University Press, New Haven, CN.




                                                52
                        Figure 1. Foreign assets relative to GDP

This figure uses the data from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003). The GDP figure is the sum of
the GDPs of the countries for which there are data on foreign assets.



                                Foreign assets / GDP

    1
  0.9
  0.8
  0.7
  0.6
  0.5
  0.4
  0.3
  0.2
  0.1
    0
        1870   1900   1914   1930   1938   1945    1960   1980   1985   1990   1995   2002




                                              53
                                   Figure 2. Gross cross-border flows to GDP

This figure uses U.S. TIC data for purchases and sales of securities between foreign
investors and U.S. residents. The aggregate trading activity is the sum of purchases and
sales.


             4.00



             3.50



             3.00



             2.50
   Percent




             2.00



             1.50



             1.00



             0.50



             0.00
                    1977

                           1979

                                  1981

                                         1983

                                                1985

                                                       1987

                                                              1989

                                                                     1991

                                                                            1993

                                                                                   1995

                                                                                          1997

                                                                                                 1999

                                                                                                        2001

                                                                                                               2003




                                                              54
                                                              Figure 3. The home bias for U.S. investors

This figure shows the home-bias measure for U.S. investors and the ratio of foreign
stocks in the portfolios of U.S. investors. The home-bias measure, introduced by
Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004), is one minus the ratio of the portfolio share of
foreign stocks in U.S. portfolios divided by the portfolio share of foreign stocks in the
world market portfolio. If there were no home bias and investors held the world market
portfolio, the home-bias measure would equal zero.



                                                       Share of Foreign Equities in U.S. Investors' Equity Portfolio


           1.2



           1.0



           0.8
   ratio




           0.6



           0.4



           0.2



           0.0
                  9/1/1977
                             9/1/1978
                                        9/1/1979
                                                   9/1/1980
                                                              9/1/1981
                                                                         9/1/1982
                                                                                    9/1/1983
                                                                                               9/1/1984
                                                                                                          9/1/1985
                                                                                                                     9/1/1986
                                                                                                                                9/1/1987
                                                                                                                                           9/1/1988
                                                                                                                                                      9/1/1989
                                                                                                                                                                 9/28/1990
                                                                                                                                                                             9/30/1991
                                                                                                                                                                                         9/30/1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/30/1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9/30/1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9/29/1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9/30/1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/30/1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9/30/1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9/30/1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9/29/2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/28/2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9/1/2002
                 share of foreign equities in U.S. investors' equity portfolio                                                                                                                                   home-bias measure for U.S. investors                                                                       9/1/2003




                                                                                                                                              55
                           VW Average of Closely-Held Shares (%)                                                                                                  EW Average of Closely-Held Shares (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Worldscope.




                       0
                            10
                                 20
                                      30
                                           40
                                                50
                                                     60
                                                          70
                                                               80
                                                                    90
                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
           Ireland                                                                                                                                Taiwan
                UK                                                                                                                                Canada
                 US                                                                                                                               Ireland
     Netherlands                                                                                                                                       UK
          Australia                                                                                                                                 Korea
      Switzerland                                                                                                                                       US
           Canada                                                                                                                                Sweden
             Korea                                                                                                                            Venezuela
           Taiwan                                                                                                                                Australia
           Finland                                                                                                                                Finland
          Sweden                                                                                                                            Netherlands
         Sri Lanka                                                                                                                                Norway
       Venezuela                                                                                                                                    Japan
           France                                                                                                                           Switzerland
           Norway                                                                                                                               Sri Lanka
             Japan                                                                                                                              Denmark
          Portugal                                                                                                                               Malaysia
               Italy                                                                                                                                  Italy
          Hungary                                                                                                                             Zimbabwe
             Israel                                                                                                                                   New
         Denmark                                                                                                                                    Spain
     South Africa                                                                                                                                    India




56
       Zimbabwe                                                                                                                             South Africa
          Belgium                                                                                                                            Luxembour
         Germany                                                                                                                                  Jordan
             Brazil                                                                                                                              Belgium
        Argentina                                                                                                                              Argentina
             Spain                                                                                                                               Pakistan
     New Zealand                                                                                                                             Hong Kong
     Luxembourg                                                                                                                                  Thailand
          Malaysia                                                                                                                            Singapore
          Thailand                                                                                                                                Greece
              India                                                                                                                                 China
       Singapore                                                                                                                                    Israel
           Greece                                                                                                                                Hungary
           Austria                                                                                                                                Turkey
      Philippines                                                                                                                                 France
      Hong Kong                                                                                                                                   Austria
              Chile                                                                                                                               Poland
           Turkey                                                                                                                                Portugal
        Indonesia                                                                                                                                   Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 4. The distribution of corporate ownership




           Poland                                                                                                                               Germany


                                                                                Figure 4.B. Value-Weighted Average of the Percentage of
                                                                                                                                               Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Shares Held by Corporate Insiders for 48 Countries in 2002




                                                                               Shares Held by Corporate Insiders for 48 Countries in 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 4.A. Equally-Weighted Average of the Percentage of




           Jordan
             China                                                                                                                                   Chile
          Pakistan                                                                                                                                   Peru
      Czech Rep                                                                                                                              Philippines
           Mexico                                                                                                                                 Mexico
              Peru                                                                                                                           Czech Rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (VW) average percentage of shares held by corporate insiders across countries in 2002,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   This figure shows the equally weighted (EW) average percentage and the value-weighted

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   where shares held by corporate insiders are proxied by the block holdings reported by
                                                            Table 1
Widely-held (family-controlled) is the fraction of the firms with no controlling shareholder (family controlling
shareholder) who holds more than 10% of the voting rights, and close_ew (close_vw) is equally (value) weighted
average fraction of firms’ stock market capitalization held by insiders according to Worldscope in 2002. PolconV is an
index of constraints of the state rulers for 1960 with values from 0 to 1, where 0 is dictatorship and 1 democracy. Exprisk
is expropriation risk, anti-dir is the LLSV index of minority protection, scap is the ratio of stock market capitalization to
GDP, sturn is the stock market turnover, bcap is bond market capitalization to GDP, and tcap is the sum of scap and
bcap.


                Country        close_ew           close_vw         polconv exprisk anti-dir scap sturn gdp bcap tcap

       Argentina                 0.553              0.512           0.00000   5.91       4 0.13 0.33     7246 0.02 0.16
       Australia                 0.418              0.234           0.86050   9.27       4 0.63    0.4 20330 0.17 0.81
       Austria                   0.624              0.625           0.73719   9.69       2 0.13 0.58 28772 0.31 0.45
       Belgium                   0.549              0.498           0.86212   9.63       0 0.47 0.17 26821 0.53 1.01
       Brazil                    0.633              0.508           0.87928   7.62       3 0.21 0.47     4298 0.12 0.39
       Canada                    0.270              0.244           0.85221   9.67       5 0.67 0.46 19624 0.12 0.81
       Chile                     0.676              0.653           0.68719    7.5       5 0.81    0.1   4172 0.14    1
       Denmark                   0.471              0.448           0.76516   9.67       2 0.38 0.44 33740 1.02 1.41
       Finland                   0.419              0.307           0.77317   9.67       3 0.58 0.35 26296 0.33 0.94
       France                    0.616              0.376           0.35877   9.65       3 0.42 0.56 26657 0.48 0.92
       Germany                   0.635              0.508           0.83692    9.9       1   0.3 1.34 29595     0.5 0.81
       Greece                    0.588              0.616           0.36009   7.12       2 0.26    0.5 11454 0.02 0.28
       Hong Kong, China          0.561              0.638                     8.29       5 2.13 0.51 21023 0.08 2.29
       India                     0.517              0.580           0.27747   7.75       5 0.33 0.36      387 0.01 0.34
       Ireland                   0.306              0.103           0.75165   9.67       4 0.26 0.67 17834 0.04 0.31
       Italy                     0.492              0.422           0.76146   9.35       1 0.24 0.48 18807      0.3 0.55
       Japan                     0.442              0.404           0.74050   9.67       4 0.85 0.43 41438 0.45 1.26
       Korea, Rep.               0.350              0.256           0.27649   8.31       2   0.4 1.44    9746 0.36 0.77
       Malaysia                  0.476              0.538           0.72896   7.95       4 1.77 0.42     3845 0.31 2.18
       Mexico                    0.798              0.825           0.04505   7.29       1 0.28 0.39     3299 0.01 0.31
       Netherlands               0.427              0.233           0.76944   9.98       2 0.84 0.63 26483 0.25 1.13
       New Zealand               0.502              0.521           0.73417   9.69       4 0.44 0.29 15836       0 0.45
       Norway                    0.440              0.400           0.75547   9.88       4 0.28 0.57 32408 0.23 0.52
       Peru                      0.706              0.870           0.47520   5.54       3 0.19 0.32     2181 0.02 0.23
       Philippines               0.719              0.634           0.31958   5.22       3 0.61 0.34     1093    0 0.61
       Portugal                  0.627              0.410           0.00000    8.9       3 0.24    0.4 10667 0.13 0.38
       Singapore                 0.568              0.613           0.29368    9.3       4 1.46 0.49 21343 0.14 1.64
       South Africa              0.523              0.458           0.27867   6.88       5 1.46 0.13     3965 0.14 1.61
       Spain                     0.509              0.517           0.00000   9.52       4 0.37 0.79 14814 0.15 0.53
       Sweden                    0.368              0.313           0.75835    9.4       3 0.75 0.47 27308 0.54 1.31
       Switzerland               0.461              0.240           0.85420   9.98       2 1.38 0.77 44437 0.52 1.95
       Thailand                  0.567              0.543           0.00000   7.42       2 0.53    0.8   2501 0.08 0.61
       Turkey                    0.616              0.667           0.00000      7       2   0.2   1.1   2838    0 0.21
       United Kingdom            0.330              0.107           0.73301   9.71       5 1.24 0.51 18920 0.19 1.46
       United States             0.353              0.157           0.85691   9.98       5 0.95 0.78 27487 0.84 1.82




                                                              57
                                              Table 2
                               Regression of ownership concentration
A widely-held firm is defined as one with no controlling shareholder with more than 10% of the votes. A
family-controlled firm is one where the controlling shareholder is a family with more than 10% of the
votes. The equally weighted average of closely-held shares uses the fraction of stock market capitalization
held by insiders according to Worldscope for 2002. The index of political constraints is PolconV measured
in 1960. The index goes from 0 to 1 and 1. The coefficient on GDP per capita is multiplied by 10,000.
Exprisk is expropriation risk, anti-dir is the LLSV index of minority protection, scap is the ratio of stock
market capitalization to GDP, sturn is the stock market turnover, bcap is bond market capitalization to
GDP, and tcap is the sum of scap and bcap. P-values in parentheses.

             Panel A: Dependent variable = fraction of widely-held firms (Tobit regression)

             intercept     -0.981           -0.991             -0.965         -1.145               -0.844
                           (0.009)          (0.009)            (0.010)        (0.001)             (0.056)
              Exprisk       0.104            0.104              0.098          0.085               0.079
                           (0.010)          (0.010)            (0.016)        (0.018)             (0.173)
               anti-dir     0.081            0.074              0.074          0.105               0.084
                           (0.024)          (0.062)            (0.046)        (0.004)             (0.021)
                 Scap                        0.043
                                            (0.669)
                 Tcap                                           0.057
                                                               (0.487)
                 Sturn                                                         0.446
                                                                              (0.008)
                 GDP                                                                               0.035
                                                                                                  (0.578)

                      2
           pseudo R         0.687            0.697             0.714           1.116              0.704

           Panel B: Dependent variable = fraction of family-controlled firms (Tobit regression)

             intercept      1.475            1.468              1.514          1.530               1.360
                           (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)        (0.000)             (0.000)
               exprisk     -0.115           -0.117             -0.125         -0.109               -0.095
                           (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)        (0.000)             (0.029)
               anti-dir    -0.027           -0.048             -0.037         -0.033              -0.029
                           (0.280)          (0.073)            (0.142)        (0.142)             (0.249)
                 scap                        0.131
                                            (0.071)
                  tcap                                          0.087
                                                               (0.152)
                 sturn                                                        -0.168
                                                                              (0.173)
                 GDP                                                                               -0.03
                                                                                                  (0.525)

                      2
           pseudo R        17.308           20.986             19.621         19.413              17.765




                                                          58
           Panel C: Dependent variable = equally-weighted average of inside ownership (OLS)

           intercept            1.091             1.091               1.086           1.122         1.090
                               (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)
            exprisk            -0.054            -0.054              -0.053          -0.051         -0.054
                               (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.011)
            anti-dir           -0.033            -0.033              -0.032          -0.039        -0.033
                               (0.006)           (0.016)             (0.013)         (0.003)       (0.008)
               scap                              -0.001
                                                 (0.977)
               tcap                                                  -0.008
                                                                     (0.798)
              sturn                                                                  -0.083
                                                                                     (0.156)
              GDP                                                                                   0.000
                                                                                                   (0.987)

                     2
             adj R              0.454             0.436              0.438            0.472         0.436

                            Panel D: Expropriation risk replaced by political constraint


                                                                                                  Dep. var. =
                         Dep. var. = fraction                 Dep. var. = fraction
                                                                                               equally weighted
                         of widely-held firms                 of family-controlled
                                                                                               average of inside
                          (Tobit regression)                   (Tobit regression)
                                                                                               ownership (OLS)


           intercept           -0.332                                0.693                          0.717
                               (0.028)                               (0.000)                       (0.000)
           polconv              0.413                                -0.438                         -0.172
                               (0.013)                               (0.000)                       (0.008)
            anti-dir            0.086                                -0.060                         -0.030
                               (0.029)                               (0.033)                       (0.052)
               scap             0.064                                0.135                          -0.024
                               (0.592)                               (0.133)                       (0.619)

       2             2
peudo R or adj R                0.757                               -70.447                         0.282




                                                               59
