NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICS, RELIEF, AND REFORM:
THE TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICA’S SOCIAL WELFARE SYSTEM
DURING THE NEW DEAL
John Joseph Wallis
Price Fishback
Shawn Kantor
Working Paper 11080
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11080
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

To appear in Corruption and Reform edited by Claudia Goldin and Ed Glaeser. We would like to thank
Claudia Goldin, Edward Glaeser, Robert Margo, Paul Rhode, Kenneth Sokoloff and the conference
participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by John Joseph Wallis, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Politics, Relief, and Reform: The Transformation of America’s Social Welfare System during the
New Deal
John Joseph Wallis, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor
NBER Working Paper No. 11080
January 2005
JEL No. N0, N3, N4, H0, H1, H4, I3
ABSTRACT
The American social welfare system was transformed during the 1930s. Prior to the New Deal public
relief was administered almost exclusively by local governments. The administration of local public
relief was widely thought to be corrupt. Beginning in 1933, federal, state, and local governments
cooperatively built a larger social welfare system. While the majority of the funds for relief spending
came from the federal government, the majority of administrative decisions were made at state and
local levels. While New Dealers were often accused of playing politics with relief, social welfare
system created by the New Deal (still largely in place today) is more often maligned for being
bureaucratic than for being corrupt. We do not believe that New Dealers were motivated by altruistic
motives when they shaped New Deal relief policies. Evidence suggests that politics was always the
key issue. But we show how the interaction of political interests at the federal, state, and local levels
of government created political incentives for the national relief administration to curb corruption
by actors at the state and local level. This led to different patterns of relief spending when programs
were controlled by national, rather than state and local officials. In the permanent social welfare
system created by the Social Security Act, the national government pressed for the substitution of
rules rather than discretion in the administration of relief. This, ultimately, significantly reduced the
level of corruption in the administration of welfare programs.
John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu

Price Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller@arizona.edu

Shawn Kantor
School of Social Sciences,
Humanities and Arts
University of California, Merced
P.O. Box 2039
Merced, CA 95344
and NBER
skantor@ucmerced.edu

Prior to the New Deal almost all public social welfare spending, or what contemporaries
called “relief,” was provided by local governments. The administration of local public relief had
long been associated with patronage, political manipulation, and corruption. Between 1933 and
1940, federal, state, and local governments combined to spend $2 billion per year to provide
relief to at least 2 million cases (families) per month. In 1933, when unemployment reached 25
percent, the federal government introduced a relief program redistributing 4 percent of GNP to a
quarter of all the nation's families. The possibility of providing cash payments to a quarter of the
nation’s families offered an opportunity for corruption unique in the nation’s history.
Surprisingly, however, while the administration of public relief was widely regarded as corrupt
before 1933, the modern federal/state public welfare system that developed out of the New Deal
reforms is often castigated as bureaucratic, but rarely corrupt. What changed? How did the
country enter the Depression with a public welfare system riddled with political manipulation
and emerge with one that was not?
Our answer is straightforward. The President, Franklin Roosevelt, and other members of
the executive branch gained little or nothing from the kinds of local corruption involved in
public relief. But they stood to incur enormous losses if the New Deal relief program was
perceived as corrupt by the voting public. Roosevelt and the Democrats brought relief to
millions of families every month and the gratitude of relief recipients was Roosevelt's political
payoff. Other politicians – Senators, Representatives, governors, and mayors – wanted to
control relief and use it for political gain. Both houses of Congress, the states, and local
governments maneuvered, manipulated, and cajoled to get their hands on a share of the billions
spent each year on relief. Although Roosevelt made substantial concessions to Congress and to
state and local governments in the administration of relief, he was able to curb corruption at the

state and local level by his influence over the discretionary allocation of relief funds, by
establishing offices to investigate complaints of corruption, and, in the long run, by
bureaucratizing the administration of public welfare. During the New Deal, when the relief
programs were reorganized to give the Roosevelt administration more control over the
distribution of funds within states, it used that control to limit state and local political
manipulation and increased the responsiveness of the allocation of funds within states to the
high-minded goals of relief, recovery, and reform. Politics were paramount in the structure of
New Deal relief programs, it just turned out that the best political outcome meant a reduction in
corruption at the state and local level. This does not mean that Roosevelt did not use the
administration of relief for his own political ends. There is ample evidence that presidential
politics mattered in the distribution of relief funds. Corruption by others was curbed because it
was in Roosevelt’s political interest to see it curbed.
We begin by discussing the types of corruption involved with relief during the New Deal.
We present a brief overview of the New Deal programs, followed by a more detailed history.
We then trace how political influences shaped the administration of relief programs and
document how relief administered by the national government differed from relief administered
by states.

I. Defining Corruption
Corruption has many dimensions. During the Great Depression the New Deal Democrats
were often accused of “playing politics with relief.” This dimension of corruption differed by
level of government. Roosevelt explicitly stated the goals of the New Deal as “relief, recovery,
2

and reform.” A growing political economy literature has tried to evaluate whether Roosevelt
pursued those goals or whether he used New Deal policies, particularly the allocation of federal
grants among the states, to pursue political goals.1 For example, if the level of unemployment in
states did not affect the allocation of relief spending across states, but the margin of Roosevelt’s
victory in the 1930s presidential election did affect allocations, this is evidence of political
corruption. At the state level, governors occasionally required administrative employees to make
contributions to political parties. At the local level, political machines were often accused of
selecting from potential relief recipients on the basis of party or requiring recipients to vote for
machine candidates. These are all examples of politics corrupting the administration of relief, in
the large and in the small.
Corruption also occurred through time honored methods of fraud and featherbedding.
For example, relief workers could be assigned to work on projects that benefited private land
owners rather than the public;2 suppliers could over bill for materials and make kickbacks to
project supervisors;3 or workers could pad their hours and receive benefits for work they never
performed.4 At their margins, these criminal types of corruption may be indistinguishable from
political types of corruption. But they are substantively different enough that reducing political
corruption requires different policies than reducing criminal corruption. It appears that the New
Deal was successful at eliminating political corruption in the administration of welfare. Fraud,
however, will always be with us and its reduction requires eternal vigilance5
The administrative structure of a government program limits the methods available to
combat corruption. In general, corruption depends on administrative discretion. Officials can be
corrupt only if they have some leeway to make decisions. The creation of rules and procedures
3

is one way to limit corruption. For example, Roosevelt could only play politics with the
allocation of relief funds between the states if the executive branch possessed the power to
allocate funds at their discretion. If funds are allocated by a formula or a rule, for example,
equal per capita grants or matching grants, the federal administrator does not possess the option
of being corrupt along this dimension. Similarly, if a local case worker has the discretion to set
the monthly relief benefit for each case he or she has much more opportunity to be corrupt than
if relief benefits per case are fixed.
While discretion and rules are, to a certain extent, substitutes as governing devices, it is
rarely possible to construct an administrative mechanism without some discretion. In the hectic
days of 1933 it was extremely difficult to come up with sensible rules. As a result, the key
aspect of administrative structures was who had administrative discretion. Was it lodged with
the national government, the President, or with the state and local governments? Our central
hypothesis maintains that political corruption at the state and local level in the administration of
federal relief funds was reduced when administrative discretion lay with the executive branch of
the national government. Criminal corruption was reduced by the promulgation of rules and
vigorous prosecution of offenders. The tests of this proposition developed in the empirical
section depend, of course, on identifying political or criminal corruption, and then distinguishing
whether corruption was addressed by creating rules or changing the location of administrative
discretion.

II. A Brief History
The history of the New Deal relief programs falls into two eras: from May 1933 to the
4

summer of 1935, and after the summer of 1935. The periods are distinguished by the amount of
administrative discretion exercised by the national government and the discretion remaining in
the hands of state and local officials. Table 1 provides a list of the major New Deal relief
programs. The first columns of the table give the beginning and ending dates for each program
(several Social Security Programs are still in force). The last column classifies programs by their
administrative character, that is, how discretion was allocated within the program. In “national”
programs the national government exerted a preponderance of administrative influence. In
“federal” programs state and local governments shared administrative discretion with the
national government and in many programs possessed the preponderance of influence. Table 2
lists the average monthly number of cases receiving relief for the nation as a whole and for each
of the major relief programs.
In the spring of 1933 the Federal Emergency Relief Act created the Federal Emergency
Relief Administration, known as FERA, the largest and most important relief program up to
1935. Roosevelt chose Harry Hopkins as the FERA Administrator. The original act
appropriated $500 million to be allocated among the states, half on a matching basis and half at
the discretion of the administrator. Once funds were granted, however, FERA funds legally
became the property of the states. Hopkins attempted to raise the standards of relief
administration, but his ability to do so was limited by the relative independence of state relief
administrations. Hopkins could, and did, threaten to withhold federal grants for relief to states
with corrupt or inefficient relief administrations. Withholding funds, however, was a blunt
policy tool that worked to the direct disadvantage of the unemployed in the state, in contradiction
to FERA’s mandate.
In 1935, Roosevelt submitted an “economic security act” to Congress. As passed, the act
provided a permanent, nationally administered program of old age insurance, which we call
social security today. It also provided for a national payroll tax for unemployment insurance
5

programs run by the individual states; 90 percent of the payroll taxes paid in each state were held
in trust for that state. Finally, the act provided relief for three categories of persons: old age
assistance, aid to the blind, and aid to dependent children. The categorical programs were
financed from general revenues and allocated among the state by strict matching grants. Federal
grants to states were determined solely by state expenditures. As a result, it was the states, and
not the federal government, who controlled spending on the categorical programs.
The second element of the 1935 reforms was the creation of an “emergency” relief
program, funded by a series of ongoing emergency relief appropriation acts. Under the act of
1935, Roosevelt created the Works Progress Administration (WPA), and a number of smaller
relief programs: the National Youth Administration (NYA), the Rural Electrification
Administration (REA), the Farm Security Administration (FSA), and others. The WPA, also
headed by Hopkins, was structured so that Roosevelt could make discretionary allocations
between the states and, importantly, WPA officials retained the right to approve individual
projects within states. Over time, Congress required a larger degree of state and local
participation. This moved the WPA closer to a matching program, but matching was never
complete. The WPA also financed a number of nationally administered programs in the arts,
theater, literature, and history that did not have state or local sponsors. After the summer of
1935, the WPA was the largest single relief program.
Our hypothesis is that Roosevelt found it in his interest to reduce corruption and political
manipulation, particularly at the state and local level, while Congress and state and local
governments continued to press for a relief structure that allowed them to use relief to their own
political advantage. The key element, therefore, was the allocation of administrative discretion.
If the President possessed administrative and fiscal discretion, he and Hopkins could reduce
corruption. Likewise, if state and local relief administrators possessed administrative and fiscal
discretion, they could pursue their own political ends. Accordingly, our empirical approach
6

considers the development of administrative policy. We examine the specific role that
administrative discretion played in the difference between Senate and House versions of bills,
differences that correspond directly to the interests of state and local governments. We also
compare the allocation of funds between the states under FERA and the WPA. Hopkins
possessed a much wider range of policy instruments to control the distribution of federal funds
within states under the WPA, and we expect and find that the allocation of WPA spending
differed significantly from the FERA allocations. When Roosevelt and Hopkins gained more
discretion over the distribution of funds within the states, they increased the attention to
promoting relief, recovery, and reform and to reducing fraud and other forms of illegal
corruption.

III. Early Relief: 1933 to 1935
Early twentieth century American social welfare policy had its roots in the English Poor
Law. Relief was administered locally through a complex network of public and private agencies,
ranging from the poorhouse to the Community Chest, who assessed need and distributed
benefits. The intellectual high ground in the emerging field of social work was dominated by
private, rather than public, organizations. The centuries old debate over using relief to care for
the truly needy as opposed to a dole for the idle, shiftless, and worthless produced a philosophy
of social welfare focused on the individual case. Social workers identified the deserving poor
and relief was tailored to suit the needs of the needy and to discourage the dissolute.
Independent private social agencies could make these distinctions without bias. The preference
for private rather than public relief was further strengthened by the general low regard for the
capacity of local governments, run by local machine politicians, and staffed by untrained
politicos as rewards for political service.6 Public relief agencies were tainted by the possibility
of the using relief for political purposes. Patronage and political influence – political corruption
7

– rather than the interests of the poor, were believed to motivate public relief.7
The sharp division between the proponents of private and public relief is clear evidence
of the deep rooted concern over competence and corruption in the administration of public
relief.8 It is very difficult to credibly measure the extent of corruption in the administration of
relief before, during, or after the New Deal. It is, however, a matter of historical record that a
significant share relief was administered by private social welfare agencies before 1933, and that
private administration was preferred to public administration largely on grounds of competence
and political corruption. These fears did not miraculously disappear in 1933. As we discuss,
private social workers continued to argue that public relief was potentially corrupt well into the
mid-1930s. By the 1950s, when social welfare advocates continued to complain about the
inadequacy of relief in the state administered categorical programs, charges of political
corruption were not to be found.9 This is clear historical evidence of a reduction in the
prevalence of political corruption in the administration of relief over the course of the New Deal.
Because of the dominance of the private relief administration in the 1920s, it came as a
surprise when the newly formed Committee on Social Statistics reported in 1929 that, in 15 large
cities, 71.6 percent of all relief funds, whether disbursed by public or private agencies, came
from local governments.10 Relief, it turned out, was often publicly financed even where it was
privately administered. As the depression deepened, both public and private sources of funds
were called upon. The growing burden of relieving the unemployed was well beyond the ability
of private agencies and relief spending by local, and eventually state, governments rose
steadily.11 Public relief officials, who had taken a backseat to professional private social workers
for decades, began exerting a larger influence in planning for a larger relief effort. But the
leadership of the social work movement had their roots in private social agencies, and these
leaders assumed important positions in the national government after 1933. They brought with
them the idea that local public relief administration was inefficient and subservient to politics.
8

Those ideas posed problems for Roosevelt and Hopkins when they began operations
under FERA. The dominate philosophy of private social work in the 1920s was to determine
what was best for each relief recipient on a case by case basis, allowing the local relief agency
the maximum degree of flexibility and discretion in spending money. The prospect of
distributing $500 million in federal government funds through the existing system of local public
relief agencies presented a nightmare of accountability for Hopkins. Giving control of the funds
to state and local public relief agencies seemed guaranteed to exacerbate the use of relief for
political and corrupt purposes. Giving control of the funds to private agencies seemed
guaranteed to insure that millions of decisions about who would receive how much relief would
be made by social workers in the best interest of the needy, with no possibility of consistently
explaining why one person received relief and another did not.
Roosevelt and Hopkins were in a hurry, however, and their initial decisions about FERA
reflected the need to start quickly. In the summer of 1933 they had to figure out how to get
hundreds of millions of dollars in relief to millions of families throughout the country. FERA
required Hopkins to distribute the money to the states, even though most states had no formal
structure for administering relief. The understanding was that most of the money would be
distributed by local relief agencies. Hopkins and FERA were given some discretion in passing
out money between the states (in the initial $500 million appropriation, half the money allocated
by matching state and local contributions and the other half as allocated at the discretion of the
administrator on the basis of need). By November 1933 the rule-based matching features of the
allocation were dispensed with and Hopkins was given full discretion to pass out the funds to the
states while taking into account need and state and local contributions to the effort. Hopkins
could use this discretionary fiscal power to influence the standards of relief administration within
individual states. The original appropriation seriously underestimated the nation’s relief needs.
FERA spent roughly $4,000 million between the summer of 1933 and the summer of 1935,
9

under a series of emergency Congressional appropriations.
Hopkins made three key administrative decisions in 1933: (1) All relief funds would be
spent by public agencies; (2) Relief benefits would be set on a case by case basis using a need
based standard;12 (3) FERA would enforce the highest standards of relief administration
possible, would use the threat of withholding funds to enforce and persuade state and local relief
administrations to meet those standards, and would vigorously prosecute state and local relief
officials who used relief for their own political purposes.
With the establishment of these rules, Hopkins began to implement procedures to insure
the efficient administration of relief. FERA initiated a program requiring each state to file
monthly financial and administrative reports, detailing case loads, benefit payments, and
administrative costs in each county. Hopkins continually pressed states to increase the amount
of funding they provided for relief, to raise the standards of relief administration, and to reduce
corruption and the political use of relief. But Hopkins was continually frustrated in these efforts.
FERA monthly grants were legally the property of the state it was granted to. Hopkins could
only threaten to withhold funds from a state, severely constraining his ability to affect the
administration of relief within a state. Eventually, FERA established a division of investigation
that looked into over a thousand complaints (ranging from the trivial to the felonious). Yet, even
here Hopkins became frustrated because FERA’s decentralized strcuture meant that the states
were responsible for the investigations and the attention to rooting out fraud and corruption
varied significantly across states.
FERA’s goal was getting the maximum amount of relief to the largest number of people,
quickly, and with a minimum of administrative costs.13 The state and local share of relief
expenditures varied from a high of 62 percent in Rhode Island to a low of 5.4 percent in
Alabama. There was constant friction between FERA and state governments over the
administration and financing of relief. Hopkins threatened to withhold FERA grants to several
10

states that refused to increase state contributions. The disputes were significant in 12 states. He
made good on his threat to withhold funds in Colorado and Missouri. Dissatisfaction with the
way relief was administered led Hopkins to take over, or “federalize” the administration of relief
in six states.14 In North Dakota, Governor Langer was indicted and convicted for extorting
kickbacks from federal government employees, although he wiggled out of serving jail time. In
Ohio, Governor Davey had a feud with Hopkins over the administration of relief. When
Roosevelt finally authorized the federalization of relief in Ohio his letter began “My Dear Mr.
Hopkins: I have examined the evidence concerning corrupt political influence with relief in the
State of Ohio. Such interference cannot be tolerated for a moment. I wish you to pursue these
investigations diligently and let the chips fall where they may. This administration will not
permit the relief population of Ohio to become the innocent victims of either corruption or
political chicanery”.15
Roosevelt reaped enormous political gains from the relief programs: he was seen as the
source of relief for millions of American families. At the same time, garnering the credit for
relief obligated Roosevelt to bear the political costs of corruption when it was exposed.16
Roosevelt might be willing risk appearing corrupt by using relief funds for political purposes if
he received the benefits. Roosevelt, however, received no direct benefits from corruption by
others in the system. Thus, Roosevelt’s interest in a system that would not be corrupted at the
state and local level were at odds with the interests of individual Democratic senators,
congressmen, governors, mayors, and state legislators who benefited much less from relief if that
they could not use it for their own political purposes.
The decision to make FERA a joint effort of national, state, and local governments was
mandated by the national emergency in 1933. There was no other way to spend several billion
dollars on relief on short notice without using the existing relief bureaucracy. The decisions
made by Harry Hopkins about how relief would be administered inevitably involved setting the
11

interests of the federal government at odds with state and local governments and, critically,
involved conflicts between the president and Congress over how the relief program should be
structured. Out of the resolution of these conflicts emerged the modern welfare state.

IV. Relief after 1935
Planning for a more permanent relief system began in 1933. From FERA’s beginning its
loose administrative structure embroiled Hopkins in arguments with governors and state relief
systems across the country about how much financial support state governments would provide,
how relief benefits were to be determined, what constituted adequate relief, whether relief was to
be given in cash or in kind, and over state and local efforts to bend the administration of relief to
serve political ends. Characteristically, Republicans accused Hopkins of playing politics with
relief while Democrats accused Hopkins of appointing Republicans to important relief posts.
There was no happy medium for Hopkins. His only certain solution to corruption was to create a
national relief agency, staffed by civil servants answerable only to Hopkins; that solution was
not acceptable to Congress or state and local governments. The compromise reached in 1935
enabled Hopkins and the federal government to put some bounds on the agency problem they
faced in allocating federal relief at the local level.17
The second stage of New Deal relief administration was marked by the passage of the
Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935 (ERAA) and the Social Security Act of 1935
(SSA). The two bills embodied the compromise between the President and the Congress. Both
bills were introduced in January, the ERAA passed in March and the SSA in August. Two
distinctions were critical: between employable and unemployable persons and between the
emergency and the permanent relief programs. The ERAA appropriated $4.8 billion for the
relief of the unemployed, to be spent at the discretion of the President, through agencies
unnamed in the bill but to be created under its authority (these ultimately included the WPA,
12

REA, FSA, and the NYA). This was emergency legislation: a one-time, temporary appropriation
of funds for the relief of employable persons (people who would have been employed had it not
been for the depression).18 The emergency appropriation was intended to tide the country over
until the “permanent” relief structure could be put in place.
The Social Security Act created the permanent program. Congress placed old age
insurance under the administration of the national Social Security Board. Administration of the
categorical relief programs was lodged with state governments and financed by matching
national grants. Unemployment Insurance was funded by a nationally administered payroll tax.
UI programs were administered by state governments, which could draw on their individual state
funds. Because states had a right to draw on their UI funds and the rules in categorical programs
called for federal matching of qualified state expenditures, the national government had virtually
no control over spending in this part of the welfare system.19 Although the Social Security
Board was responsible for approving the initial design of state programs, actual administration of
the programs was left up to the states. Significantly, the Board was explicitly prohibited from
interfering with personnel policies of the state administration or withholding matching funds
because of personnel policies. Control over patronage in unemployment insurance and
categorical relief programs was firmly located at the state and local level. The Board did have
some ability to enforce standards of relief administration, a power that became important later.
During the FERA administration, Hopkins had used the threat of withholding funds and
federalizing relief to pressure state relief administrations. Those tools were taken away from the
national administration in the Social Security Act.
The elements of the compromise were clear. Roosevelt was given a free hand in the
administration of emergency relief for the remainder of the depression. The emergency
programs created under the ERAA, of which the WPA was the most important, provided the
lion’s share of relief for the rest of the 1930s. How Roosevelt used his authority was up to him,
13

subject to Congress’s power to approve further appropriations. Congressional Democrats lost
the immediate advantage of controlling relief. But their position as the majority party was
strengthened by the prospect of Roosevelt’s reelection, and they could reasonably expect to share
in some of the benefits of administering relief through the normal political process. Roosevelt
and Hopkins could not afford to alienate powerful congressional interests. And in the permanent
program almost all of the discretionary powers over relief administration had been reserved for
the states. There the national government’s hands were tied, fiscally and administratively.
Private social welfare professionals were incensed at what it perceived to be a betrayal of
their basic principles. Control over the permanent relief program was given back to the states.
National support and administration of relief was abandoned. Responsibility for general relief,
relief for those who did not fit into a category of relief supported under the Social Security
program, was returned to local governments. Only the needy who were unemployed, aged,
blind, or dependent children came under the protection of the federal system. They feared that
the compromise of 1935 cast relief back into the realm of politics: “One of the greatest
difficulties in the way of sound organization [after 1935] was political interference with
legislation and standards of personnel... The fact remains that much of the confusion and many
of the backward steps taken in state and local administration were due to political pressures”
(Brown 1940, p. 321).

V. Congress and the Politics of Relief: Geography and Jurisdiction
Political institutions that endure must provide political actors with incentives to maintain
the system. Prior to 1933, local governments dominated the provision of public relief and the
financing of private relief. Accepted wisdom was that local public relief was more corruptible
than private relief: relief was more likely to go to the politically connected needy, or at least to
those in need willing to pledge their vote; that relief expenditures were likely to line the pockets
14

of patrons; that funds were likely to go to wards or counties where votes mattered; and that
administrative jobs went not to those with professional training but those enjoying political
patronage. If the New Deal relief programs challenged these local prerogatives, why did
politicians elected from state and local constituencies support the New Deal reforms? Or, as
many have argued, did elected politicians support New Deal relief programs because they
believed that they perpetuated, rather than reformed, the local political abuses of relief?
In this section, we examine the passage of New Deal legislation to determine whether
Congress played politics with relief. Did the House and Senate design the rules and
administrative authority in the relief bills in ways that enhanced their own gains from the relief
programs? First, differences between House and Senate versions of the same bill are examined
to see if the two branches of Congress designed the rules for allocating funds between large and
small states in a predictable way. Large states are better represented in the House and small
states in the Senate. These differences provide a simple and clean test of whether politics
mattered in the political economy of New Deal spending. Second, differences between House
and Senate versions of the same bill are scrutinized to see if the House was more likely to create
administrative discretion and authority at the local level and if the Senate was more likely to
create administrative discretion and authority at the state level. Since using relief for political
ends required administrative discretion, these results give us an indirect indication of what
politicians hoped to accomplish by structuring the relief programs in particular ways. The ten
important pieces of relief legislation during the New Deal are listed in Table 3.
Congress influenced the geographical allocation of relief spending in two ways. First,
within a given program legislation could specify that funds be spent in a particular way or
according to a given formula. For example, in the Federal Emergency Relief Act, HR 4606 72nd
Congress, the Senate bill appropriated $500 million to be divided between a $300 million
matching fund ($3 state to $1 national matching rate) and a $200 million discretionary fund to be
15

allocated by the Relief Administrator. The House bill allocated $250 million to each fund. The
Act was ultimately passed with the House allocation. We can compare how the $50 million
would have been allocated under the House and Senate versions, using the actual allocation of
funds in the discretionary and matching funds to guide the counterfactual. Alternatively,
Congress could have distributed funds between programs with different patterns of allocation. In
the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935, HR 9830 73rd Congress, the Senate proposed
a transfer of $100 million in FERA funds to the Public Works Administration (PWA); the House
version did not transfer the funds. Since FERA and the PWA expenditures across states were
different, we can compare the House and Senate allocations by examining how the $100 million
would have been spent under the two proposals.
The difference between the House and Senate allocation of funds to state i is:
(1) DFi = House allocationi - Senate allocationi.
The proposition that the House will allocate more funds to large states better represented in the
House than in the Senate can be tested using the regression:
(2) DFi = a + b · Voting Sharei,
where the independent variable is the voting share of state i in the House.
The House and Senate differed over the allocation of funds in seven of the ten pieces of
New Deal relief legislation. Estimates of equation (2) for those seven bills are shown in Table 4.
The dollar differences ranged between $50 million to $200 million, significant amounts of
money but fairly small portions of the overall appropriations. In five of those cases the
differences between the House and Senate versions were positively and statistically significantly
related to a state’s voting share in the House. In the other two cases the coefficients were
statistically insignificant, one positive and the other negative. Geographical interests in most
cases were an important determinant of differences between the House and Senate.
A curiosity of the regression results lends additional support to the geographic story. We
16

can solve for the voting share in the House that results in no difference between the House and
Senate versions (that is, x = -a/b from equation 2). The last column in Table 4 lists the implied
"critical size” for each regression estimate. In six of the seven cases, states with 15 votes in the
House received more money from the House bill than the Senate bill. Only nine states had 14 or
more votes in the House, but the total vote of those states was 217, one vote shy of a majority of
the 435 House votes. The nine states that, on average, benefited more from the House version
than the Senate version were the minimum number of states required to pass legislation in the
House.
The House and Senate allocations differ in systematic and understandable ways.
Unemployment, and therefore relief spending at the state level, was concentrated in the large
industrial states of the northeast and upper Midwest. These states were much better represented
in the House, and the House pursued programs that allocated relative large amounts of money to
large states. An important way of doing that was through matching grants, since the more
wealthy, industrial, and hard hit states spent more of their own state and local funds on relief and
therefore qualified for larger matching grants. The Senate, on the other hand, tended to prefer
(relative to the House) programs and methods of allocation that favored the geographically large,
sparsely populated states of the west and Midwest. They preferred allocation formulae, like
population or land size, that funneled more money into the west. They also showed a strong
preference for large public works projects, like the type conducted by Harold Ickes and the PWA
located primarily in western states with an abundance of public land, over the small, often urban
work relief projects conducted by Harry Hopkins and the WPA.20
Jurisdictional differences between the House and Senate were more marked and more
important than geographic differences. Jurisdictional matters determined which level of
government possessed elements of administrative discretion. Geographical differences usually
arose over substantial amounts of money but were minor in relation to the whole relief package,
17

and they never proved to be a significant impediment to the passage of legislation. Jurisdictional
disputes, however, were fought over central issues of administrative control and, on at least one
occasion, were capable of bringing the whole legislative process to a halt.21 There were four
dimensions of administrative discretion: decisions about money, patronage, project selection,
and recipient selection. In general, we expect the House to locate administrative control over
these functions at the local level and the Senate to locate control at the state level. Table 5 lists
the ten relief bills, whether there was a difference in one of these four areas, and whether the
difference was as expected (Y if it was; N if it was not). An example from each category:
1) Money: The very first relief bill, HR 12445 72nd Congress, authorized the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) to make loans to the states for relief purposes. The
Senate version of the bill restricted RFC loans to the states. Local governments could not apply.
The House version of the bill allowed cities to apply directly to the RFC for loans, rather than
going through the state government. In this case the House version was adopted.
2) Patronage: In the ERAA of 1935, the House proposed that any county relief agency
was required to hire its administrative employees from the residents of that county, which would
have given local relief authorities and congressmen strong control over patronage. The Senate
version stipulated that administrative employees within a state had to live within the state, but
employees from one county could be hired in another county. Neither restrictive residency
requirement survived in the final bill.
3) Project Selection: Under the WPA, a class of projects called "federal projects" were
financed and administered directly by the WPA with no state or local sponsorship. The most
prominent of these were the art and theater projects. In the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act
of 1939, both versions of the bill eliminated all federal theater projects, and the House version of
the bill required that any new federal projects have a local sponsor. The Senate bill had no
provision for local sponsorship. The local sponsorship provision stayed in the final bill.
18

4) Recipient Selection: There was never a hard and fast legislative decision on who
should select the recipients for the WPA. In practice local relief agencies "referred" potential
recipients to the WPA, and it was usually impossible to receive a WPA relief job without the
referral.22 Local relief agencies were not paid, at least not directly, for this task and so
effectively remained independent of the WPA. Hopkins and the WPA several times requested
funds from Congress to pay local relief agencies for providing referral services, and a provision
for payment was included in several Senate bills. In every case the provision was eliminated
from the bill by the House. Hopkins was unable to exert even indirect control on local recipient
selection by providing money for the referral service, money that could have been withheld or
reduced.
These examples are indicative of House and Senate concerns in relief legislation. As
Table 5 shows, differences in the kind of administrative arrangements preferred by the House
and Senate were frequent, persistent, and systematic. In 17 of the 18 cases where the House and
Senate differed over administrative procedures, the differences are as predicted.23 Both Senators
and Congressmen were interested in locating administrative control of the relief program at the
level of government where they exercised the most control.

VI. Roosevelt’s Interests: Comparing the Intra-State Allocation of FERA and WPA Funds
Dividing administrative control over relief between national, state, and local governments
was the key element in the compromise of 1935. Congress located administrative control over
the permanent categorical relief programs, unemployment insurance, and general relief at the
state level. The national government was given control of the emergency relief programs and the
permanent social insurance program. Roosevelt and Hopkins were given a blank check for $4.8
billion in the ERAA of 1935. The magnitude of the change in New Deal relief administration
cannot be underestimated. Although control of the permanent welfare program remained largely
19

with the states, the permanent program took time to implement. For the remainder of the 1930s
and the depression, the national government would be the largest provider of relief in the country
and the ERAA of 1935 gave Roosevelt and Hopkins wide latitude and discretion in how they
administered that relief.
The WPA succeeded FERA as the primary national program for the relief of the
unemployed. Like FERA, the WPA under Hopkins provided work relief to over 2 million cases
each month. Under the FERA structure, Hopkins had not possessed the discretion to allocate
funds within states. When a state strayed from the administration’s goals, the public was likely to
blame the Roosevelt administration as much or more than they blamed the state and local
politicians. To guide the state back to the proper path, Hopkins could try friendly persuasion or
go to the extreme of withdrawing funds or federalizing relief. But he had no intermediate
punishments. This was not a problem under the centralized structure of the WPA. WPA
administrative employees worked directly for the federal government and the WPA
administrators controlled the intra-state allocations of WPA funds.24
The next section examines the WPA rules and procedures adopted by Hopkins to control
illegal corruption in the distribution of relief. This section examines how centralization limited
political corruption in the distribution of funds. Roosevelt’s critics argued that greater federal
control under the WPA allowed Roosevelt and Hopkins to better manipulate relief allocations for
political purposes. If we are correct that Hopkins and Roosevelt sought to limit political
manipulation by state and local officials within the states, we should see that the distribution of
relief within states more closely matched the stated goals of relief, recovery, and reform under
the WPA than under FERA and that political considerations had less influence on intra-state
allocations under the WPA than under FERA. Information on the allocation of WPA and FERA
spending from over 3000 counties is used to examine the differences in the intra-state
distribution of WPA and FERA funds. In order to compare allocation policies directly, the
20

values for every variable (dependent and independent) for each county are normalized by
subtracting the state mean for that variable and then by dividing the difference by the standard
deviation within the same state. As a result every variable has a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one within each state. This facilitates comparison of the coefficients determining
spending for FERA, the WPA, and the difference between the two programs.25 We include key
variables that influence the distribution of relief grants, as discussed in the literature on the
allocation of New Deal funds.
One group of variables measures economic conditions across counties that reflect the
New Deal’s stated goals of relieving financial distress, promoting recovery, and redistributing
income. Relief spending should have been positively related to a measure of unemployment
(measured in the 1930 census), negatively related to economic growth from 1929 to 1933
(measured as the change in log retail sales per capita between 1929 and 1933), negatively related
to a measure of the share of high income people (the percent of the population paying income
taxes in 1929), and negatively related to a measure of average consumption in 1929 (retail sales
per capita in 1929). Unemployment relief programs were targeted at urban areas, so the
coefficient on percent urban should be positive.
The second group of variables reflects political factors. The Roosevelt administration
may have used the allocation of funds to promote their prospects for re-election by rewarding
long-term loyal Democrats (measured by the mean percent voting Democrat in presidential
elections from 1896 through 1928), by trying to attract voters who were relatively fickle in their
support of the Democrats (measured by the standard deviation of the percent voting Democrat
from 1896 through 1928), by rewarding voters who swung to Roosevelt in 1932 (the percent
voting for Roosevelt in 1932 minus the mean percent voting Democrat from 1896 through 1928),
or by spending more in areas with higher turnout (the number of presidential votes in 1932
relative to the population in 1930).26
21

The first two specifications in Table 6 show the results for the WPA and FERA
separately. With regard to the economic variables, both programs provided more funds per
capita in urban areas, provided more funds in counties with higher unemployment, and provided
fewer funds to higher income counties as measured by retail sales per capita. FERA provided
more funds, while the WPA provided fewer funds, to counties with higher tax returns per capita.
On the political side, both FERA and WPA gave less money to counties that traditionally voted
Democratic and more money to counties that swung to Roosevelt in 1932 and that had higher
voter turnout. FERA gave more funds to counties with higher variance in their party voting,
while the WPA gave less to these counties.
Our specific interest, however, is in the differences between the responses of the FERA
and the WPA to key variables; therefore, we focus on the third specification in Table 6 where the
dependent variable is per capita WPA spending minus per capita FERA spending. The results of
the comparison are consistent with our view that when Hopkins gained more control of the intrastate allocations he reduced state and local political manipulation by focusing spending more on
relief, recovery, and reform.
The WPA distributed relatively more funds within states to areas with greater
unemployment, lower economic activity, and a higher urban share of the population. Because of
the way the variables were scaled, a one-unit change in a variable represents a change of one
standard deviation in each variable. A one standard deviation increase in the unemployment rate
produced an increase in WPA funds that was 0.055 standard deviations larger than the response
by FERA. A similar increase in retail sales per capita in 1929, our measure of economic activity,
was associated with a reduction in WPA spending that was .08 standard deviations greater than
for FERA spending. A one standard deviation increase in percent urban led to a response by the
WPA that was .09 standard deviations larger. All three differences are statistically significant.
The differential response in WPA and FERA spending in urban areas is particularly telling.
22

Representation in state legislatures was skewed in favor of rural areas. The national government
was already distributing large amounts of aid to farmers through agricultural programs. Hopkins
wanted FERA and the WPA to focus on relief of unemployed workers, not low income farmers.
Thus, when Hopkins gained control under the WPA he managed to shift funds back to urban
areas. There is one exception in our findings. The FERA was more responsive to the depths of
the crash between 1929 and 1933, as measured by the growth (or reduction) in retail sales per
capita in those years.
The results in Table 6 for the political variables suggest that Hopkins and Roosevelt
resisted the temptation to take advantage of greater discretion by more vigorously pursuing
political goals when they gained more control under the WPA. The effect of long-term swing
voters and voter turnout on intra-state allocations were statistically significantly lower by .06 and
.03 for the WPA than for FERA, respectively. The response to the Roosevelt swing voters was
also lower under the WPA, but not in a statistically significant way.
The major bone of contention in the political economy of New Deal spending debate is
whether economic or political factors influenced the allocation of federal spending. These
results clearly show that when control over the intra-state allocation of relief funds shifted from
state and local politicians to Hopkins that the political influence on intra-state allocations was
reduced and intra-state allocations were more responsive to economic conditions.

VII.

Rules and Procedures
The switch from the FERA to the WPA offered Hopkins more than greater discretion

over how relief funds were allocated within states. It also gave him more central authority over
the monitoring of relief administration. The WPA continued FERA’s efforts to collect financial
information from state and local agencies in a timely manner. Because WPA funds were federal
funds, the WPA was better able to audit the finances on individual projects whether the projects
23

were carried out by state or local governments or by the WPA itself. Administrative discretion
was reduced in several areas. The WPA introduced a “security wage” policy which set the
wages of WPA employees according to a formula that took into account the employees’ skill, the
size of the locality in which the work was performed, and the prevailing wage for work in the
area. Hours of work and standards of construction on WPA projects were more closely
controlled.
The move from the FERA to the WPA allowed Hopkins to reorganize and strengthen the
investigations of complaints concerning improper administration of relief and corruption. Under
FERA such investigations were carried out by small staffs at the federal or state level. The
administration of relief “was a new problem and a new field of investigative work” and the
approaches taken were as “variable as the number of states themselves” (WPA Division of
Investigation 1943, p. 1). FERA established a Division of Special Inquiry in October 1934, that
operated out of the Washington, D.C. office. Investigative efforts often were uncoordinated and
were hampered at times by the transfer of legal ownership of relief funds to the state on reception
of the grant. States, as a result, were the primary investigators when charges were raised.
Roosevelt’s Executive Order creating the WPA established a “division of progress
investigation,” designed “to coordinate the pertinent work of existing investigating agencies of
the government so as to insure the honest execution of the relief programs” (WPA 1943, p. 4).
The Division had its own director and field organization directly responsible to the
Administrator. The functions of the Division, “covered the investigation of all complaints
alleging fraud or loss to the government or violations of Federal statutes as they applied to the
expenditure of relief funds. More specifically these functions included the handling of
complaints that funds were being diverted to private rather than public benefit; that false
statements had been made in obtaining allocations or benefits from relief money; that pay rolls
for either personal services or the rental of equipment by WPA were being padded; complaints of
24

extortion or kickbacks, of theft or embezzlement, or bribery or the collection of illegal fees; that
false compensation claims had been filed by WPA employees or that fraud existed in
competitive bidding on government contracts; that vendors to the government were not
delivering in line with their contracts; that forgery had been committed in work assignments,
time reports, or other official documents, and other less common types of fraud in the handling
of federal funds” (WPA 1943, p. 5). The Division later investigated violations of the Hatch Act,
prohibiting “pernicious political activity” and provisions passed by Congress in 1939 preventing
aliens from receiving WPA employment.
A staff of 50 was based in Washington, supplemented by field offices in 15 cities,
originally, and later in the regional offices. The number of field agents peaked in number at 73,
supplemented by “resident agents” throughout the country.27 There were plenty of complaints.
The records of the investigative division take up 415 cubic feet plus numerous rolls of microfilm
in the National Archives. In 1937 alone, the Division conducted 3,280 investigations.
The Division evaluated complaints, investigated them if necessary, and then, if a problem
was found, turned cases over to the Attorney General’s office for prosecution. The Division
investigated and reported on 17,352 cases. In 8,811 the charges were substantiated. A total of
2,215 were referred to the Attorney General for criminal prosecution. Of the remaining 6,596
substantiated cases, 4,496 persons were dismissed, demoted, suspended, reprimanded or
debarred. When a subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations of the House investigated
the WPA in 1940 they could not uncover a single serious irregularity that had not previously
been investigated by the Division.
The switch from the FERA to the WPA gave Hopkins a great deal more authority over
the activities of state and local WPA projects. It is clear that he took this opportunity to establish
better monitoring of the programs. He and Roosevelt were concerned that charges of corruption
left to fester and later be uncovered by Congressional investigations would significantly damage
25

the success of the program and ultimately the administration. Therefore, they established a more
centralized investigative division that routinely investigated complaints and pressed for the
prosecution of political and criminal corruption.

VIII. Concluding Remarks
The modern American welfare state was created during the New Deal. Prior to 1933, the
burden of caring for the needy and unemployed fell on local governments. By late 1935, a
system of nationally funded and administered old age insurance was in place; federally funded
and state administered programs providing old age assistance, aid to dependent children, aid to
the blind, and unemployment insurance were in place; and a substantial emergency relief
structure with both national and state components was working to see the nation through the last
years of the depression. Before 1932, the administration of public relief was widely regarded as
politically corrupt, a concern so prevalent that a significant portion of the nation’s relief systems
were administered by private social welfare agencies. Although political opponents of the New
Deal often complained about the use of relief for political purposes, by 1940, charges of
corruption had diminished considerably. Corruption within the relief programs was reduced.
How this contributed to the overall level of corruption in the political system within the New
Deal is not clear. The importance of political machines is often claimed to have declined over
the course of the New Deal, partly because the provision of national relief undercut the provision
of local relief by the machines. But as we have documented, part of the relief system remained
in the administrative hands of the local governments, albeit with more supervision from the
Social Security Board.28
The transformation of public relief in the United States from corrupt to bureaucratic
occurred because of the political interests of President Roosevelt and his administration. Local
officials, state politicians, and members of Congress were in a position to use relief in the time
26

tested and corrupt ways: getting politically connected people on relief, letting contracts for
materials and supplies to political allies, and using administrative jobs to reward loyal followers.
Roosevelt, on the other hand, had little use for this type of political machination. The gratitude
of millions of relief recipients and the general public impression that the administration was
moving decisively to relieve the worst victims of the depression garnered votes for Roosevelt.
That support would have evaporated if relief had been administered in a visibly corrupt manner.
The Federal Emergency Relief Administration, the first New Deal relief program, was
created in the spring of 1933 to rapidly distribute millions of dollars to families in immediate
need of financial assistance. It was impossible for Roosevelt and Hopkins to solve the agency
problem they faced. The crisis forced them to distribute relief money through the established
local public relief administrations; it was the only existing structure capable of administering
relief to over 4 million families each month. Inevitably, some of the $4 billion distributed to
states between 1933 and 1935 was used to further the political ends of state and local politicians.
FERA’s loose administrative structure did not give Roosevelt and Hopkins the administrative
tools to limit local politicians from capturing some of the rents for themselves. As we have seen,
Congress was complicit in the political maneuvering. The Senate persistently sought to allocate
more money to small states well represented in the Senate, while the House worked to allocate
more money to large states better represented in the House. The Senate tried to locate
administrative control of relief at the state level, and the House tried to locate control at the local
level. Both were generally hostile to locating administrative control at the national level.
The deal struck in 1935 with the passage of the Emergency Relief Appropriations Act
and the Social Security Act gave the Roosevelt administration authority over the distribution of
emergency relief. Congress insured, however, that states retained control over important
elements of the permanent relief program: unemployment insurance, aid to the blind, old age
assistance, and aid to dependent children, but were subject to federal oversight. Although we
27

stress the difference in the interests of Congress and the executive branch, this should not
obscure the importance that all Democrats placed on re-electing Roosevelt. Giving Roosevelt
control over the emergency relief program allowed him to claim credit for providing relief and
employment to millions of families every month. Voters responded by supporting Roosevelt.
When Roosevelt and Hopkins obtained more control over the intra-state allocation of WPA relief
funds, they targeted the allocation of funds within states more at the high-minded goals of relief,
recovery, and reform and resisted increasing the role of presidential politics.
The other side of the bargain gave states more control over the administration of
categorical relief and unemployment insurance, as well as complete fiscal autonomy. But state
independence came with a catch. The Social Security Board could not force states to spend more
or less on relief, nor could it decide who would staff administrative positions, but it could and
did require that relief be administered in a fair and impartial manner. The development of
welfare entitlements and the evolution of higher standards of welfare administration in the states
under the watchful eye of the Social Security Board are a subject beyond our current story.
Our explanation for why the New Deal relief policies sought to reduce corruption does
not imply that politics played any less of a role in the 1930s than politics played before the Great
Depression. It was in Roosevelt’s political interest to reduce corruption from the administration
of relief at the state and local level. It was political interest, and not only enlightened social
policy, that contributed to the reduction in corruption.

28

Table 1
Major Relief Programs, Dates, and Administrative Character

Started
Ended
Legislation/Agency
Administration
1
May 1933 Fall 1935 Federal Emergency Relief Administration Federal
(FERA)
Civilian Conservation Corp (CCC)

National

December March
1933
1934

Civil Works Administration (CWA)

National

Spring
1935

Emergency Relief Appropriations Act of
1935

1942

Works Progress/Projects Administration National/Federal
(WPA)

Summer
1935

Rural Electrification Administration
(REA)

National

Farm Security Administration (FSA)

National

Continuing Economic Security Act
Social Security Board
Old Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) National
Unemployment Insurance
Federal
Categorical Relief
Old Age Assistance (OAA)
Federal
Aid to the Blind
Federal
Aid to the Dependent Children (ADC) Federal

Notes. Federal administration refers to joint administration by the state and national
governments. National administration refers to programs administered by the National
government. General relief was provided by local governments throughout the period.
1

Some FERA projects were phased out over a period lasting through March 1937.

29

Table 2
Average Monthly Case Loads by Major Programs (000s of cases)

Months
Reported
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940

Total
1/33-6/40
5022
6593
6320
5758
5202
5995
6285
5943

FERA
CWA
WPA
6/33-12/35 11/33-4/34 8/35-6/40
3836
4474
4655

2565
2970
1156
2544
1793
2611
2407
2102

OAA
1/33-6/40
109
142
303
737
1369
1559
1852
1941

Local Relief UI
1/33-5/33, 1/38-6/40
1/36-6/40
1990

1667
1445
1543
1661
1547

698
718
1065

Source: Social Security Bulletin, February 1941, table 9, pp. 68-70.
Notes: All figures are the average of monthly case loads for the months reported in each year in
the original source. For example, the FERA listing in 1933 is the average monthly case load for
the months June through December of that year. The UI listing in 1940 is the average monthly
case load for the months January through June of 1940. The CWA listing in 1934 includes a
peak of 4.311 million cases in January 1934 down to 1.1 million cases in April after the program
was ended and was winding down.

30

Table 3
Major Relief Legislation: 1921-1939
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Year
Congress
Bill #
Title
______________________________________________________________________
1932

72nd

HR 12445

Emergency Relief and Construction Act

1933

73rd

HR 4606

Federal Emergency Relief Act

1934

73rd

HR 7527

Act of February 15, 1934

1934

73rd

HR 9830

Emergency Appropriation Act of 1935

1935

74th

HJR 117

Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935

1936

74th

HR 12624

Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1936

1937

75th

HJR 326

Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1937

1938

75th

HJR 361

Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1938

1939

76th

HJR 679

Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1939

______________________________________________________________________

31

Table 4
Regressions of the Difference in House and Senate Bills on Voting Share in House

Constant

Votes

R

Critical
Vote

HR 12445

-0.601
(1.75)

14.39
(1.22)

0.03

15.2

HR 4606

-0.03
(-0.72)

3.89
(2.60)

0.13

2.8

HR 9830

-11.38
(2.99)

277.51
(2.71)

0.14

15

HJR 117

-6.49
(5.07)

157.26
(3.59)

0.22

15.1

HR 12624

-1.38
(8.22)

33.71
(5.86)

0.42

14.9

HJR 361

-0.82
(2.90)

19.81
(2.04)

0.08

15.1

HJR 679

0.18
(0.27)

-4.13
(-0.18)

0.0007

15.9

Bill Number

2

Notes: The dependent variable in all regressions is the difference in per capita spending between the
House and Senate versions of the bill. Independent variable in each regression is voting share of each
State in the House. All regressions have 46 degrees of freedom. The t-statistics are in parentheses below
the coefficients.

32

Table 5
Observable Differences in House and Senate Bills

Bill Number
HR 12445
HR 4606
HR 7527
HR 9830
HJR 117
HR 12624
HJR 326
HJR 361
HJR 679

Money

Y
N
--Y
Y
Y
--Y
Y

Project Recipient
Patronage Selection Selection

--Y
Y
--Y
Y
Y
-----

----Y
--Y
------Y

------------Y
Y
Y

Notes: Entries correspond to differences in the House and Senate versions of each bill, where Y means
that the Senate version favored state over local interests; N means that the Senate version did not favor
state over local interests; and --- means that there was no difference in this aspect of the House and Senate
versions of the programs.

33

Table 6
Comparison of Intra-state Allocation of FERA and WPA Funds
1
WPA

2
FERA

3
WPA
minus
FERA

R2

0.216
(7.54)
-0.005
(-0.15)
-0.208
(-6.74)
-0.016
(-0.87)
0.282
(13.9)
-0.061
(-3.28)
-0.034
(-1.74)
0.048
(2.63)
0.048
(2.25)
0.127

0.125
(4.29)
0.076
(2.52)
-0.153
(-4.87)
-0.13
(-7.03)
0.227
(11.04)
-0.069
(-3.64)
0.03
(1.48)
0.078
(4.21)
0.056
(2.60)
0.099

0.091
(3.27)
-0.081
(-2.79)
-0.055
(-1.84)
0.114
(6.44)
0.055
(2.77)
0.008
(0.43)
-0.064
(-3.33)
-0.03
(-1.69)
-0.008
(-0.4)
0.037

Adjusted R2

0.124

0.097

0.034

Number of observations

3061

3061

3061

Variable

% urban, 1930
Tax returns per capita, 1929
Retail sales per capita, 1929
Retail sales per capita growth, 29-33
% unemployed, 1930
Democratic Loyalty, 1896-1928
Swing, 1896-1932
Turnout, 1932
Roosevelt Swing, 1932

Notes and Sources: (t-statistics in parentheses). The values for each variable have been
normalized by subtracting the state mean and dividing by the state standard deviation. WPA and
FERA spending information is from the U.S. Office of Government Reports (1940). It was
converted to per capita spending by dividing by the population in 1930. Retail sales information
from 1933 is from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce
(1936). The 1929 retail sales information, percent urban in 1930, population in 1930 and 1940,
and the ratio of unemployed to gainfully employed in 1930 is from Historical, Demographic,
Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR tape number 0003, as
34

corrected by Michael Haines. The population figures used to create our per capita estimates for
1929 and 1933 retail spending were calculated using linear interpolations of the 1930 and 1940
populations. The tax return information comes from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Foreign and Domestic Commerce (1932). The mean Democratic share of the presidential vote
from 1896-1928, the percent voting for Roosevelt in 1932 minus the mean Democratic share
from 1896 to 1928, the standard deviation of the Democratic share of the presidential vote from
1896 to 1932, and the percent of adults voting in 1932 were all calculated using information
from ICPSR’s United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968 (ICPSR tape number 0001).
The data set consists of 3,061 counties and county/city combinations in the United States. The
New Deal program information was reported for some combined counties. For a list see
Fishback, Kantor and Wallis (2003, pp. 304-5).

35

References
Anderson, G. M. and Tollison, R. D. 1991. “Congressional Influence and Patterns of New Deal
Spending, 1933-1939,” Journal of Law and Economics 34 (April), 161-75.
Arrington, L. 1969. “The New Deal in the West: A Preliminary Statistical Inquiry,” Pacific
Historical Review 38 (August), 311-16.
Arrington, L. 1970. “Western Agriculture and the New Deal,” Agricultural History 49 (October),
337-51.
Brock, William R. 1988. Welfare, Democracy, and the New Deal. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Brown, Josephine C. 1940. Public Relief 1929-1939. New York. Henry Holt and Company.
Couch, Jim F. and Shugart, William F. 2000. “New Deal Spending and the States: The Politics of
Public Works.” In J. Heckelman, J Moorhouse, and R. Whaples (eds.), Public Choice
Interpretations of American Economic History. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp.
105-122.
Couch, Jim F. and Shugart, William F. 1998. The Political Economy of the new Deal.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Dorsett, Lyle W. 1977. Franklin Roosevelt and the City Bosses. Kennikat Press.
Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor, and John Joseph Wallis, 2003. “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s
be Rehabilitated? A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis,” Explorations in
Economic History, 40 (July): 278-307.
Fleck, Robert K. 1994. “Essays on the Political Economy of the New Deal,” unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Stanford University.
Fleck, Robert. K. 2001. “Population, Land, Economic Conditions and the Allocation of New
Deal Spending,” Explorations in Economic History, 38 (April) 296-304.
Fleck, Robert K. 1999. “The Value of the Vote: A Model and Test of the Effects of Turnout on
Distributive Policy,” Economic Inquiry 37 (October): 609-23.
Howard, Donald. S. 1943. The WPA and Federal Relief Policy. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Katz, Michael B. 1986. In the Shadow of the Poor House: A Social History of Welfare in
36

America. New York: Basic Books.
Leuchtenberg, W. E. 1963. Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal, 1932 - 1940. New York:
Harper and Row.
Patterson, James T. 1967. Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal. Lexington, Kentucky:
University of Kentucky Press.
Patterson, James T. 1986. America’s Struggle Against Poverty, 1900-1985. Cambridge,
Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.
Piven, Frances Fox, and Richard Cloward. 1993. Regulating the Poor: The Function of Public
Welfare, 2nd edition. New York: Vintage Press.
Reading, D. C. 1973. “New Deal Activity and the States,” Journal of Economic History 36
(December): 792-810.
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Statistical Section. 1940. Report No. 10, Volume II.
Washington, D.C.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1984. “The Birth of the Old Federalism: Financing the New Deal,” Journal
of Economic History 44 (March), 139-59.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1987. “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery during the Great
Depression,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 59 (August), 516-520.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1989. “Employment in the Great Depression: New Data and Hypotheses,”
Explorations in Economic History 26 (January), 45-72.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1991. “The Political Economy of New Deal Fiscal Federalism,” Economic
Inquiry 29 (July), 510-24.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1998. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending, Revisited, With and
Without Nevada,” Explorations in Economic History, 35 (April): 140-170.
Wallis, John Joseph. 2001. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending, Yet Again: A reply
to Fleck,” Explorations in Economic History, 38 (April): 305-314.
Wallis, John Joseph, and Oates, W. E. 1998. “The Impact of the New Deal on American
Federalism.” In M. Bordo, C. Goldin, and E. White (eds.) The Defining Moment: The Great
Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Williams, E.A. 1939. Federal Aid for Relief. New York: Columbia University Press.
37

Works Progress Administration [WPA] Division of Investigation. 1943. “The Division of
Investigation of the Work Projects Administration.” Unpublished mimeo. Record Group 69.
Works Progress Administration. Records of Division of Investigation, 1934-1943. General
Records. Box 13. National Archives in Suitland Maryland.
Wright, G. 1974. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics 59 (February): 30-38.

38

ENDNOTES
1

The literature begins with Arrington (1969 and 1970), Reading (1973), and Wright (1974), and
continues in Wallis (1984, 1987, and 1991). Anderson and Tollison (1991) criticized Wright and
Wallis for not including Congressional information, which led to the response by Wallis (1998)
and the exchange between Fleck (2001) and Wallis (2001). Couch and Shugart (1998 and 2000)
examined New Deal spending as well. Investigation of the determinants of county allocations
and a summary of the entire literature can be found in Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003).
2

A restriction on the “extension or improvement of streets and utilities in relatively
underdeveloped areas… was the direct result of cases developed by the Division [of
Investigation], some of which were prosecuted in Federal courts, showing that, at times and
through subterfuge, real estate firms or developing companies, for example, sought to divert
relief funds to their own benefit in constructing streets and private utilities in undeveloped areas
to the enhancement of the value of the real estate owned by them” (Works Progress
Administration Division of Investigation 1943, p. 7).
3

“This type of case involved the submission of false time claims to the government in the rental
of equipment; the short delivery of materials to WPA projects by venders, at times in collusion
with WPA supervisory employees; or the furnishing of equipment or material below the
specifications of the contract which resulted in loss to the Government. Cases of this character
frequently involved considerable amounts of money… In this connection, it should be
remembered that the Works Projects Administration operated a program consisting of projects
which ranged from the building of two miles of farm-to-market road in Texas, to the
construction of LaGuardia Airport at New York City” (Works Progress Administration Division
on Investigation 1943, p. 23).
4

“Due to the fact that the program employed large numbers of people, frequently in rather small
units, an operation involving the preparation of a vast number of payrolls, irregularities in
connection with these payrolls were the most common type of complaint. These irregularities in
general consisted of normal and routine “padding” operations in which persons were paid for
time when they were absent from their WPA duties of were dually employed” (Works Progress
Administration Division of Investigation 1943, p. 21).
5

The evidence for the New Deal’s success at eliminating political corruption is the virtual
absence of complaints, for example, that party orientation of a recipient has any impact on the
probability of getting a social security check or and AFDC payment. Evidence that political
corruption was important before the New Deal is presented in the historical section.
6

On the general low opinion in which local government was held by public administration
experts and political scientists in the early years of the twentieth century see Brock (1988, pp.
50-83. “When Americans used the word ‘politician’ in a derogatory sense (as they often did),
39

they had most in mind the local official in city wards, townships, or counties seeking patronage
and spoils, favoring friends, juggling contracts, and acknowledging some obligation to their
party but none to the community. Civic reformers, students of public administration, and almost
every issue of the American Political Science Review produced abundant evidence of local
incompetence.” (p. 51).
7

“There was ample evidence in the reports of the studies already mentioned that this system
[pre-New Deal local relief] encouraged petty graft as well as the use of relief for political power.
Merchants sometimes failed to report the death of customers who were on the relief lists and
continued to collect for their private tills the pittances of the dead from the relief funds of the
town or county. Legal restrictions on pauper voting were usually not enforced in the states
where they existed. Hence men and women on relief built up a solid vote for officials from
whom they got relief.” See Brown (1940, p. 16).
8

“Most relief workers on either the private or public side were chiefly bent on destructive
criticism and critical comment regarding the opposition” (Brown 1940, p. 45). “The community
of interests in public welfare shared by both the voluntary social agency and the political
authority have not always prevented the private agency from viewing the government as an
inimical and antagonistic body opposed to the constituents of the private agency, instead of
being their political creature and the medium of their democratic expression of their ideals and
purposes” (quote of Joseph Logan by Brown 1940, p. 53). Brown’s first chapter is a discussion
of the national, state, and local responsibility for relief and the conflict between private and
public relief advocates.
9

Brock (1988), Brown (1940), and Katz (1986, pp. 36-57) talk extensively about the problem of
politics, corruption, and relief prior to the 1930s. Historical studies of the post-New Deal
programs spend almost no time discussing corruption. Harsh critics of the welfare system, such
as Piven and Cloward (1993) and Katz (1986) argue that relief has become an instrument of
social control, but conceded that relief had become more professionally administered. There is
little discussion of corruption in the distribution of relief funds after the New Deal.
10

See Brown (1940, p. 55). “The amazement with which this information was received and the
significance attached to it are shown by the extent to which the figures are cited in the literature
of the period. They appear like a refrain, in conference papers and reports, magazine articles,
statements of policy and recommendations for programs put out by national and local agencies,
both public and private. They are quoted with satisfaction and triumph by proponents of public
welfare and with some consternation and trepidation by private agency executives.” p. 56.
11

New York was the first state to establish an unemployment relief agency, the Temporary
Emergency Relief Administration (TERA) in May 1931. Roosevelt was Governor and Harry
Hopkins was appointed the first TERA administrator. By May of 1933, 22 states had provided
some money for unemployment relief, but not all states had a functioning state relief
40

administration.
12

Local relief agencies investigated each case, determined the amount of resources available to
each family or individual in need, and then determined the benefits to be paid each month as the
difference between the families’ available resources and the relief “standard” for families of a
given size. This reflected the philosophy of private social work that each case should be treated
individually. This opened the door to wrangling about the determination of benefits. On the
other hand, it was popular with the social workers who staffed local relief agencies and it gave
the entire relief structure an inherent fiscal flexibility. Since benefits were determined case by
case on the basis of need, it was relatively easy, when budgets got tight, to reduce all benefits
slightly. Had benefits been flat and fixed, adjustments to budget fluctuations would have had to
come in the number of cases rather than the generosity of benefits, which was something
everyone wanted to avoid. Budget flexibility turned out to be important, the initial FERA
appropriation was intended to last two years, but exhausted by the fall of 1933. FERA received
new appropriations roughly every six months. The flow of national, state, and local funds to
local relief agencies was never steady.
13

During the winter of 1933/1934, Roosevelt established the Civil Works Administration, which
was a temporary program designed to provide jobs for 4 million unemployed. The CWA was a
“national” program, in the sense that the federal government issued checks to individual
recipients, and CWA administrators nominally worked for the federal government. In effect, the
CWA was largely administered by FERA personnel. Most were state and local employees
temporarily transferred to the federal government’s payroll during the winter.
14

The six states were Oklahoma, North Dakota, Massachusetts, Ohio, Georgia, and Louisiana.
Federal officials federalized relief in Oklahoma on 2/23/34 when the governor announced that he
would not apply for relief unless he had control over the distribution; in North Dakota on 3/1/34
as the result of charges that employees of the state relief administration were being assessed for
political contributions; for work relief in Massachusetts on 3/7/34 because the state had a statute
that all grants from the state had to be distributed on a population basis not on a need basis; in
Ohio on 3/16/35 in a dispute over whether Ohio had supplied a fair share of relief funds; and in
Louisiana (4/8/35) and Georgia (4/19/35) due to long-running disputes between the governors
and federal administrators over the use of the funds. Hopkins withheld funds from Colorado in
December 1933 and from Missouri in April 1935 until the state legislatures produced funds to
help pay for relief. Threats to withhold funds went out to Alabama and Kentucky in 1933 and to
Illinois in 1934. See E.A. Williams (1939, 170-8, 203-5).
15

As quoted in Brown (1940), p. 210.
The “political economy of New Deal spending” literature provides a thorough, but somewhat
inconclusive, picture of the overall use of federal allocation of grants between the states for
political purposes. See the citations in footnote 1. There is evidence that Hopkins was in direct
contact with relief administrations in large cities, including important and influential Democratic
16

41

machine politicians. See Dorsett (1977).
17

The compromise between Congress and Roosevelt in 1935 is studied in detail in Wallis
(1991).
18

There were also Emergency Relief Appropriation Acts in 1936, 1937, 1938, and 1939.

The Social Security Board could exercise fiscal influence in times of crisis. For example,
when states exhausted their unemployment insurance trust funds, the Board could impose
administrative changes on states in return for providing funds.
19

20

The importance of land area in the literature on the political economy of New Deal spending
reflects the geographic differences between the east and west. See Wallis (1998) and the ensuing
exchange between Fleck (2001) and Wallis (2001).
21

The case where a jurisdictional dispute prevented any legislation from passing was,
interestingly, a relief bill proposed in the last Hoover Congress. The jurisdiction at issue was
national versus state. In January of 1932 a bill sponsored by Senators LaFollette and Costigan,
72nd Congress S. 3045, proposed the creation of a Federal Emergency Relief Board that would
be given $375 million to allocate between the states for relief purposes and an equal amount for
highway construction. Forty percent of the $375 million would be divided between the states on
the basis of population, the remainder to be allocated at the discretion of the relief board. The
bill failed to pass the Senate, but not because of lack of support for relief. A substitute bill was
proposed by Senators Black, Walsh, and Bulkley, which differed in only two ways. The
substitute bill provided loans rather than grants and allocated all of the $375 million on the basis
of population, thereby eliminating the need for a federal board of any kind. The substitute bill
failed by a vote of 48 to 31, the original bill failed the next day, after extensive debate, by a vote
of 48 to 35. Only 15 Senators voted for both bills -- in all 81 Senators had expressed voting
support for some kind of relief program. The bill failed to pass because of differences over how
the program should be administered, specifically whether the states should answer to a national
relief board or be completely free to administer relief on their own. Since only a handful of
states had any existing relief program, the struggle in the Senate was over administrative
arrangements that might be created, not interests that already existed.
22

It was possible to get a non-relief WPA job without a referral. These jobs were either
supervisory or administrative. See Howard (1943, pp. 356-365) for a discussion of referral
policy.
23

The one anomaly is a special case. In the original FERAct the Senate inserted a provision
enabling the federal government to take over the administration of relief in a state. This was
called "federalizing" relief and it clearly weakened state independence, which we would not
expect the Senate to do. Later, in 1934, Senator McAdoo from California asked Hopkins to
42

federalize relief in California, because he was in a political battle with the faction of the party
controlling the relief administration. It appears that the anomaly in Table 5 was the result of the
anticipated political gains that would come to Senators from "federalization." Those gains, it
turns out, never materialized.
There is one caveat. WPA grants were not distributed in the absence of state and local activity.
States and local jurisdictions lobbied for and spent resources to obtain funds from both FERA
and the WPA. Some of the difference in the distribution within states under the WPA and the
FERA may reflect differences in state and local behavior, as well as differences in Hopkins’s
administrative policy.
24

We have also explored using the ratio of the county observation to the state mean and had the
same general results. We have also run the analysis by demeaning the variable but not
normalizing. Demeaning the variables does not completely eliminate the scale differences
between the WPA and the FERA. The WPA spent more money so that the variance in spending
was likely to be higher. In such a situation the WPA and FERA could have responded to the
same differences in unemployment by raising spending by 5 percent in that county, but because
the WPA spent more on average, the 5 percent will generate a larger coefficient for the WPA
than for the FERA.
25

26

See Wright (1974); Fleck (1994, 1999, and 2001); Wallis (1998 and 2001); and Fishback,
Kantor and Wallis (2003) for empirical analysis of relief spending using these variables.
27

Agents were often young, 85 percent had professional or college training as lawyers,
accountants, and engineers. A number had been investigators for the FBI or in other settings.
28

Dorsett concludes his study of the New Deal and the machines with this way: “The second
wrong assumption is that the federal government, by assuming responsibility for welfare
programs, thereby destroyed the machine’s useful role as a service institution. Actually, the
distribution function was not preempted by the federal government: under the New Deal many
welfare programs were financed in Washington, but they were directed at the local level.” (p.
113).

43

