NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A DYNAMIC THEORY OF OPTIMAL CAPITAL
STRUCTURE AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Andrew Atkeson
Harold L.Cole
Working Paper 11083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

Atkeson gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation. Cole acknowledges the
support of NSF SES 0137421. We thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Andrzej Skrzypacz, and Steve Tadelis for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Andrew Atkeson and Harold L. Cole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

A Dynamic Theory of Optimal Capital Structure and Executive Compensation
Andrew Atkeson and Harold L. Cole
NBER Working Paper No. 11083
January 2005
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
We put forward a theory of the optimal capital structure of the firm based on Jensen's (1986)
hypothesis that a firm's choice of capital structure is determined by a trade-off between agency costs
and monitoring costs. We model this tradeoff dynamically. We assume that early on in the
production process, outside investors face an informational friction with respect to withdrawing
funds from the firm which dissipates over time. We assume that they also face an agency friction
which increases over time with respect to funds left inside the firm. The problem of determining the
optimal capital structure of the firm as well as the optimal compensation of the manager is then a
problem of choosing payments to outside investors and the manager at each stage of production to
balance these two frictions.
Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net
Harold Cole
Economics Department
University of California
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
hlcole@econ.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
We put forward a theory of the optimal capital structure of the firm and the optimal
compensation of the firm’s managers based on Jensen’s (1986) hypothesis that a firm’s choice
of capital structure is determined by a trade-oﬀ between agency costs and monitoring costs.
We model this trade-oﬀ dynamically by assuming that outside investors in a firm face diﬀerent
obstacles to recouping their investment at diﬀerent times. Early on in the production process,
outside investors face an information friction – the output of the firm is private information
to the manager of the firm unless the outside investors pay a fixed cost to monitor the firm.
With time, the output of the firm is revealed to outside investors and, hence, the information
friction disappears. At this later stage in the production process however, outside investors
face an agency friction – the firm’s manager can divert resources not paid out to investors
in the early phases of production towards perquisites that provide him with private benefits.
The problem of determining the optimal capital structure of the firm as well as the optimal
compensation of the manager is then a problem of choosing payments to outside investors
and the manager at each stage of production to balance these two frictions.
Our theory is developed in an dynamic optimal contracting framework, and, as a
result, our model yields predictions about the joint dynamics of a firm’s capital structure
and its executive compensation. The choice of compensation for the manager is shaped by
the assumption that the manager is risk averse while the outside investors are risk neutral.
Our theory has the following implications regarding optimal capital structure and executive
compensation. Each period, the payouts from the firm can be divided into payments to the
manager that consist of a non-contingent base pay and a performance component of pay based
on the realized output of the firm, as well as two distinct payments to the outside investors

that resemble payments to debt and outside equity respectively. The debt-like payment to
outside investors is made early in the period. It comes in the form of a fixed lump – the
failure of which to pay leads to monitoring. The equity-like payment to outside investors
comes in the form of a residual which depends upon the performance of the firm and is paid
at the end of the period.
In our model, the fact that the manager receives some form of performance based
pay is not motivated by the desire to induce the manager to exert greater eﬀort or care in
managing the firm. Instead, the performance based component of the manager’s pay simply
serves to induce the manager to forsake expenditures on perquisites for his own enjoyment.
Hence, our model’s predictions for whether it is optimal to have the performance component
of the manager’s compensation depend on the total market value of the firm or on some
narrower measure of current performance such as current sales are determined entirely by our
assumptions regarding the extent of the agency friction. If the manager is able to appropriate
a broad measure of the firm’s resources for his own benefit, then his performance bonus will
be based on this broad measure. If the manager’s ability to appropriate resources is more
limited in scope, then his bonus pay will be based on this narrower measure of performance.
Our theory also has implications for the relationship between the optimal financial
structure of the firm and its optimal production plan. Our theory predicts that there is a
wedge between the marginal product of capital in the firm and rental rate on capital that
depends upon the expected monitoring costs associated with bankruptcy and the ineﬃcient
risk-sharing between outside investors and the manager induced by the agency friction. Under
certain parametric assumptions, we are able to compute the magnitude of this wedge between
the marginal product of capital and its rental rate in terms of readily observed features of
2

the firm’s financial structure and its executive compensation.
To extend our model to a dynamic setting, we assume that there is an information
cycle in which outside investors first face an information friction and then face an agency
friction. This cycle is repeated indefinitely. We associate this cycle with an accounting or
capital budgeting cycle at the firm. We show the qualitative decomposition of the optimal
contract into four payments – base pay and performance pay for the manager, and debt
and equity-like payments to the outside investors – holds both in a static setting in which
there is only one information cycle, and in a dynamic setting in which there are an arbitrary
number of information cycles. Thus, repetition of our contracting problem does not change,
qualitatively, the interpretation of our eﬃcient contract as a theory of capital structure and
executive compensation.
We derive two additional results in our model in dynamic setting with more than
one information cycle. The first of these results is that the compensation of incumbent
managers is non-decreasing over time, regardless of the performance of the firm. The second
of these results is that incumbent managers are protected against the risk that they become
unproductive with a “golden parachute”.
The result that the pay of the incumbent manager is non-decreasing over time has
implications for the dynamics of the firm’s optimal capital structure since, ceteris paribus, the
dynamics of executive compensation alter the terms of the trade-oﬀ between the information
and agency frictions that outside investors face. In particular, this result implies that if the
firm is particularly profitable in one period, in the next period, the firm’s payout shifts away
from debt toward equity.
The result that an incumbent manager that becomes unproductive receives a “golden
3

parachute” suﬃcient to maintain the marginal utility of consumption that he enjoyed as
productive manager is a direct consequence of optimal risk sharing. The exact size of the
golden parachute is determined by the outside opportunities of an incumbent manager – if
these outside opportunities are not good, then the manager receives a large golden parachute
while if they are good, then the parachute mandated by optimal risk sharing is smaller.
Our model delivers predictions for the division of payments from the firm between the
manager, the owners of outside equity, and the owners of the firm’s debt based on the tradeoﬀ of information and agency frictions. It is important to note that our dynamic model does
not pin down the debt-equity ratio of the firm. This is because our model does not pin down
the source of financing for ongoing investment in the firm. We present an simple example
to demonstrate that, holding fixed the division of gross payments to debt and outside equity
holders, the firm will have a diﬀerent debt-equity ratio depending on whether debt is long
term and ongoing investment is financed out of retained earnings or debt is short-term and
ongoing investment is financed with new short-term debt. We conjecture that this failure
of our model to pin down the debt-equity ratio of the firm in a dynamic setting may be a
general aspect of completely specified “trade-oﬀ” models of corporate finance.
This paper is considers the optimal financial contract between outside investors and a
manager in the presence of both information and agency frictions when there is the possibility
of monitoring. It is therefore related to a wide range of prior research on each of these topics.
The within period, or static, aspects of the information and monitoring aspect is similar to
Townsend (1979), while the static aspects of the agency friction and the information friction
are similar to Hart and Moore (1995), in that these frictions can rationalize a division of
the firms output into debt, and other payments.1 However, unlike these prior papers, the
4

inclusion of both frictions and monitoring, and the specific form of these friction leads to
three diﬀerent payment streams coming out of the firm, outside debt, outside equity, and
managerial compensation.
Since we consider these frictions within a recursive environment, our paper is related
to prior work on dynamic eﬃcient contracting. However, unlike the literature on dynamic
models of eﬃcient financial contracting with information frictions, such as Atkeson (1991),
Hopenhayn and Clementi (2002), Demarzo and Fishman (2004) or Wang (2004), our information friction is temporary since there is complete information revelation by the end of the
period. As a result, while the costly state verification aspect of our model rationalizes outside
debt, the dynamic aspects and the overall tractability of our model are similar to those of the
dynamic enforcement constraint literature, such as Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004), and
Cooley, Marimon and Quadrini (2004). In particular, it shares the feature that if the manger
is retained, then his promised utility is weakly increasing over time, and these increases serve
to reduce the extent of the enforcement friction.
In our model contracting is complete subject to explicit information and enforcement
frictions. This is in contrast to a large literature that seeks to explain various aspects of the
financial structure of firms as arising from incomplete contracting. Examples include Hart
and Moore (1995,1997), as well as: Aghion and Bolton (1992) which examines the eﬃcient
allocation of control rights, Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) in which outside investors choose
their holdings of a debt as opposed to equity claims to generate the eﬃcient decision with
respect to the interference or not in the continuing operation of the firm, Zweibel (1996) in
which manager uses debt as a means of constraint their future investment choices to be more
eﬃcient.
5

2. Model
We begin by presenting a one period version of the model. We extend our results to
a dynamic model in a later section.
There is a large number of risk neutral outside investors who are endowed with capital
which they can rent in the market at rental rate r. There is also a large number of identical risk
averse managers. These managers have an outside opportunity that oﬀers them utility U0 .
We assume that the managers have a utility function u(c) with u(0) = −∞ and u0 (0) = ∞.
There is a production technology that transforms capital and the labor of a manager
into output. The production process takes place over the course of three subperiods within
the period. In the first subperiod, a manager is chosen to operate the production technology
and capital K is installed. In the second subperiod, this production technology yields output

y = θF (K)

where θ is a productivity shock that is idiosyncratic to this technology. In this subperiod,
this productivity shock θ and hence, output y as well, is private information to the manager.
The set of possible shocks is an interval given by Θ and the distribution of these shocks has
c.d.f. P with density p and an expected value of one. We assume that there are diminishing
returns to scale in the sense that F 00 (K) < 0.
In the second sub-period, the outside investors have the option of monitoring the
output of the project to learn the realization of the shock θ (and hence output y as well)
at a cost of γF (K) units of output. At the end of the second subperiod, the manager has
the option of spending up to fraction τ of whatever output of the firm that he has not paid
6

out to the outside investors during this sub-period on perquisites that he alone enjoys. That
output that the manager does not spend on perquisites is productively reinvested in the firm.
For simplicity, we assume that the gross return on this productive reinvestment in the firm
between the second and third sub-periods is one.
In the third sub-period, the outside investors can freely observe both the output of the
firm y = θF (K) and the division of this output between spending on perks for the manager
and productive reinvestment.
The contracting problem between the outside investors and the manager can be described as follows. A contract between these parties specifies a level of capital K to be hired
in the first subperiod, a decision by the outside investors to monitor m and a payment from
the manager to the outside investors in the second subperiod v, and a payment from the
outside investors to the manager in the third subperiod x.
We assume that the outside investors can commit to a deterministic strategy for paying
the cost to monitor the output of the project in the second sub-period as a function of the
manager’s announcement θ̂ of the realization of the productivity shock θ. Denote this strategy
by m(θ̂) and denote set of announced shocks for which monitoring takes place by M ⊆ Θ.
The payments v from the manager to the outside investors in the second subperiod
are contingent on the manager’s announcement of the productivity shock θ̂ as well as the
outcome of the monitoring decision. Let v0 (θ̂) denote the payment that the manager makes
to the outside investors in the second sub-period as a function of the announcement θ̂ in case
monitoring does not take place, and let v1 (θ̂, θ) denote the payment that the manager makes
as a function both of the announcement θ̂ and the true value of θ in case monitoring does
take place.
7

Finally, let x(θ̂, θ) denote the payment from the outside investors to the manager in
the third subperiod as a function of his report θ̂ in the second sub-period and the realized
production shock θ. Note that it is not necessary for x to depend on the monitoring decision
because the true value of θ is revealed to outside investors in the third sub-period at zero
cost.
For reasons of limited liability, we require

v0 (θ̂) ≤ θ̂F (K), v1 (θ̂, θ) ≤ θF (K), and x(θ̂, θ) ≥ 0.

(1)

We assume, without loss of generality, that x(θ̂, θ) is chosen to ensure that the manager
chooses not to take any perks for himself. This assumption implies a constraint on x(θ̂, θ)
that

u(x(θ̂, θ)) ≥ u(τ (θF (K) − v0 (θ̂))) for all θ̂ ∈
/ M, and

(2)

u(x(θ̂, θ)) ≥ u(τ (θF (K) − v1 (θ̂, θ))) for all θ̂ ∈ M.

Given the terms of the contract, m, v0 , v1 , and x, the manager chooses a strategy for
reporting θ denoted σ(θ). We say that the report σ(θ) = θ̂ is feasible given v0 and θ if either
θ̂ ∈ M or θ̂ ∈
/ M and v0 (θ̂) ≤ θF (K). Note that this definition requires that the manager has
the resources to make the payment v0 (σ(θ)) in the event that he reports σ(θ) = θ̂ ∈
/ M. We
restrict the manager to choose a reporting strategies such that σ(θ) is feasible given v0 for
all θ. We interpret this constraint as following from the assumption that there is an optimal
contract in which the outside investors choose to monitor if the manager announces θ̂ ∈
/M
8

but then does not pay v0 (θ̂) and that x(θ̂, θ) = 0 in this event.
We restrict attention to contracts in which the manager truthfully reports θ. Hence,
we impose the incentive constraint

u(x(θ, θ)) ≥ u(x(θ̂, θ)) for all θ ∈ Θ and feasible θ̂ given θ and v0 .

(3)

The manager’s expected utility under the contract is given by the expectation of u(x(θ, θ)).
Since managers have an outside opportunity that delivers them utility U0 , we require the
individual rationality constraint
Z

(4)

u(x(θ, θ))p(θ)dθ ≥ U0 .

Note that this contracting problem is a partial equilibrium problem in the sense we
assume that the outside investors have already purchased this production opportunity from
the entrepreneur who created it and now they simply seek to design a contract with the
manager that they hire on a competitive market to run this production opportunity. We
do not model the costs that entrepreneurs pay to create these production opportunities nor
the price that they receive when they sell a newly created production opportunity to outside
investors.

9

3. Characterizing an eﬃcient contract
In this section, we characterize a contract that maximizes the expected payoﬀ to the
outside investors
Z

[(θ − γm(θ))F (K) − x(θ, θ)] p(θ)dθ − rK

(5)

subject to the constraints (1), (2), (3), and (4) in the following two propositions. We refer to
such a contract as an eﬃcient contract.
Proposition 1. There is an eﬃcient contract with the following properties: (i) v1 (θ̂, θ) =
n
o
∗
∗
θF (K) for all θ̂ ∈ M and v0 (θ̂) = θ F (K) for all θ̂ ∈
/ M, where θ = inf θ̂|θ̂ ∈
/M ,

(ii) M is an interval ranging from 0 to θ∗ , and (iii) for θ̂ 6= θ, x(θ̂, θ) = 0 if θ̂ ≤ θ∗ and

x(θ̂, θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) if θ > θ∗ .
Proof: To prove (i), we first consider the case of reports that lead to monitoring. For all
θ̂ ∈ M, setting v1 (θ̂, θ) = θF (K) relaxes the constraint (2) as much as possible and has
no eﬀect on the objective (5) nor on any other constraint. Hence we can, without loss of
generality, assume that v1 has this form.
n
o
Next, consider the case of reports that don’t lead to monitoring. Let v0∗ = inf v0 (θ̂)|θ̂ ∈
/M .

Note that for all θ < v0∗ /F (K), it is not feasible for the manager to report θ̂ ∈
/ M since the
manager would be unable to make the payment v0 (θ̂) ≥ v0∗ in that case. This implies that

v0∗ ≤ θF (K) for all θ ∈
/ M since, otherwise, truthtelling would not be feasible. From (2) and

10

(3), for all θ ≥ v0∗ /F (K), we have that

x(θ, θ) ≥ sup x(θ̂, θ) ≥ τ (θF (K) − v0∗ ) ,

(6)

θ̂∈M
/

since the manager can, with strategic reporting of θ̂, ensure that the payment that he makes
to outside investors in the second subperiod is arbitrarily close to v0∗ and thus ensure that he
consumes arbitrarily close to τ (θF (K) − v0∗ ) in perks. Since (θF (K) − v0∗ ) ≥ (θF (K) − v0 (θ̂))
for all θ̂ ∈
/ M, we can set v0 (θ̂) equal to a constant, here v0∗ , without aﬀecting any of the
binding incentive constraints (2). Given a monitoring set M, setting the constant v0∗ as high
as possible relaxes the constraint (2) as much as possible. Given this, constraint (1) implies
n
o
that v0∗ = θ∗ F (K) with θ∗ ≡ inf θ̂|θ̂ ∈
/ M is an optimal choice.

To prove that M is an interval, note that if M were to contain some θ̃ > θ∗ , it would
³
´
still be the case that, for that θ̃, x(θ̃, θ̃) ≥ τ θ̃ − θ∗ F (K) since the manager has the option
of reporting any feasible θ̂ ∈
/ M that he chooses and hence ensuring himself of consumption
³
´
arbitrarily close to τ θ̃ − θ∗ F (K). Hence, it is not possible to relax the constraint (2) for

θ > θ∗ any further by choosing to monitor for that report θ̃. Since it is costly to monitor, an
eﬃcient contract must have θ̃ ∈
/ M for almost all θ̃ > θ∗ . Thus, there is an eﬃcient contract
in which M is an interval ranging from 0 to θ∗ .
To finish the proof, observe that given the incentive constraint (3), we can, without
loss of generality, set x(θ̂, θ) for θ̂ 6= θ as low as possible to relax this incentive constraint
as much as possible. Hence, it is eﬃcient to set x(θ̂, θ) = 0 for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ ≤ θ∗ , and it
is feasible to do so since, in the event of monitoring, the outside investors take possession
of the output of the firm and there are no resources for the manager to spend on perks for
11

himself. From (2) and the results above, we set x(θ̂, θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ ) for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ > θ∗ .
Here it is not possible to set the manager’s compensation any lower. Note that by setting
x(θ̂, θ) in this way, we ensure that any choice of x(θ, θ) that satisfies nonnegativity for θ ≤ θ∗
and x(θ, θ) ≥ τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) for θ > θ∗ also satisfies both the no perks condition (2) and is
incentive compatible in that it satisfies (3). Q.E.D.
With these results, we can restate our optimal contracting problem much more simply
as follows. The problem now is to choose a level of investment K, a monitoring set indexed
by θ∗ , and payments to the manager w(θ) = x(θ, θ) to maximize the expected payoﬀ to the
outside investors:
Z

(θF (K) − w(θ)) p(θ)dθ − γP (θ∗ )F (K) − rK,

(7)

subject to the constraints of individual rationality
Z

u(w(θ))p(θ)dθ ≥ U0

(8)

and a no-perks constraint

u(w(θ)) ≥ u(τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)) for all θ ≥ θ∗ .

(9)

With our assumption that managers’ utility is unbounded below, we know that the limited
liability constraint w(θ) ≥ 0 is not binding.
Given values of θ∗ , K, and w(θ) that solve this problem, the contract with M =
{θ|θ ≤ θ∗ } , v1 (θ̂, θ) = θF (K), v0 (θ̂) = θ∗ F (K), x(θ, θ) = w(θ), x(θ̂, θ) = 0 for θ̂ 6= θ and
12

θ̂ ≤ θ∗ , and x(θ̂, θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ > θ∗ is an eﬃcient contract.
In the following two sections, we use the first order conditions of this simplified contracting problem to characterize the financial structure of this project and the relationship
between financial structure and production eﬃciency. To that end, we consider the Lagrangian associated with the problem (7) given by

max

w(θ),K,θ∗ ,λ,δ(θ)

λ
Z

½Z

Z

(θF (K) − w(θ)) p(θ)dθ − γP (θ∗ )F (K) − rK+

(10)

¾

u(w(θ))p(θ)dθ − U0 +

δ(θ) {u(w(θ)) − u(τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K))} p(θ)dθ.

4. Debt, Equity and Executive Compensation
In this section, we interpret the characteristics of the eﬃcient contract in terms of a
contract compensating the manager that consists of a base level of pay and a performance
bonus, a debt contract, and an outside equity contract.
We begin by characterizing managerial compensation under this optimal contract in
the following proposition.
Proposition 2. Under an optimal contract, the payments to the manager w(θ) have the
form w(θ) = w̄ for θ ≤ θ̄ and w(θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) for θ > θ̄, where θ̄ is the solution to

¡
¢
w̄ = τ θ̄ − θ∗ F (K).

13

Proof: The first-order conditions of (10) with respect to w(θ) are given by

1 = (λ + δ(θ)) u0 (w(θ)) .

(11)

This first order condition implies that w(θ) is constant for all values of θ such that the
constraint (9) does not bind (δ(θ) = 0). We denote this constant by w̄. Given w̄, the constraint
(9) binds for θ > θ̄ and does not bind for θ < θ̄. Clearly, w(θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) when (9)
binds. Q.E.D.
Note that for those values of θ such that the constraint (9) is slack, the first order
condition (11) implies that

λ=

1
u0 (w̄)

(12)

.

From proposition 2, we have that the payments made to the manager in the third
sub-period are given by w(θ) = w̄ in the event that θ ≤ θ̄ and w(θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) =

¡
¢
τ θ − θ̄ F (K) + w̄ in the event that θ > θ̄. We interpret the payment w̄ as the manager’s
¡
¢
base pay and the additional payment to the manager of τ θ − θ̄ F (K) in the event that

θ > θ̄ as the performance component of the manager’s pay. For the outside investors, the
value of this performance payment to the manager is given by

C=

·Z

θ̄

∞

¸
¡
¢
τ θ − θ̄ p(θ)dθ F (K).

Note that the manager places a diﬀerent value on these payments because he is risk averse.
As we discus below, this wedge between the valuation of this performance payment by the
14

outside investors and the manager plays a role in determining the firm’s optimal production
plan.
To interpret the other payments under this optimal contract in terms of debt and
equity, we must ensure that payments to outside investors after the initial investment in the
first sub-period are non-negative so that they do not violate the limited liability constraint
imposed on investors in corporations. To do so, we assume that the outside investors invest
not only the capital K, but also the uncontingent portion of the manager’s pay w̄ in the
first sub-period. We associate the payments v0 or v1 made by the manager in the second
sub-period as the payments to debt holders. We associate the residual payments to outside
investors as the payments to outside equity.
The payments made in the second sub-period are given by v1 (θ, θ) = θF (K) if θ ≤ θ∗
and v0 (θ) = θ∗ F (K) if θ > θ∗ . We interpret θ∗ F (K) as the face value of the project’s debt.
In the event that the realized value of the project exceeds the face value of the debt, the debt
is paid. In the event that the realized value of the project is less than the face value of the
debt, the project is bankrupt, monitored, and all remaining value is paid to the debt holders.
If one assumes that the debt holders bear the cost of monitoring, the market value of the
project’s debt is given by

D=

·Z

0

θ∗

∗

∗

∗

¸

θp(θ)dθ + (1 − P (θ ))θ − P (θ )γ F (K).

Note that under the assumption that the debt holders bear the cost of monitoring, the value
of D can be negative since it is net of the cost of monitoring. Alternatively, one may assume
that the outside investors jointly contribute resources γF (K) in addition to uncontingent
15

payments K and w̄ in the first sub-period. Under this alternative assumption, the market
value of the debt is given by

D=

·Z

0

θ∗

∗

∗

∗

¸

θp(θ)dθ + (1 − P (θ ))θ + (1 − P (θ ))γ F (K),

which is always positive. This alternative assumption can also rationalize commitment to
deterministic monitoring since the proceeds from monitoring are nonnegative even if θ = 0,
and are positive for θ > 0.
The residual payout from the project is associated with the payments to the outside
equity holders. In the event of bankruptcy (θ ≤ θ∗ ), the outside equity holders receive no
payment. In the event that θ > θ∗ and θ ≤ θ̄, the outside equity holders receive payment
(θ − θ∗ ) F (K), which is the realized value of the project less the payment to the debt holders.
(Recall that the base portion of the manager’s pay, w̄, was set aside in advance). In the event
¡
¡
¢¢
that θ > θ̄, the outside equity holders receive θ − θ∗ − τ θ − θ̄ F (K) which is equal to the

realized value of the project less the payments to the debt holders and the payments to the
manager on the performance portion of his compensation.

Note that in our model, the performance component of the manager’s pay resembles an
option on the value of the firm with strike price θ̄F (K), or equivalently an option on the value
¡
¢
of the equity of the firm with strike price θ̄ − θ∗ F (K). This result that the performance

component of the manager’s pay resembles an option on the firm is driven by our assumption

that the agency friction applies to the entire value of the firm – that is, by our assumption
that the manager can spend up to fraction τ of all of the undisbursed output of the firm at
the end of the second sub-period.
16

More generally, the measure of firm performance upon which the manager’s performance pay is based is determined by the extent of the agency friction. To see this, consider
a variant of our model in which firm output had two components: current cash flow θf (K)
and undepreciated capital (1 − δ)K. Assume that the manager is able to spend up to fraction
τ of undisbursed cash flow on perquisites, but that he cannot divert undepreciated capital
for his own use. In this variant of the model, the constraint (2) on payments to the manager
would be modified to read

u(x(θ̂, θ)) ≥ u(τ (θf (K) − v0 (θ̂))) for all θ̂ ∈
/ M, and
u(x(θ̂, θ)) ≥ u(τ (θf (K) − v1 (θ̂, θ))) for all θ̂ ∈ M,

and the limited liability constraint (1) would be modified to read

v0 (θ̂) ≤ θ̂f (K) + (1 − δ)K, v1 (θ̂, θ) ≤ θf (K) + (1 − δ)K, and x(θ̂, θ) ≥ 0.

It is straightforward to show that the optimal contract in this variant of the model would break
down into four payments as before, except in this case, the performance pay to the manager
would be based on cash flow θf (K) and not on the value of the firm (which includes the value
of undepreciated capital). It is also straightforward in this variant of the model to interpret
the payments v backed by undepreciated capital (1 − δ)K as payments to collateralized debt.
It is worth noting, however, that our model does not have predictions regarding the optimal
mix of collateralized and uncollateralized debt.

17

5. Capital Structure, Production and Monitoring
The standard result due to Modigliani and Miller (19??) is that in a frictionless
world, the capital structure of a firm has no impact on its eﬃcient production plan. Here we
have assumed specific frictions that determine the optimal capital structure of the firm. In
this section, we discuss the impact of these frictions of the firm’s eﬃcient production plan
as characterized in Proposition 3 below. In particular, we show that, under the optimal
production plan, there is a wedge between the expected marginal product of capital within
the firm and the opportunity cost of capital. Our main result is that the magnitude of this
wedge can be measured in terms of elements of the firm’s capital structure and its executive
compensation.
We refer to an economy in which the monitoring cost γ = 0 as a frictionless environment. In such an environment, the optimal contract specifies that the outside investors
monitor the output of the project in the second sub-period for all values of θ̂ and pay the
manager constant compensation w̄ independent of the realized value of θ. In this frictionless environment, the eﬃcient capital stock satisfies F 0 (K) = r. In contrast, with financial
frictions, there is a wedge between the marginal product of capital and its rental rate. We
characterize this wedge in proposition 3.
Proposition 3. Assume that the support of θ in unbounded above. Then, under the optimal
contract, F 0 (K) > r.
Proof: The first order-condition of (10) with respect to K is given by
·Z

¸
{θ − δ(θ)u (τ (θ − θ )F (K))τ (θ − θ )} p(θ)dθ − γP (θ ) F 0 (K) = r.
0

∗

∗

18

∗

(13)

From (11) and (12), we have that

δ(θ) =

1
1
−
.
u0 (w(θ)) u0 (w̄)

With this result and the assumption that the expectation of θ is 1, this first order condition
for capital simplifies to
½
Z
∗
1 − γP (θ ) −

θ̄

∞

·
¸
¾
u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
∗
1−
τ (θ − θ )p(θ)dθ F 0 (K) = r.
u0 (w̄)

(14)

Note w̄ is finite as long as the manager’s reservation utility is finite. Hence the assumption
that the support of θ is unbounded above implies that P (θ̄) < 1. Thus, since

0<1−

u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
< 1 ∀θ > θ̄,
u0 (w̄)

we have that

∗

1 − γP (θ ) −

Z

θ̄

∞

·
¸
u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
1−
τ (θ − θ∗ )p(θ)dθ < 1.
u0 (w̄)

Hence, F 0 (K) > r. Q.E.D.
Note that the assumption that the support of θ is unbounded above is suﬃcient to
ensure that F 0 (K) > r, but it is not necessary. What is necessary is that either P (θ∗ ) > 0 or
P (θ̄) < 1, so that either there is monitoring or there is not perfect risk sharing.
From (14), one can see that there are two parts to this wedge between F 0 (K) and r.
The first part is the expected loss due to monitoring given by γP (θ∗ ). This loss is a cost of
19

debt since the monitoring that debt requires in the event of bankruptcy results in a loss of
output. The second part of the wedge is the loss due to ineﬃcient risk-sharing between the
outside investors and the manager that arises as a result of the performance component of
the manager’s compensation. Specifically, this is the loss due to the fact that the risk averse
manager places a lower valuation on the state contingent component of his compensation
than the outside investors do, and this loss is represented by the term
Z

θ̄

∞

·
¸
u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
1−
τ (θ − θ∗ )p(θ)dθ.
0
u (w̄)

To interpret this term, observe that the outside investors value the manager’s option at
R∞
θ̄

τ (θ − θ∗ )p(θ)dθ. In contrast, the payment of τ (θ − θ∗ ) to the manager in the event that

productivity θ > θ̄ is realized raises the manager’s utility by u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)] τ (θ − θ∗ ) and
hence relaxes the promise keeping constraint by an amount that is worth only

u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
τ (θ − θ∗ )
0
u (w̄)

to the outside investors.
Log Preference Example: If we assume that u(c) = log(c), then the first order
condition for capital (14) reduces to
½
Z
∗
1 − γP (θ ) −

θ̄

∞

¾

τ (θ − θ̄)p(θ)dθ F 0 (K) = r.

(15)

Hence, in this case the wedge between the marginal product of capital and the rental rate on
capital is given by one minus the sum of the fraction of expected output (F (K)) devoted to
20

the monitoring cost and the fraction of expected output paid to the manager as the option
portion of his compensation. Thus, in this example, it is a simple matter to link our model’s
implications for the impact of financial frictions on eﬃcient production plans to observables.
We turn next to the determination of the optimal extent of monitoring. The first
order-condition of (10) with respect to θ∗ can be written as follows once we substitute for
δ(θ) as we did in the capital condition (14),

τ

Z

θ̄

∞

µ
¶
u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
1−
p(θ)dθ = γp(θ∗ )F (K).
0
u (w̄)

(16)

This condition implies that under the eﬃcient contract, θ∗ is determined by a trade-oﬀ between the marginal cost of monitoring as captured by the right hand side of the above
expression, and the marginal impact of monitoring on the cost of distorting the manager’s
consumption, as captured by the left hand side of the above expression.

6. The Dynamic Contracting Problem
We now consider the optimal contracting problem in a dynamic extension of our one
period model. In this section we show that the optimal dynamic contract is quite similar
to the optimal static contract in that it can be broken down into four payments: base pay
and performance pay for the manager, debt, and outside equity. We then show that the
manager’s pay is non-decreasing over time. In this section, we keep our problem simple by
assuming that all managers are equally productive in running the firm. In a later section, we
introduce the possibility that the incumbent manager in the firm may, at random, become
unproductive at running the firm. With this further extension of the model, we show how

21

a “golden parachute” forms part of the optimal package of executive compensation. In the
next section, we discuss several issues concerning the interpretation of an optimal contract
in this dynamic setting as a theory of the capital structure of the firm.
The extension of our one period model to a dynamic setting is as follows. Each period
consists of three sub-periods as described above. In the first sub-period, the outside investors
hire a manager to run the project and put forward capital. In the second sub-period, the
current productivity shock θ, and hence current output y = θF (K), is realized, and these
values are observed only by the manager. The manager makes some payment to the outside
investors in this second sub-period. At the end of the second sub-period, the manager has
the option of investing up to fraction τ of the remaining output of the firm into perks that he
consumes and otherwise he reinvests the remaining output of the firm at gross rate of return
one. In the third sub-period, the realized value of the shock θ becomes public information, as
well as the manager’s division of the firm’s output between perks and productive reinvestment.
The manager is paid in this third sub-period. This production process is then repeated in
subsequent periods. We interpret this cycle of information about production as corresponding
to an accounting cycle or a capital budgeting cycle within the firm.
We assume that all managers not running a project have an outside opportunity to
enjoy consumption c̄ each period. Corresponding to this consumption flow is a reservation
expected discounted utility level U0 . Individual rationality requires that new managers can
expect utility of at least U0 under a contract and that incumbent managers can expect a
utility of at least U0 in the continuation of any contract.
We present a recursive characterization of the optimal dynamic contract. Accordingly,
we assume that the incumbent manager is indexed by a utility level U promised him from this
22

period forward under the contract the previous period. This utility level is a contractual state
variable carried over from the previous period and hence is determined before the realization
of the productivity shock θ. We let V (U) denote the expected discounted value of payments
to outside investors given utility promise of U to the incumbent manager.
A dynamic contract has the following elements. Given the utility U promised to the
incumbent manager as a state variable, the contract specifies a monitoring region M(U ) with
indicator function m(θ̂; U ) indicating the monitoring decision as a function of the manager’s
report, payments from the manager to the outside investors in the second subperiod v0 (θ̂; U)
if there is no monitoring and v1 (θ̂, θ; U) if there is monitoring, and payments from the outside
investors to the manager in the third subperiod x(θ̂, θ; U). The recursive representation of
the contract also specifies continuation utilities Z(θ̂, θ; U) for the incumbent manager. In
what follows, we suppress reference to U where there is no risk of confusion.
These terms of the contract are chosen subject to the limited liability constraints (1).
Since the incumbent manager can always quit and take his outside opportunity in the next
period, we have an individual rationality constraint

Z(θ̂, θ) ≥ U0 for all θ̂, θ

(17)

We require that the contract deliver the promised utility U to the incumbent manager
Z

(18)

[u(x(θ, θ)) + βZ(θ, θ)] p(θ)dθ = U.

The incumbent manager must be induced to truthfully report θ in the second sub-period.

23

Hence we have incentive constraints, for all θ and θ̂ ∈
/ M such that θ̂ is feasible in that
θ ≥ v0 (θ̂)/F (K),

u(x(θ, θ)) + βZ(θ, θ) ≥ u(x(θ̂, θ)) + βZ(θ̂, θ).

(19)

Finally, there is a dynamic analog to the constraint (2) arising from the assumption that the
manager can spend fraction τ of whatever resources are left in the project at the end of the
second sub-period on perks that he enjoys. This constraint is given by

u(x(θ̂, θ)) + βZ(θ̂, θ) ≥ u(τ (θF (K) − v1 (θ̂, θ))) + βU0 if θ̂ ∈ M

(20)

/M
u(x(θ̂, θ)) + βZ(θ̂, θ) ≥ u(τ (θF (K) − v0 (θ̂))) + βU0 if θ̂ ∈

for all θ and for all θ̂ ∈
/ M such that v0 (θ̂) ≤ θF (K). Here we have used the requirement that
the manager’s continuation utility cannot be driven down below U0 in the left-hand side of
(20) to compute the manager’s utility in the event that he invests in perks and then is fired
as a consequence.
The terms of the dynamic contract are chosen to maximize the expected discounted
payments to the outside investors. This problem is to choose K, m(θ̂), v0 (θ̂), v1 (θ̂, θ), x(θ̂, θ),
and Z(θ̂, θ) to maximize
¾
Z ½
1
V (U) = max
(θ − γm(θ))F (K) − x(θ, θ) + V (Z (θ, θ)) p(θ)dθ − rK
R
subject to the constraints (1), (17), (18), (19), and (20).

24

(21)

In the remainder of this section, we characterize elements of an eﬃcient dynamic
contract. In proposition 4, we show that the optimal dynamic contract is similar to the
optimal static contract in that the monitoring set is an interval from 0 to θ∗ , and payments
in the second sub-period are given by v1 (θ̂, θ) = θF (K) if there is monitoring and v0 (θ̂) =
n
o
θ∗ F (K) where θ∗ ≡ inf θ̂|θ̂ ∈
/ M if there is no monitoring. The line of argument here is

similar to that in proposition 1.

In proposition 5, we discuss the manager’s pay and retention. We show that the manager’s pay consists again of a constant base pay level denoted w̄ and then an increasing portion
of pay if a suﬃciently high realization of θ occurs. The line of argument on compensation is
similar to that for Proposition 2. We also show that, under the optimal dynamic contract, if
β ≥ 1/R, then the pay to the incumbent manager is non-decreasing over time.
Proposition 4. There is an eﬃcient contract with the following properties: (i) v1 (θ̂, θ) =
n
o
θF (K) for all θ̂ ∈ M and v0 (θ̂) = θ∗ F (K), where θ∗ ≡ inf θ̂|θ̂ ∈
/ M , (ii) M is an interval

ranging from 0 to θ∗ , and (iii) x(θ̂, θ) = 0 and Z(θ̂, θ) = U0 for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ ∈ M and

x(θ̂, θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) and Z(θ̂, θ) = U0 for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ ∈
/ M.
Proof: The proof here is quite similar to the proof of proposition 1. For all θ̂ ∈ M, setting
v1 (θ̂, θ) = θF (K) relaxes the constraint (20) as much as possible and has no eﬀect on the
n
o
objective (21) nor on any other constraint. Again define v0∗ = inf v0 (θ̂)|θ̂ ∈
/ M and θ∗ =
inf {θ|θ ∈
/ M} . Observe that to relax the constraint (19) as much as possible, the manager’s

utility following a misreporting of θ̂ 6= θ should be set as low as possible. Given (1), (17),

25

and (20), this gives x(θ̂, θ) = 0, Z(θ̂, θ) = U0 for θ̂ 6= θ and θ̂ ∈ M, and

u(x(θ̂, θ)) + βZ(θ̂, θ) = u(τ (θF (K) − v0∗ )) + βU0

(22)

for θ̂ ∈
/ M, and θ ≥ v0∗ /F (K). Again, holding fixed the monitoring set, setting v0∗ as high as is
feasible relaxes this constraint as much as possible. Since feasibility requires that θ∗ F (K) ≥
v0∗ , this gives us that under an optimal contract, v0∗ = θ∗ F (K). That M is an interval follows
from the argument that including some θ > θ∗ in the monitoring set does nothing to relax
(22) and does require resources for monitoring. That x(θ̂, θ) = τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K) for θ̂ 6= θ,
θ̂ ∈
/ M follows from the result that v0∗ = θ∗ F (K). Q.E.D.
With this proposition, we can write our optimal contracting problem more simply as
one of choosing capital K, the upper support of the monitoring set θ∗ , current managerial
pay w(θ) = x(θ, θ), and continuation values W (θ) = Z(θ, θ) to maximize the payoﬀ to the
outside investors
¾
Z ½
1
θF (K) − w(θ) + V (W (θ)) p(θ)dθ − γP (θ∗ ) − rK
V (U) = max
R

(23)

subject to the promise-keeping constraint
Z

(24)

[u(w(θ)) + βW (θ)] p(θ)dθ = U

the dynamic no-perks constraint

u (w(θ)) + βW (θ) ≥ u (τ (θ − θ∗ ) F (K)) + βU0 ,
26

(25)

As in the static case, we can derive several results regarding the characteristics of
managerial compensation from the first order conditions of this problem. These characteristic
include that managerial pay consists of base pay plus a performance based component and
that pay for the incumbent manager is non-decreasing over time.
Proposition 5. There is an optimal contract under which there is a cutoﬀ θ̄ together with
a level of base pay w̄ for the manager such that w(θ) = w̄ and the continuation values W (θ)
are also constant at W̄ for θ ≤ θ̄. Both w(θ) and W (θ) are increasing for θ > θ̄. If βR ≥ 1,
then managerial pay w(θ)F (K) is non-decreasing over time.
Proof: The proof is quite similar to that of proposition 2 and follows from the first order
conditions of the optimal contracting problem. Let λ be the Lagrangian multiplier on the
constraint (18) and ρδ(θ)p(θ) the Lagrangian multipliers on the constraints (25). The first
order conditions of this problem with respect to w(θ) and W (θ) are

1 = (λ + δ(θ)) u0 (w(θ)),

and

1
− V 0 (W (θ)) = β(λ + δ(θ)).
R

These first order condition imply that w(θ) and W (θ) are constant unless the constraint (25)
binds. Note that since u (τ (θ − θ∗ ) F (K)) + βU0 is increasing in θ, there is a cutoﬀ θ̄ such
that this constraint does not bind for θ ≤ θ̄ and binds for θ > θ̄. When the constraint (25)

27

binds, the optimal choices of w(θ) and W (θ) satisfy

1=−

1 0
V (W (θ))u0 (w(θ))
βR

and (25) as an equality. Hence, w(θ) and W (θ) are both increasing in θ when this constraint
binds. To prove that if βR = 1, then w(θ) is non-decreasing over time, we use the envelope
condition −V 0 (U ) = λ.Plugging this into the first order conditions for w(θ) and W (θ) and
using βR = 1 gives

u0 (w(θ))/u0 (w̄0 ) = βR ≥ 1

where w̄0 and F (K 0 ) are next period’s values of these variables. Hence w̄0 ≥ w(θ), which gives
our result.
Note that this proposition implies that performance bonuses paid in one period are
incorporated into the manager’s base pay in future periods.
Remark 1. Because there is complete resolution of uncertainty at the end of each period, it is
straightforward to extend the model to allow for persistence in the idiosyncratic productivity
shock.
To be concrete, assume that the production shock follows a Markov process, and
therefore the c.d.f. P (θ; θ−1 ) and p.d.f. p(θ; θ−1 ) are conditional on the prior periods shock
θ−1 . This time dependence in the shock would mean that the return to the outside investors
and the elements of the eﬃcient contract would be functions of both the ex-ante promised
utility U and the prior period’s shock θ−1 .
28

7. Capital structure in the dynamic model
In this section, we discuss two issues that arise in interpreting an eﬃcient contract
in our model as a theory of the capital structure of the firm and the compensation of the
firm’s manager. The first of these issues concerns our model’s implications for the optimal
debt-equity ratio of the firm. We show here that while our model does have implications for
the payments to debt and equity holders, it does not pin down the debt-equity ratio of the
firm. The second of these issues concerns the interpretation of the monitoring of the firm by
outside investors as bankruptcy.
Our dynamic model delivers a theory of the division of the gross payments out of
an ongoing firm between holders of the firm’s debt, outside equity, and the firm’s manager.
This division of gross payments is not suﬃcient, however, to pin down the relative value of
the firm’s debt and equity. This is because our model does not pin down whether it is the
debt holders or the outside equity holders who pay for the investments K in future periods.
This issue is not new to our model and can arise in any financial contract in which there are
multiple flows out of the firm.
We illustrate this problem with the following simple example. Imagine that an entrepreneur has created a project that can be operated for 2 periods in which an investment of 1
at the beginning of each period produces an output of 2 at the end of each period. Assume
that this entrepreneur sells this project to outside investors after having made the initial investment at the beginning of period 1 and that there is no discounting, so that the total value
of this project is equal to 3 units of output (2 units of output in period 1 plus two more units
in period 2 less 1 unit of investment in period 2). Hence, it is clear in a competitive capital
market, the outside investors must pay the entrepreneur 3 units of output at the beginning
29

of period 1 to purchase this project. What is to be determined is the division of this value
between outside investors who hold debt and outside investors who hold equity. Imagine
further that a theory such has ours has yielded the implication that, each period, the gross
output of 2 is divided equally between debt and equity holders, so 1 unit is paid to the debt
holders and 1 unit is paid to the equity holders. As the following examples make clear, the
division of the value of this firm between debt and equity is not pinned down under these
assumptions, despite the fact that the division of the gross payments to the outside investors
is pinned down.
To see this, assume first that the firm is financed with a combination of short-term
debt and equity. In particular, assume that short-term debt holders lend one unit at the
beginning of each period and are repaid that one unit at the end of each period. In period 1,
the equity holders pay 2 units to the entrepreneur to purchase the project and the remainder
of the purchase is financed with the first issuance of 1 unit of short-term debt. The equity
holders in this case receive a dividend of one unit each period in exchange for their investment
while the investment of 1 unit required at the beginning of the second period is financed by
a second issuance of short-term debt at the beginning of period 2. Under these assumptions,
in the first period, after the initial investment of 1 unit has been made, the value of the debt
is 1 unit and the value of the equity is 2 units.
Next assume that the investment of one unit in the firm at the beginning of the second
period is financed by the outside equity holders (through retained earnings) while the debt
is long-term debt. In this case, to purchase this project, one group of outside investors puts
forward 2 units of output in exchange for a long-term debt claim that pays 1 unit at the
end of each of the two periods while another group of outside investors puts forward 1 unit
30

of output in exchange for an equity stake that pays no dividend in the first period and a
dividend of 1 unit at the end of the second period. The three units of output raised in this
way are used to purchase the project from the entrepreneur. Under this financing scheme,
the firm’s debt is worth 2 units and the firm’s equity is worth 1 unit.
As this simple example makes clear, under diﬀerent assumptions about the division of
responsibility for ongoing investments in the firm, one obtains diﬀerent implications for the
debt-equity ratio of the firm. We conjecture that this issue will arise in any well-specified
“trade-oﬀ” theory of optimal capital structure.
In interpreting our eﬃcient contract as a theory of capital structure, we associate
monitoring with bankruptcy. Monitoring in our model occurs whenever the current gross
output of the firm fall below a threshold θ∗ F (K) determined by the optimal contract. In our
one-period version of the model, in the event that θ ≤ θ∗ , monitoring occurred, all of the
remaining value of the firm was paid to debt-holders and the outside equity holders received
nothing. In this sense, in the one-period model, monitoring corresponds to a stylized notion
of bankruptcy. In a multi-period version of our model, the division of the value of the firm
between debt and equity holders in the event of monitoring is not so stark. In the event that
θ ≤ θ∗ , monitoring occurs, but the firm still has a value to the outside investors as an ongoing
concern (denoted by the continuation value V (W (θ))). In the event that this continuation
value exceeds the face value of the debt, then the equity holders emerge from this episode
of bankruptcy with shares that still have positive value. In this sense, monitoring in the
dynamic model does not necessarily correspond to the liquidation of the firm. Of course, the
same is true of bankruptcy in the data.

31

8. Retention and Golden Parachutes
We now extend our dynamic model to include a decision whether to retain the manager. This decision is contingent on the realization of an observable shock that aﬀects the
productivity of the incumbent manager in running the firm. Outside investors have an incentive to retain incumbent managers with high productivity and replace those with low
productivity. We show that a golden parachute type payment to an incumbent manager who
becomes unproductive and is fired is part of the optimal compensation scheme.
To extend the model, we assume that each period, the incumbent manager who has
been running the project experiences a shock η ∈ {0, 1} at the beginning of the period to
his productivity with this project, so that the project’s output is given by ηθF (K). This
shock η is observable to all parties. This shock follows a Markov process in which η = 0 is
an absorbing state and the probability that η = 1 in the current period given that η = 1
in the previous period is given by ρ. As we show below, along the equilibrium path, the
outside investors choose to continue with the incumbent manager if η = 1 and they hire a
new manager if η = 0. Hence, in what follows we suppress reference to η where there is no
risk of confusion.
With this alteration to our model, we need to include additional terms in the contract
between the outside investors and the manager. In particular, we need to include a payment
from the outside investors make to the incumbent manager in the event that he is not retained
as well as notation for the cost to the outside investors of hiring a new manager. Let Ṽ (wF )
denote the indirect lifetime utility of the incumbent manager in the event that he is not
retained and paid wF . We assume that Ṽ (0) ≤ U0 , that is that an incumbent manager
who has been fired with no severance pay gets no more than the reservation utility of an
32

unemployed manager.
Since our results characterizing an eﬃcient contract in proposition 4 carry over here,
we can express the problem of choosing the optimal contract as one of choosing contract
terms w(θ), θ∗ , K, W (θ) ≥ U0 together with the payment that a manager receives if he is
not retained wF so as to maximize the objective

V (U) = max

wF ,U R

¡
¢
V0 − wF (1 − ρ) + ρV R (U R )

subject to the promise-keeping constraint

ρU R + (1 − ρ)Ṽ (wF ) = U.

(26)

Here V R is notation for the value of retaining the incumbent manager when that manager
receives continuation utility U R conditional on being retained. The function V R (U R ) is
defined by
¾
Z ½
1
V (U ) =
max
θF (K) − w(θ) + V (W (θ)) p(θ)dθ −γF (K)P (θ∗ )−rK (27)
w(·),W (·),θ∗ ,K
R
R

R

subject to
Z

[u(w(θ)) + βW (θ)] p(θ)dθ = U R

(28)

33

and the dynamic no-perks constraint

u (w(θ)) + βW (θ) ≥ u (τ (θ − θ∗ ) F (K)) + βU0 .

(29)

The term V0 denotes the value to the outside investors of hiring a new manager (with η = 1
and U = U0 ) and is defined as the solution to the problem of choosing w0 (θ), θ0∗ , K0 , W0 (θ) ≥
U0 to maximize
¾
Z ½
1
θF (K0 ) − w0 (θ) + V (W0 (θ)) p(θ)dθ − γF (K0 )P (θ0∗ ) − rK0
V0 =
R

(30)

subject to
Z

(31)

[u(w0 (θ)) + βW0 (θ)] p(θ)dθ = U0

and the constraint (29).
In the next proposition, we establish the optimality of a golden parachute payment to
incumbent managers who have become unproductive.
Proposition 6. In the event that η = 0, then the manager’s pay satisfies Ṽ 0 (w0 ) = u0 (w̄).
Proof: Let λ be the Lagrangian multiplier on the constraint (26). From the first
order conditions for wF and U R we have

1 = −V R0 (U R )Ṽ 0 (wF ).

34

The envelope condition from the problem defining V R (U R ) we get that V R0 (U R ) = −1/u0 (w̄),
hence

u0 (w̄) = Ṽ 0 (wF ),

where w̄ is the base pay to the manager if he is retained.
This proposition implies that the optimal golden parachute payment to an incumbent
manager who has been unproductive should be large enough to allow him to maintain the
living standard that was guaranteed in his base pay. The optimal size of this golden parachute
payment will be larger, then, the more limited the outside options of the manager in the event
that he is not retained.

9. Comparative Statics
We now consider how the terms of the optimal contract for financing the firm depend
on the parameters τ, U0 , and γ governing the severity of the agency problem and the costs
of monitoring the output of the firm. We focus on the one-period contracting problem. In
general, these comparative statics depend on the parameters of the manger’s utility, the
distribution of shocks θ, and the production function F. We present analytic results here
under the assumption that the manager’s utility is CRRA, the distribution of shocks θ is
uniform, and the optimal choice of capital K is fixed. With K fixed, the contract terms that
vary are base pay w̄, the set of states θ < θ∗ for which monitoring occurs, and the set of states

35

θ > θ̄ for which the manager receives a performance bonus. These contract terms maximize

max F (K)

w̄,θ̄,θ∗

Z

∞

0

θp(θ)dθ − w̄P (θ̄) − τ F (K)

Z

θ̄

∞

(θ − θ∗ )p(θ)dθ − γP (θ∗ )F (K) − rK (32)

subject to the constraints that

u(w̄)P (θ̄) +

Z

θ̄

∞

u(τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K))p(θ)dθ = U0

(33)

and

w̄ = τ (θ̄ − θ∗ )F (K)

(34)

Proposition 7. Assume that u(c) = (c1−φ − 1)/(1 − φ), θ is uniformly distributed, and
F (K) = min {K, 1} . If w̄ and θ∗ are an interior solution of the problem (32) and the optimal
choice of K is fixed at 1, then
1. monitoring θ∗ and the bonus cutoﬀ θ̄ are increasing in the perks parameter τ. The eﬀect
on base pay w̄ is ambiguous.
2. base pay w̄ is increasing and monitoring θ∗ and the bonus cutoﬀ θ̄ are decreasing in the
reservation utility U0
3. base pay w̄ is increasing and monitoring θ∗ and the bonus cutoﬀ θ̄ are increasing in the
monitoring cost γ

Proof: We proof this proposition by diﬀerentiating the first order conditions determining the optimal choice of contract terms. We use (34) to substitute out for w̄ in (32) and
36

derive the following first-order conditions determining the optimal choice of θ∗ and θ̄
Z

µ
¶
u0 [τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K)]
γ ∗
p(θ )F (K).
1− 0
p(θ)dθ
=
τ
u [τ (θ̄ − θ∗ )F (K)]

∞

θ̄

∗

u(τ (θ̄ − θ )F (K))P (θ̄) +

Z

∞

θ̄

u(τ (θ − θ∗ )F (K))p(θ)dθ = u(c0 )

where c̄ is defined to solve u(c0 ) = U0 . Using the homogeneity of the CRRA utility function,
these equations simplify to
Z

¶
µ
γ ∗
u0 (θ − θ∗ )
p(θ)dθ
−
1− 0
p(θ )F (K) = 0
τ
u (θ̄ − θ∗ )

∞

θ̄

∗

u(θ̄ − θ )P (θ̄) +

Z

∞

θ̄

(35)

¶
c0
.
u(θ − θ )p(θ)dθ = u
τ F (K)
µ

∗

(36)

Diﬀerentiating these equations with respect to θ̄, θ∗ and the parameters τ, c0 , and γ gives
·

¸
Z
u00 (θ̄ − θ∗ ) ∞ u0 (θ − θ∗ )
p(θ)dθ dθ̄+
u0 (θ̄ − θ∗ ) θ̄ u0 (θ̄ − θ∗ )
¸
·Z ∞ 00
u (θ − θ∗ ) u00 (θ̄ − θ∗ ) u0 (θ − θ∗ )
γ 0 ∗
− 0
p(θ)dθ − p (θ )F (K) dθ∗
0
∗
∗
0
∗
τ
u (θ̄ − θ )
u (θ̄ − θ ) u (θ̄ − θ )
θ̄
=

(37)

1 ∗
γ
p(θ )F (K)dγ − 2 p(θ∗ )F (K)dτ
τ
τ

·
Z
0
∗
u (θ̄ − θ )P (θ̄)dθ̄ − u (θ̄ − θ )P (θ̄) +
0

∗

0

=u

µ

c0
τ F (K)

¶·

∞

θ̄

1
c0
dc0 − 2
dτ
τ F (K)
τ F (K)

37

∗

¸

u (θ − θ )p(θ)dθ dθ∗

¸

0

(38)

First observe that with θ uniform p0 (θ∗ ) = 0 and with CRRA preferences, u00 (θ − θ∗ ) is
increasing in θ. Hence the term multiplying dθ∗ in (37)
Z

θ̄

∞

u00 (θ − θ∗ ) u00 (θ̄ − θ∗ ) u0 (θ − θ∗ )
γ
− 0
p(θ)dθ − p0 (θ∗ )F (K) > 0
0
∗
∗
0
∗
τ
u (θ̄ − θ )
u (θ̄ − θ ) u (θ̄ − θ )

and with K and parameters τ and γ fixed, (35) defines implicitly a function θ1∗ (θ̄) with slope
everywhere strictly greater than 1. Likewise, with K and parameters τ and γ fixed, (36)
defines implicitly a function θ2∗ (θ̄) with positive slope everywhere strictly less than 1. Since
any interior solution of (35) and (36) is found at an intersection of θ1∗ (θ̄) and θ2∗ (θ̄), any such
solution is unique.
We now solve for the comparative statics by analyzing how shifts in the parameters
τ, γ, and c0 shift the implicit functions θ1∗ (θ̄) and θ2∗ (θ̄). Observe that because the slope of
θ1∗ (θ̄) is everywhere greater than the slope of θ2∗ (θ̄) which in turn is greater than zero, a shift in
parameters that raises the function θ1∗ (θ̄) and leaves θ2∗ (θ̄) unchanged lowers the equilibrium
θ∗ and θ̄. Moreover, the equilibrium θ̄ falls by more than the equilibrium θ∗ . Likewise, a shift
in parameters that raises θ2∗ (θ̄) and leaves θ1∗ (θ̄) unchanged raises the equilibrium θ∗ and θ̄
and the increase in θ∗ is larger than the increase in θ̄.
The comparative statics are the derived as follows. From (37) we see that an increase
in τ lowers θ1∗ (θ̄), while from (38) we that that an increase in τ raises θ2∗ (θ̄). The fall in θ1∗ (θ̄)
by itself raises θ∗ and θ̄, with the implied increase in θ̄ larger than the increase in θ∗ . The
increase in θ2∗ (θ̄) by itself also raises θ∗ and θ̄, but now the implied increase in θ∗ is larger
than the implied increase in θ̄. Hence we get that an increase in τ increases both θ̄ and θ∗ ,
with the net eﬀect on base pay w̄ = τ (θ̄ − θ∗ ) depending on parameters.
38

An increase in the manager’s reservation utility U0 , or equivalently an increase in c0 ,
only aﬀects (36) and hence θ2∗ (θ̄). From (38), we see that an increase in c0 lowers θ2∗ (θ̄), leading
to a fall in θ∗ and θ̄, with the fall in θ̄ being smaller than the fall in θ∗ . Hence, base pay w̄
rises.
An increase in the monitoring cost γ only aﬀects (35) and hence θ1∗ (θ̄). From (37) we
see that an increase in γ lowers θ1∗ (θ̄) and hence raises θ∗ and θ̄, with the increase in θ̄ being
larger than the increase in θ∗ . Hence base pay w̄ rises. Q.E.D.
In this proposition, we have assumed that the optimal choice of capital is fixed. In
general, we cannot obtain analytic comparative statics when capital is variable because the
relationship between changes in θ∗ , θ̄, and K depends on parameters. This is easiest to
see if we assume that preferences are logarithmic, so the first order condition determining
the optimal capital stock K reduces to (15). Each of the comparative static exercises we
considered above resulted in either an increase in both θ∗ and θ̄ or a decrease in both θ∗ and
θ̄. From (15), however, we see that the impact on the optimal choice of K from an increase in
both θ∗ and θ̄ is ambiguous – increasing θ∗ increases the probability of costly monitoring and
hence reduces the optimal choice of K while increasing θ̄ improves risk sharing between the
manager and the outside investors and hence increases the optimal choice of K. If we assumed
that the manager was risk neutral, so that there was no problem of risk sharing between the
outside investors and the manager, it would be easy to show that if the manager’s reservation
utility c0 were high enough so that

c0 > τ

Z

∞

θp(θ)dθF (K ∗ )

0

39

where K ∗ is defined by F 0 (K ∗ ) = r, then the optimal contract is fully eﬃcient with no
monitoring and the terms of the contract do not change with marginal changes in τ, γ, and
c0 . In contrast, when

c0 > τ

Z

∞

θp(θ)dθF (K ∗ ),

0

the optimal choice for base pay w̄ is zero, so that θ̄ = θ∗ , and the optimal choices of θ∗ and
K solve the first order conditions

τ F (K)

Z

∞

θ∗

(θ − θ∗ ) p(θ)dθ = c0

[1 − γP (θ∗ )] F 0 (K) = r.
Under this assumption of risk neutrality, an increase in τ results in an increase in θ∗ and a
decrease in K, an increase in c0 results in a decrease in θ∗ and an increase in K, while an
increase in γ leads to a decrease in θ∗ and a decrease in K.

40

References
[1] Aghion, P. and P. Bolton, 1992. An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contracting, Review of Economic Studies, 59(3): 473-94.
[2] Albuquerque, R. and Hopenhayn, H. “Optimal Lending Contracts and Firm Dynamics”,
with Hugo Hopenhayn, September 2002. Forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.
[3] Alvarez, F. and U. Jermann, 2000. Eﬃciency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk
of Default, Econometrica, 68(4): 775-97.
[4] Aiyagari, S. Rao, and Fernando Alvarez. “Stationary Eﬃcient Distributions With Private
Information and Monitoring: A Tale of Kings and Slaves.” Manuscript, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, 1995.
[5] Atkeson, A., “International Lending with Moral Hazard and Risk of Repudiation,” Econometrica, 79:14-31, 1991.
[6] Clementi, G.L. and Hopenhayn, H., “A Theory of Financing Constraints and Firm Dynamics,” RCER working paper #492, June 2002.
[7] Cooley, T., R. Marimon and V. Quadrini, “Aggregate Consequences of Limited Contract
Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4): 817-847.
[8] DeMarzo, P. and Fishman, M., “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting with Privately
Observed Cash Flows,” Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 2003.
[9] Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole. 1994. A Theory of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securities
and Manager-Shareholder Congruence, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4): 1027-54.
41

[10] Green, E. “Lending and the Smoothing of Uninsurable Income.” In Edward C. Prescott
and Neil Wallace, eds., Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, pp. 3—25.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.
[11] Hart, O. and J. Moore. 1995. Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard
Claims in Constraining Management, American Economic Review, 85(3): 567-85.
[12] Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1998. Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 1-41.
[13] Jensen, M. 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,
American Economic Review, 76(2): 323-29.
[14] Kehoe, T. and D. Levine, 1993. Debt-Constrained Asset Markets, Review of Economic
Studies, 60(4): 865-88.
[15] Quadrini, V., “Investment and Default in Optimal Financial Contracts with Repeated
Moral Hazard,” Stern School of Business, New York University, 2000.
[16] Townsend, R. 1979. Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification, Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2): 265-93.
[17] Wang, C. , 2004. Dynamic Costly State Verification, research memo.
[18] Zweibel, J. 1996. Dynamic Capital Structure under Managerial Entrenchment, American
Economic Review, 86 (5), 1197-1215.

42

