                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FEDERAL OVERSIGHT, LOCAL CONTROL,
                          AND THE SPECTER OF “RESEGREGATION”
                                 IN SOUTHERN SCHOOLS

                                           Charles T. Clotfelter
                                             Helen F. Ladd
                                            Jacob L. Vigdor

                                          Working Paper 11086
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11086


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Federal Oversight, Local Control, and the Specter of “Resegregation” in Southern Schools
Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 11086
January 2005
JEL No. I28

                                            ABSTRACT

Analyzing data for the 100 largest school districts in the South and Border states, we ask whether

there is evidence of "resegregation" of school districts and whether levels of segregation can be

linked to judicial decisions. We distinguish segregation measures indicating the extent of racial

isolation from those indicating the degree of racial imbalance across schools. For the period 1994

to 2004 the trend in only one measure of racial isolation is consistent with the hypothesis that

districts in these regions are resegregating. Yet the increase in this measure appears to be driven by

the general increase in the nonwhite percentage in the student population rather than policy-

determined increases in racial imbalance. Racial imbalance itself shows no trend over this period.

Racial imbalance is nevertheless associated with judicial declarations of unitary status, suggesting

that segregation in schools might have declined had it not been for the actions of federal courts. This

estimated relationship is subject to a lag, which is in keeping with the tendency for courts to grant

unitary status only if districts agree to limit their own freedom to reassign students.

Charles T. Clotfelter                                  Jacob L. Vigdor
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Duke University                                        Duke University
Box 90245                                              Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708                                       Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                               jacob.vigdor@duke.edu
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu

Helen F. Ladd
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
hladd@pps.duke.edu
1/20/05

Federal Oversight, Local Control, and the Specter of “Resegregation” in Southern Schools1

                    Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor




I. Introduction

       The historic movement toward racially integrated schools, initiated by Brown v. Board of

Education and advanced by subsequent Supreme Court decisions, was marked by a dramatic

decline in the number of students attending “racially identifiable” schools. In the South, the

percentage of black students enrolled in schools with 90-100% nonwhite enrollments fell from

100% in 1954 to 78% in 1968 and to 25% by 1972. Consistent with this decline, the comparable

percentage for the country as a whole fell from 64% in 1968 to less than 34% in both 1980 and

1989 (Clotfelter 2004, p.56).

       Since 1990, however, this measure of racial isolation has begun to creep up again. It rose

to 37.4% for the nation by the fall of 2000 and between 1991 and 2000 it increased in every

region of the country (Clotfelter 2004, p. 56). These developments have raised alarms about the

“resegregation” of schools. Observers have expressed special concern about the South, where

Jim Crow apartheid gave way to sweeping change in the late 1960s, transforming schools in that

region from the most segregated to the least segregated in the country.

       A prominently cited culprit behind this apparent turnaround is the federal judiciary.



       1
         We are grateful to John Charles Boger and Jeffrey Kling for comments on an earlier
version of this paper and to Roger Aliaga Diaz, Janeil Belle, Demarron Berkley, Megan
Fotheringham, Felicity Kolp, Robert Malme, and Dallas Stallings for research assistance.

                                                 1
According to Orfield and Eaton (1996, p. 1), the key to understanding the reversal in trends after

1990 is a pair of Supreme Court decisions in 1991 and 1992. The 1991 decision, Board of

Education of Oklahoma v. Dowell, allowed districts to be released from judicial control once

they had been declared “unitary” and thus to be free to assign students to schools, if they wished,

by neighborhood of residence. Owing to the pervasive racial segregation in existing housing

patterns, the use of such neighborhood-based attendance zones quite naturally tends to produce

de facto segregation in schools. In the second decision, Freeman v. Pitts (1990), the Court

effectively eased the requirements necessary for a district to be declared unitary.2 Orfield and

Eaton (1996, p. 1) state:

       these historic High Court decisions were a triumph for the decades-long
       powerful, politicized attacks on school desegregation. The new policies
       reflected the victory of the conservative movement that altered the federal courts
       and turned the nation from the dream of Brown toward accepting a return
       to segregation.

The NAACP Legal Defense Fund’s 2000 annual report concurs: “When there are findings of

unitary status, as in Oklahoma City and Norfolk, resegregation has become the rule” (NAACP

2000, p. 8).

       Whatever its causes, not everyone agrees that resegregation is in fact occurring. Logan

(2004) argues that increases in measures of racial isolation are merely a reflection of the

country’s changing racial composition and that schools are no more segregated today than they

were before these court decisions were handed down. Using data on public schools from across



       2
        Rather than having to eliminate simultaneously all vestiges of past discrimination, as
enumerated by Green v. New Kent County (1968) in order to achieve unitary status, the Court
ruled that these factors only needed to be addressed successfully sometime.

                                                 2
the country, he documents the general increase in the proportion of nonwhite students between

1990 and 2000. He shows that the proportion of all students attending predominantly white

schools declined, for example, while the percentage attending schools 90% or more nonwhite

increased (Logan 2004, p. 9). According to Logan, it is the increase in the nonwhite share and

the consequent increase in predominantly nonwhite schools that raises measures of racial

isolation such as the percentage of black students attending 90-100% nonwhite schools.

       Our aims in this paper are two-fold. One goal is to examine the extent to which

“resegregation” has occurred during the past 10 years, with particular reference to the 100 largest

districts in Southern and near-Southern (or “Border”) states. We focus on districts in these states

because, given their policy of official segregation before 1954, they have been a focal point for

the widely-expressed concern about resegregation.3 The second goal is to determine what role

the courts have played in whatever resegregation has occurred, with particular attention to

judicial declarations of unitary status and the rulings in the Fourth Circuit.

       To preview our conclusions, we find first that whether and to what extent segregation

appears to be reemerging differs according to the construct used to measure segregation. If we

define segregation as racial isolation, we find some evidence of increasing segregation across

schools within districts during the 1993-2003 period, but only when we use the specific measure

cited at the beginning of the paper, the percentage of black students attending schools 90-100%



       3
         Following Orfield and Monfort (1992, p. 2), these regions are defined as follows:
Border: Delaware, District of Columbia, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Oklahoma, West
Virginia; South: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia. In fact, public schools had been segregated by law
not only in the eleven states of the former Confederacy, the six Border states, and the District of
Columbia, but also in parts of Kansas, Arizona, and New Mexico (Clotfelter 2004, p. 18)

                                                  3
nonwhite. If we define segregation not as racial isolation, but rather as racial imbalance within

districts, we find, somewhat to our surprise, no evidence of resegregation. Nor, however, do we

find any evidence that segregation is declining. Thus, within districts, the trends in school

segregation contrast markedly with the trends for the same period in residential segregation

(measured at the metropolitan level), which decreased quite substantially in some Southern

metropolitan areas (Glaeser and Vigdor, 2003). The decline in residential segregation creates the

possibility that, even in the absence of rising school segregation, were it not for judicial rulings of

unitary status, racial segregation across schools might have declined.

        Second, we find some suggestive links between the decisions of federal courts and school

segregation as reflected in two measures of racial imbalance, but these findings are by no means

definitive proof that court decisions have opened the door to resegregation. We find higher

levels of racial imbalance among districts that were declared unitary before 1993 than among

those which have never been so declared. We also find an increase over time in racial imbalance

among districts in the Fourth Circuit, which finding could be the result of decisions unique to

that circuit. With the exception of one specification, we find no association between judicial

rulings or jurisdictions and a measure of racial isolation, probably because that measure is so

strongly influenced by demographic changes. Since those demographic changes are outside the

control of district policymakers, it is difficult to isolate the effects of judicial action on the school

assignment decisions over which they do have control.

        Section II of the paper discusses various measures of segregation and section III

documents changes over the 10-year period for our sample of 100 large districts. Section IV

provides an overview of legal issues related to school desegregation cases, with emphasis on the


                                                    4
role of declarations of unitary status and decisions in the Fourth Circuit. That historical overview

serves as background to the empirical investigation of their effects on segregation in section V.

The paper ends with a brief concluding section.



II. Recognizing “Resegregation”

        The “segregation” referred to in the Brown decision was a system of laws whereby

students of different races were assigned to separate schools with separate faculties.4 In

contemporary discussions in the school context, the term segregation has become an attribute of

enrollment patterns by race – typically across schools within a district – and is typically measured

in quantitative terms so that one pattern can be judged more segregated than another.

Contemporary measures of segregation can be grouped into two main categories: measures of

racial isolation and measures of racial imbalance.



Racial Isolation

       The measure used at the beginning of this paper, the percentage of black students in

schools that are 90-100% nonwhite, is one widely used measure of racial isolation. By

summarizing the extent to which black students are in schools primarily with other minority

students, it indicates the degree to which black students are isolated from (non-Hispanic) white

students. Its focus on the nature of schools attended by black students reflects the historical fact



       4
          The preponderant importance of de jure segregation at the time of Brown is also
illustrated by the emphasis placed on state support of segregation in a statement by prominent
social scientists that was submitted as part of an amicus brief to the Court in 1953 (“The Effects
of Segregation...” 1953).

                                                  5
that blacks were both the principal minority group in the South and the group whose history of

subjugation and discrimination made its legal status central to the Brown case.

       In recent years, owing to the growth in Hispanic and other nonwhite enrollments, the

percentage of nonwhite students who are black has fallen in many districts. Thus it is useful to

distinguish this first measure from a closely related measure of racial isolation that also focuses

on the schools attended by black students: the percentage of black students in schools that are 90-

100 percent black. In contrast to the prior measure, this one measures the extent to which black

students are concentrated in schools with students like themselves. In the absence of Hispanic or

other non-black minority students, the two measures would of course be identical. In districts

with a growing number of Hispanic students, however, trends in the two measures could well

diverge.

       A somewhat different measure of racial isolation, defined once again from the perspective

of black students, is the rate at which they attend school with other black students. Also referred

to as the exposure rate of black students to black students, this rate is:

       Ebb = [ Bj bj ] /      Bj,

where Bj is the number of black students in school j and bj is the school’s percentage of black

students. Equivalent to the proportion black in the typical black student’s school, this exposure

rate is one way of indicating how isolated black students are from students of other races.

       Importantly, measures of racial isolation are not independent of a district’s overall racial

composition. In general the higher is the proportion of black or of nonwhite students, depending

on the measure used, the higher will be one of these measures of isolation. Stated differently,

measures of racial isolation incorporate into a single measure any imbalance in the racial mix of


                                                   6
students across schools as well as the overall racial composition of the district. As a descriptive

device, measuring segregation by means of an index of racial isolation is undoubtedly useful.

From the perspective of district policy makers, however, who are likely to have far greater

control over the extent to which students of different races are distributed among schools in a

balanced or unbalanced manner than over the racial mix of students in the district, it is useful to

have a segregation measure that isolates the aspect of enrollment patterns over which they have

more control. Segregation indexes that measure racial imbalance fit this requirement in that they

are not a function of a school district’s racial composition.



Racial Imbalance

       Such indexes are designed to measure the extent to which students of a particular race are

unevenly distributed across schools within the district. At one extreme, segregation would be

complete if members of each racial group attended schools with members of their own race

alone. At the other, there would be no segregation, according to this approach, if all schools had

the same racial composition, which by definition would be the racial composition of the district

as a whole. The calculation of any measure of racial imbalance must begin with a decision about

which racial groups to highlight. For most of our analysis of racial imbalance, we look at the

balance between white and nonwhite students.

       One useful measure of racial imbalance is a gap-based segregation index, S, which takes

the following form for segregation within district k:

       Sk = (nk - Ewn) / nk ,

where nk is the proportion of the district’s students who are nonwhite and in this case Ewn is the


                                                  7
exposure rate of whites to nonwhites, defined as

       Ewn = [ Wj nj ] /      Wj,

Wj is the number of whites in school j, and nj is its nonwhite percentage. The exposure rate Ewn

can be interpreted as the nonwhite percentage in the typical white student’s class, and can range

from zero, where schools are fully separated by race, to nj, where they are racially balanced. Thus

the segregation index is the difference between the maximum exposure rate of whites to

nonwhites, which is simply the nonwhite share of students in the district, and the actual exposure

rate, expressed as a fraction of the maximum. The segregation index runs from 0, which

represents no segregation, to 1, which represents complete segregation.

       Another well-known measure of racial imbalance is the dissimilarity index.5 This index,

which also runs from 0 to1, has a simple intuitive interpretation: it indicates the proportion of any

one racial group of students that would have to switch schools to achieve racial balance across

the district. The closer is the number to 1, the more segregated is the district. Though the

dissimilarity index is commonly used in studies of residential segregation, we prefer the gap-

based measure of segregation which we have used extensively in our previous research of school

segregation in North Carolina. Though not of particular usefulness for this paper, a major

advantage of the gap-based measure is that it can be readily decomposed into segregation

between and within schools.

       A drawback to measures of racial imbalance such as the gap-based segregation index and



       5
       The index of dissimilarity is defined as
      D = 0.5     Nj / N - Wj / W ,
where N and W are total nonwhite and white enrollment in a district, and Nj and Wj are the
nonwhite and white enrollment in school j.

                                                   8
the dissimilarity index is that, because they are calculated by dividing the relevant population

into two groups, they cannot reflect differences in racial balance among multiple groups. One

index that is able to account for multiple groups is the entropy index, based on Theil’s

information theory where g indexes racial groups and j indicates schools. A district’s entropy

index is
                 H=             tj (F - Fj ) / F
                        j

where tj is school j’s proportion of district enrollment,

                 Fj =           pgj ln (1/pgj), and
                            g


                 F =            pg ln (1/pg) ,
                            g
where pgj is group g’s proportion in school j, and pg is group g’s proportion of district

enrollment.6 We divide students into four groups: white, black, Hispanic, and other nonwhites.

Like the other two measures of racial imbalance, noted above, H has a maximum value of 1,

indicating schools that are completely separated by race, and a minimum value of 0, indicating

racially balanced schools.


Level of Analysis

       Quite apart from the concept of segregation employed, another issue central to the

measure of school segregation is the level of analysis. The standard approach is to measure

segregation across schools within a single school district. That is the approach implicit in the

summary measures cited at the beginning of the paper and also in our discussion of the various




       6
           For expositions of this index, see, for example, Theil 1972 or Iceland 2002.

                                                      9
definitions of racial segregation. Although we have used data at the classroom level to measure

segregation in some of our previous work (Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor 2003), we are restricted

to data collected at the school level for the analysis in this paper.7 In some of our work, we have

also examined segregation at the metropolitan area level, making it possible to separate

segregation attributable to racial disparities within school districts – the basis for conventional

measures – from that due to racial disparities between school districts. It turns out that changes

in school segregation at the metropolitan level between 1970 and 2000 were affected by contrary

movements in these two components: the movement of whites to suburban school districts

caused segregation of the second variety to increase at the same time that within-district

segregation was declining.8

       In this paper, we restrict our attention to segregation within school districts. Consequently

changes in measures of segregation based on imbalance, which effectively abstract from any

changes in the racial composition of the district, will fail to pick up any new segregation that

results from growing racial disparities between districts within a metropolitan area. In contrast,

changes in measures of racial isolation at the district level inevitably reflect in part changes in the



       7
          In our earlier work, we used classroom-level data on racial composition for the entire
state of North Carolina. We found only a minimal amount of within-school segregation in
elementary schools. At secondary schools, which are more likely to employ tracking and other
curricular policies that separate students on different academic tracks, within-school segregation
is more prominent. We found evidence that all forms of segregation, both within- and between-
school, increased between 1994 and 2001. These increases were found in both urban and rural
districts, and in parts of the state varying widely in terms of racial composition.
       8
         For an explanation of the decomposition into these two parts, see Clotfelter (1999) or
Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2003); for a discussion of these changes over time, see Clotfelter
(2004, chapter 2). The last of these also includes the effect of private school enrollment, but the
quantitative effect of that aspect is not large.

                                                  10
racial mix of students in each district, changes that may be the result of differential movement of

students by race across districts within a metropolitan area. In particular, the movement of white

students out of city districts either to suburban districts or to private schools will result in rising

nonwhite proportions in city districts, and, most likely, into greater racial isolation. Because they

reflect different aspects of racial segregation, we therefore draw attention both to measures of

racial isolation and to measures of imbalance to assess whether recent enrollment trends justify

the characterization of “resegregation.” We turn now to that assessment.


III. Segregation Trends in the 100 Largest Southern Districts

        We base our analysis on enrollment data for the largest 100 districts in the South and

Border regions (based on 2001/02 enrollments), some of which we have collected ourselves

directly from the districts. These districts represent some 15% of total K-12 enrollment in the

South and Border regions in the 2001/02 school year.9 In size, these districts ranged from 31,190

in Calcasieu Parish (Lake Charles) to 365,343 in Dade County (Miami), Florida. In racial

composition, they ranged from 13.3% nonwhite in Pasco County (suburban Tampa) to 97.5% in

Birmingham, Alabama.

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for a number of district characteristics as well as the

six segregation measures defined in the previous section. Means and standard deviations are


        9
           Percentage based on K-12 enrollments from the NCES Common Core of Data. For
districts that were subject to consolidation or annexation, we included all of the subsequent
components throughout the time period of analysis. For school years through 2002/03, the data
were generally available in the Common Core of Data. To supplement these publicly available
data with information from the most recent school year, we requested from individual districts
comparable data on enrollment by race of each school for the 2003/04 year. A complete listing
of these districts is given in Appendix Table 1.

                                                   11
reported for the 1993/94 and 2003/04 school years, which comprise the endpoints for our panel

dataset. All summary statistics are weighted by enrollment. Most school districts in our sample

experienced substantial population growth during this time period, reflecting strong growth rates

in the region as a whole. Almost all of this growth occurred in the nonwhite population: average

white enrollment shows virtually no trend, and the nonwhite share of enrollment increased by ten

percentage points over ten years. The bottom panel of the table refers to information related to

judicial decisions to which we will return in section IV. At this point, we simply note that

districts in the Fourth Circuit serve about 1 out of 4 students in the sample and that districts in

the Eleventh District serve more than a third of the students.

       With respect to trends in segregation, the table shows a small increase in one measure, the

dissimilarity index, and a substantial increase in the percent of black students in 90-100 percent

nonwhite schools. As shown in the first row, that measure of racial isolation increased from

about 27 percent in 1993-94 to 34 percent in 2003/04. Intriguingly, this trend does not appear to

be attributable to an increased tendency for blacks to attend overwhelmingly black schools. The

share of black students attending 90-100% black schools fell slightly and the exposure rate of

blacks to other blacks ended the decade unchanged. Thus, any increase in racial isolation of

black students appears to have far more to do with the growth in proportions of students who are

neither non-Hispanic white nor non-Hispanic black, the majority of whom are likely to be

Hispanic, than with changes in enrollment patterns of black and white students.

       Consistent with the view that district-wide demographic changes are driving the growth

in the proportion of black students in 90-100 percent nonwhite schools, the measures of racial

imbalance show little or no increase in segregation over time. Thus, aside from changes over


                                                  12
time in the racial composition of enrollments in the 100 large districts, we find no strong

evidence of a rise in racial segregation.

       Figure 1 plots the five segregation measures over time, incorporating enrollment data

from intervening years.10 The graph confirms the basic summary statistics in Table 1. Only the

proportion of black students attending 90-100% nonwhite schools shows any significant time

trend over this ten-year period, a very smooth upward progression spanning the entire ten-year

period. The other five indices, including the proportion of blacks attending 90-100% black

schools, display only a small amount of fluctuation over this time period, with no discernible

drift either upward or downward.

       The contribution of students who are neither white nor black to trends in racial isolation

is underscored by Figure 2, which displays the racial composition of the school attended by the

typical white, black, Hispanic, or other nonwhite student in 1993/94 and 2003/04. The graph

shows that students of all races, including whites, tended to witness decreases in the proportion

of non-Hispanic white students in their schools between 1993/94 and 2003/04. The average

share of black students, though generally higher for blacks than for students of other races,

remained virtually unchanged for students of every race. Whites, Hispanics, and students of

other races attended schools that were about 25% black in both 1993/94 and 2003/04. The

typical black student attended a school slightly more than 45% black in both years, as indicated

by the black-black exposure rate in Table 1. In the case of each racial group, the reduction in

white student share was almost exactly compensated by an increase in the proportion of Hispanic



       10
         For the purpose of making the figure, values were interpolated for five districts with
missing data in several years.

                                                13
and other nonwhite students.

       The relative stability of mean values shown in Figure 1 may mask considerable variation

across particular types of districts or between regions. Table 2 shows mean values for two

segregation indices, one measure of racial isolation and one of racial imbalance, at two points in

time for various categories of districts. We categorize districts by region, and, whether central

city, suburban or consolidated, and by percent nonwhite enrollment in the initial year of the

panel, 1993/94 as well as by federal court circuit.

       The regional breakdown is of general interest because of the regions’ different histories.

Whereas districts in the Border region generally began to comply with Brown almost

immediately, those in the South were famously reluctant, often aggressively so. The table shows

that the Border districts in the sample tended to have higher levels of racial imbalance and racial

isolation, as well as greater rates of white enrollment loss. However, the ten-year trends in racial

separation, whether measured by imbalance or by racial isolation, appear quite similar in both

regions.

       As shown by the next set of categories, school segregation is most severe in districts that

serve central cities of metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs). More than three of every four

students enrolled in these districts in the 1993/94 school year were nonwhite. Over the decade

analyzed here, segregation as measured by imbalance declined somewhat in these districts while

the isolation of black students rose, possibly reflecting the substantial losses in white enrollment

over the period. While continued “white flight” is a sensible explanation for the increased

isolation of black students in central city districts, trends in suburban and city-county




                                                 14
consolidated districts imply a more complicated story.11 In these districts, where losses in white

enrollment were much less severe, the proportion of black students in 90-100% nonwhite schools

increased just as rapidly, if not more, than in central city districts. Among the 42 suburban

districts in the sample, for example, ten experienced increases in their percentage nonwhite of 20

points or more. By 2003/04, seven suburban districts had nonwhite percentages of 80% or more.

White enrollments declined the least rapidly in consolidated districts, which helped served to

stabilize their racial compositions. Over the 10-year period, none of the 36 consolidated districts

experienced an increase in the nonwhite percentage as large as 20 points.

       Classifying districts by initial percent nonwhite as in the next panel of the tables reveals

some noteworthy differences in trends. Rates of white enrollment loss were largest in majority-

nonwhite districts, a pattern confirmed by the scatterplot in Figure 3. As white enrollment

declined in these districts, the share of black students attending overwhelmingly nonwhite

schools increased, as shown in Table 3. That the segregation indices posted either very modest

gains or declines in the face of these losses implies that districts managed to maintain a similar

degree of racial balance in attendance patterns across schools despite the change in racial

composition. A somewhat different pattern emerges in overwhelmingly white school districts.




       11
          For purposes of this analysis, school districts serving independent cities or cities that
attained county-equivalent status prior to World War II are classified as central city districts.
Districts affected by this classification rule include Orleans parish (coterminous with the City of
New Orleans since 1870), Baltimore City, St. Louis City, Newport News, Norfolk, Virginia
Beach, and Washington, DC. Our choice of cutoff date reflects the onset of rapid
suburbanization in the postwar era. Cities consolidating with their overlying counties after
World War II, including Jacksonville, Miami, Nashville, Augusta, Lexington, and Louisville, are
classified as consolidated districts.

                                                 15
       The final panel refers to differences by federal judicial circuit.12 We return to these

differences later in the paper.

       For a comprehensive overview of changes in segregation and racial isolation between

1993/94 and 2003/04, Figures 4 and 5 show scatterplots of index values from the two years, with

a 45-degree line separating those districts experiencing increases from those exhibiting decreases.

In Figure 4, the gap-based measure of racial imbalance displays some mean-reversion over time.

Districts experiencing increases in segregation tended to have low levels to start with, while

those with high levels were more likely to decrease than increase. Figure 5, which plots the share

of black students attending 90-100% nonwhite schools in the two years, shows a cluster of points

near zero in both years, but a generally larger collection of points above the 45-degree line,

highlighting the general increase in this measure of racial isolation.



IV. Changes in the Legal Landscape

       We now turn to the more complex question of what role judicial actions have played in

the segregation patterns just described. The data presented so far suggest that the relaxation of

judicial constraints may be far less implicated in the changes than analysts such as Orfield have

claimed. Recall that trends in measures of racial isolation such as the percentage of black

students in 90-100 percent nonwhite schools have been used to support the notion that racial

segregation in schools is increasing. Yet, as we have already shown, the rise in this measure is



       12
         The federal judicial circuits for the relevant states containing the sample districts are:
Fourth: Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia; Fifth: Louisiana, Mississippi,
and Texas; Sixth: Kentucky and Tennessee; Eighth: Missouri; Eleventh: Alabama, Florida, and
Georgia; D.C.: D.C.

                                                 16
largely attributable to the changing demographics of the districts in our sample. Because our

measures of racial imbalance are not affected by such changes, they provide a “cleaner” measure

of the segregation that results from district level decisions about student assignment. Given that

these measures show no upward trend over time, one might conclude that there is nothing left to

be explained by the court decisions. At the same time, however, because residential segregation

declined during the same 10-year period, it could be that in the absence of judicial decisions,

segregation in the schools would have declined. In addition, because court decisions apply to

particular districts or sets of districts, such decisions could help explain the variation in trends

across districts.

        Before turning to our empirical analysis we provide some background regarding federal

judicial rulings in desegregation cases, with emphasis on those rulings relating to racial balance

in school assignments and declarations of unitary status. As we will show, identifying the judicial

actions relevant to our empirical analysis is not an easy task. We begin with rulings in which the

courts declared districts to be unitary, and, hence, no longer subject to active judicial oversight.



Unitary Status

        The Supreme Court’s 1968 decision in Green v. County School Board of New Kent

County stated emphatically that segregated, or “dual,” school systems could not meet the

admonition promulgated in Brown unless racially identifiable schools were eliminated.13 As one

of six factors set down in this case, this pupil assignment criterion suggested, but did not dictate,

racial balance as a desideratum. Three years later, in Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of


        13
             391 U.S. 430 (1968). See also Boger (2000, p. 1733).

                                                  17
Education, the Court came close to ordering just that, stating “a presumption against schools that

are substantially disproportionate in their racial composition."14 Ratifying a plan that paired

schools and transported students across the district to achieve racially balanced schools, the

decision set off a series of lower court decisions in the South and Border states that employed

methods such as these to achieve racially balanced schools.15 In the same decision, however, the

Court also implied that court supervision, and thus extraordinary measures to maintain racial

balance in schools, along with racial guidelines for schools, would not be a permanent state of

affairs. Once deemed unitary, a school district would not have to make continual adjustments to

maintain racially balanced enrollments in its schools.16

       In Green and Swann, therefore, the Court set the stage for a district to be freed from

active judicial oversight once it had been declared unitary. In two decisions, Board of Education

of Oklahoma v. Dowell (1991) and Freeman v. Pitts (1992), the Supreme Court clarified what it

meant to be deemed unitary.17 After a district has shown a good-faith effort to eliminate vestiges

of past segregation and has satisfied the requirements of Green, it stated, the district can be

declared unitary, after which any racial imbalance among its schools arising from residential



       14
           “No per se rule can adequately embrace all the difficulties of reconciling the competing
interests involved; but in a system with a history of segregation the need for remedial criteria of
sufficient specificity to assure a school authority’s compliance with its constitutional duty
warrants a presumption against schools that are substantially disproportionate in their racial
composition.” Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 402 U.S. 1, 26 (1971).
       15
            402 U.S. 1 (1971); Armor (1995).
       16
          402 U.S. 1, 31 (1971). Some critics maintain that lower courts ignored this distinction,
instead equating desegregation with racial balance. See, for example, Armor (1995, p. 32).
       17
            498 U.S. 237 (1991); 503 U.S. 467 (1992); Boger (2000, p. 1737).

                                                 18
segregation would be permitted.18 Since desegregation orders often entailed extensive micro-

management, very often extending down to the detail of specifying precise attendance boundaries

for individual schools, receiving a unitary status declaration would appear to free a district to

determine student assignments for itself. In fact, however, the practical import of unitary status

has rarely been as simple as the evaporation of outside control, as we discuss below.



Fourth Circuit Rulings on Race-conscious Assignment

       A related but distinct legal question is whether a district not under court order to

desegregate – either by having been declared unitary or by never having been subject to an order

– can base school assignments by race. Needless to say, any desegregation plan that aimed at

racial balance had to devise assignment patterns that would keep all schools in a district close to

the district’s overall racial composition. But in a series of decisions meant to apply to districts

not under court order, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that race could not be used in

assigning students, presumably making it impossible for a district to maintain racial balance

through the adjustment of student assignments.19 Boger (2000, p. 1794) warns that these

decisions could have dire consequences:



       18
          See, for example, Armor (1995, pp. 52-54); Orfield and Eaton (1996, p. 2) state:
“These decisions view racial integration not as a goal that segregated districts should strive to
attain, but as a merely temporary punishment for historic violations, an imposition to be lifted
after a few years. After the sentence of desegregation has been served, the normal, “natural”
pattern of segregated schools can be restored.”
       19
         The decisions are Capacchione v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, 57 F. Supp. 2d 228
(W.D.N.C. 1999), Eisenberg v. Montgomery County Public Schools, 197 F.3d 123 (4th Cir.
1999), and Tuttle v. Arlington County School Board, 195 F.3d 698 (4th Cir. 1999). For a
discussion of these cases, see Boger (2000, pp. 1721, 1740, and 1780).

                                                 19
       if willing school boards cannot assign students by race or ethnicity, we risk a rapid return
       to a time when each school child could, and did, identify “white schools” and “black
       schools” simply by reference to the predominant race of the children attending them. Far
       more certainly than school boards’ good-faith efforts to assure of educational diversity,
       this de facto resegregation of our schools will re-create the conditions condemned in
       Brown in 1954.

As of this writing, the legal status of these Fourth Circuit rulings remains unsettled. The

Supreme Court’s 2003 decision in Grutter v. Bollinger reaffirmed that race could be taken into

consideration in making admissions decisions to a law school if this aspect were merely one part

of a full evaluation of candidates; it is as yet uncertain how this ruling will be applied to K-12

school assignment plans that take race into account.20 And whether these Fourth Circuit rulings

could have influenced the decisions of school districts before 1999, when they were handed

down, is highly uncertain. Only to the extent that school districts in the Fourth Circuit

anticipated the subsequent rulings could the rulings have had an impact before 1999.



Variations in the Meaning of Unitary Status

       Overlaying these general legal issues is local particularity. Each district has its own

particular history of policies, political forces, issues in dispute, rulings, and compliance, and the

meaning of unitary status has likewise differed across districts, to be sure. A few districts seem

to present clear cases of how changes in judicial doctrine can open the door to de facto



       20
           As of this writing, two federal district courts have allowed racially conscious school
assignment plans, citing Grutter and Gratz, but one circuit’s court of appeals has disallowed
another such plan, citing the same decisions. See Comfort v. Lynn School Committee (2003),
McFarland v. Jefferson Co. Public Schools (2004), and Parents Involved in Community Schools
v. Seattle School District, No. 1 (2004).

                                                  20
segregation. Two such examples are Charlotte-Mecklenburg and Winston-Salem/Forsyth, North

Carolina. After tiring of the extensive pairing and busing plan made famous in the Swann case

for more than 20 years, Charlotte-Mecklenburg in 1992 launched a magnet school program,

hoping to attract whites to downtown schools voluntarily, with racial balance maintained by

quotas for acceptance. It was these quotas that were challenged, successfully, establishing one of

the Fourth Circuit’s rulings against race-conscious assignments (Capacchione v. Charlotte-

Mecklenburg Schools, 2001). The school board adopted a new student assignment plan (in the

fall of 2002) allowing families limited choice among schools, but which guaranteed most

students the option of attending neighborhood schools.21 The apparent result of this change in

assignment plans was an increase in racial isolation. Whereas the percentage of black students

attending 90-100% minority schools in 1995 was 4%; this share rose to 11% in 2001/02 and 23%

in 2003/04. In the case of Charlotte-Mecklenburg, the change in assignment (2002) occurred

immediately after the official ruling of unitary status (2001).

       A similar district with a similar history yields a quite different sequence of dates.

Winston-Salem/Forsyth, another county-wide district in North Carolina, operated a district-wide

busing plan much like Charlotte’s beginning in 1971, making its schools, like Charlotte’s, very

balanced. The district was declared unitary soon thereafter, in 1974, but continued nevertheless

to operate its desegregation plan. In 1995 a newly elected school board voted to adopt a new

approach to student assignment based, like Charlotte’s, on parental choice. The plan divided the

district into eight zones and would, when fully implemented, give each elementary and middle



       21
       Website of the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools,
www.cms.k12.nc.us/discover/narrative.asp, last visited 1/31/03.

                                                 21
school a unique theme and allow parents to choose their children’s school from among those

within their own geographic zone. Although the school board expressed a wish that the resulting

enrollment patterns would not produce large racial disparities across schools (in the form of a

guideline that no school would deviate by more than 20 percentage points from the district’s

overall nonwhite percentage), no controls were put in place to limit parental choices. Indeed, the

plan did lead to racial disparities among schools, which sparked complaints. After investigating

these complaints, the Office for Civil Rights, in light of the Fourth Circuit decisions disallowing

the use of race in assignment, officially gave its blessing to the plan in 2000, after the district

pledged to create several district-wide magnet schools.22 The resulting measure of racial

isolation, like Charlotte’s, showed increases. The percentage of black students attending 90-

100% minority schools in the district rose from 6% in 1995 to 22% in 2001 and to 23% in 2003.

        But unitary status has not always meant handing a district a free pass, as might be inferred

from these two examples from North Carolina. To be sure, in some cases a court’s declaration

that a district is unitary has been by all appearances an official blessing with few strings attached.

The unitary declarations covering such districts as Oklahoma City in 1991, Chatham County

(Savannah) in 1994, DeKalb County (suburban Atlanta) in 1996, Muscogee County (Columbus,

GA) in 1997, and the Florida districts of Dade (Miami), Duval (Jacksonville), and Hillsborough

(Tampa) in 2001 were more or less unconditional terminations of formal, continuing oversight of

a desegregation plan. In these cases, unitary status meant that the court had formally washed its

hands of further involvement in the details of student assignment and would instead merely stand


        22
        Dawn Ziegenbalg, “Civil-Rights Inquiry into Schools Ending; No Major Redistricting
Changes Expected,” Winston-Salem Journal, January 7, 2000, p. A1; telephone conversation
with Doug Punger, attorney for the Winston-Salem/Forsyth School Board, May 15, 2003.

                                                  22
by to adjudicate any new complaint alleging racial discrimination.23 But in more than a few

instances, unitary status has been granted only with strings attached. In these cases, unitary status

was merely one component of a broader consent decree or other agreement in which the district

commits itself to certain practices for some period. Nor do unitary declarations always coincide

with the end of court supervision. Five examples serve to illustrate the varied meanings of

unitary status.

        First, Nashville-Davidson was ruled unitary in 1998, but only as part of a negotiated

agreement that allowed the district to replace its cross-district busing plan and the accompanying

racial goals for schools with a plan that allowed students to choose neighborhood schools or

magnets but also obligated the district to spend some $200 million over the following five years

on construction and renovation of schools, many in predominantly black neighborhoods.24

Second, in Lee County (FL), a federal judge declared the district unitary in 1999, but did not end

supervision until 2004. And these declarations were made only after the school district agreed to


        23
           To illustrate, the decision in Muscogee County stated: “The district court's conclusions
that the school board has eliminated the vestiges of de jure segregation as far as practicable and
that the school board has shown a good faith commitment to and compliance with the
desegregation plan were not clearly erroneous. Accordingly, we affirm the district court'  s final
dismissal and declaration that the school board has attained unitary status.” Lockett v. Muscogee
Board of Education, 111 F.3d 839 (1997). Other references are: Oklahoma City: Dowell ex rel.
Dowell v. Board of Educ., 778 F.Supp. 1144 (1991); Chatham County: US and Stell v. Savannah-
Chatham County Board of Education, 860 F. Supp. 1563 (1994); DeKalb County: Mills v.
Freedman, 942 F. Supp. 1449 (1996); Dade County: “Miami District Declared Unitary,”
Education Week, July 11, 2001; Duval: NAACP v. Duval County, 273 F.3d 960 (2001);
Hillsborough : Manning v. Board of Public Instruction of Hillsborough County, 244 F.3d 927,
(2001). The Dade County decision allowed the district to maintain race conscious programs until
2002.
        24
        Kathleen Kennedy Manzo, “Curtain Falls on Desegregation Era in Nashville,”
Education Week, October 7, 1998; http://www.edweek.org/ew/vol-18/06deseg.h18, last visited
7/6/04.

                                                 23
consult with a Unitary School System Advisory Committee regarding certain future decisions,

including changes in its student assignment plan and school opening or closings. The school

district also committed itself to continuing a school choice plan that would keep minority

populations in the bulk of its schools within 20 percentage points of the system average.25 Third,

Pinellas County (FL) was declared unitary by a federal district court in 2000, but only subject to

the terms of a negotiated settlement that called for a seven-year transition from an existing

attendance plan utilizing magnet schools and assignments designed to achieve racial balance to a

choice plan that would eventually be unconstrained by racial controls.26

       Fourth, as part of a settlement in 2003, the Fulton County (GA) school district agreed to

continue its longstanding minority-to-majority transfer policy for nine years and to examine

enrollments in advanced placement and foreign language courses in its predominantly black

southern schools (Fulton Co., p.6). Fifth, a federal court’s unitary declaration for East Baton

Rouge was similarly made subject to an agreement, covering in this case the succeeding four

school years. This agreement requires the district to continue its existing system of magnet

schools, specifying a target racial composition of 55% black for them and appointing an

independent overseer for the program, continue and actively recruit for its majority-to-minority



       25
        Dave Breitenstein, “‘Children Have Changed Our Community” Lee Official Says,”
Naples Daily News, May 16, 2004; http://www.naplesnews.com, last visited 7/6/04.
       26
          For the 2000/01 to 2002/03 years, the previous assignment plan would be continued;
for the 2003/04 to 2006/07 years, a controlled choice plan would be implemented whereby
schools would have no more than 42% black enrollments. U.S. District Court, Case No. 8:64-
CV-98-T-23B. http://www.pinellas.k12.fl.us/usi/htm/FinalOrder.pdf
School Board of Pinellas County, Choice Plan, October 24, 2000
http://www.pinellas.k12.fl.us/USI/choiceplan.html


                                                24
transfer policy, with rules for transfers stated in terms of specific racial compositions, provide

free transportation for both of these programs, attempt to further desegregation in redrawing

attendance lines, make additional expenditures for certain schools, and continue pre-kindergarten

programs.27 A sixth example, though not technically a unitary declaration, was the ending of

federal oversight over the St. Louis district in 1999. There the court made this withdrawal

subject to a detailed settlement, by which the district agreed to continue operating its group of

magnet schools and the state agreed to continue funding the city-to-suburb transfer voluntary

busing program and to finance the construction and renovation of schools in the district.28

       Thus unitary status, or the ending of judicial oversight of a desegregation plan, has meant

different things in different districts at different times. Nor can it be assumed that districts never

subject to any desegregation order, such as Montgomery County, Maryland or Cumberland

County, North Carolina, are not influenced by federal court rulings. As noted above,

Montgomery County was the district to which one of the Fourth Circuit rulings regarding race-

conscious school assignments applied. For districts not under a specific court order, school

boards must worry about potential law suits or federal sanctions arising from the 1964 Civil

Rights Act, by which the federal government can cut off funding to discriminating districts. To




       27
          For magnet schools the agreement specified a target racial composition of 55% black
and 45% nonblack. It give preference to students nearby and who attend racially identifiable
schools. “Final Settlement Agreement,” U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Louisiana,
Civil Action 56-1662-D-M3, July 16, 2003. See also website for U.S. Attorney,
http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/lam/press/press0204.html.

       28
       Hendrie, Caroline. 1999. “Settlement Ends St. Louis Desegregation Case.” Education
Week March 24, 1999. (http://www.edweek.org/ew/vol-18/28louis.h18)

                                                  25
recap, then, there is no one-to-one connection between unitary status and freedom to return to de

facto segregation.

       Because of the importance attached to unitary status in discussions of resegregation, we

have endeavored to ascertain for each of the 100 districts analyzed in the current paper whether

the district has been deemed unitary and, if so, when that declaration was made. For this

purpose, we have drawn on a variety of sources, including published court decisions, district web

pages, and news reports.29



V. The Impact of Court Rulings

       We focus here on two main aspects of judicial rulings: the declaration of unitary status

and whether or not a district is located in the Fourth Circuit and, hence, subject to that circuit’s

admonitions to eschew the use of race in student assignments. We begin with some simple trend

analysis and then turn to a more complete multivariate model that permits us to isolate the effects

of the court decisions from other changes.



Role of Fourth Circuit Decisions

       The bottom panel of Table 2 above provides some initial insight into the role of the

Fourth Circuit decisions, with attention to our two preferred measures of segregation, one that

measures racial isolation and one that measures racial imbalance. If, as Boger (2000) argues, the

admonitions in that circuit against race-based student assignments had teeth, one might expect


       29
         The years in which districts in our sample were declared unitary are listed in Appendix
Table 1. A detailed summary of the sources used to make these designations is available at
http://www.pubpol.duke.edu/people/faculty/clotfelter/.

                                                  26
segregation to rise more over the period in the Fourth Circuit than in other federal circuits.

Indeed, the two districts with the largest increases in the segregation index over the period,

Charlotte-Mecklenburg and Winston-Salem/Forsyth, are both in the Fourth Circuit. For the

circuit as a whole the table entries confirm that pattern. During the 10-year period, racial

isolation increased in all of the circuits identified, but it grew far faster in the Fourth Circuit (57

percent) than in the other circuits (10 to 33 percent). With respect to racial imbalance, as

measured by the gap-based segregation index, only the Fourth Circuit exhibited an increase –

and quite a substantial one at that – in its segregation index. In each of the other relevant federal

court circuits, schools became less racially unbalanced over the 10-year period. Thus we have

some initial evidence that the rulings in the Fourth District exacerbated segregation.



Unitary status

        Our initial trend analysis of unitary status leads to a different conclusion. For this purpose

we compared the trend in the proportion of students attending schools in districts deemed to

unitary to the trends in segregation indexes. The bottom panel of Table 1 shows that by 2003 a

far higher percentage of students in our sample districts were attending schools in districts

declared unitary than in 1993, and Figure 6 shows how the number of districts so designated

increased year by year. Between 1993 and 1999, the fraction of districts deemed unitary,

weighted by enrollment, increased gradually, from about 12% to just over 20%. Starting in 1999

and continuing over the next three years, the rate of growth increased markedly, with the

(weighted) share of districts with unitary status increasing from just over 20% to 45%. This

clearly nonlinear pattern contrasts with the smoother trends exhibited by segregation indices in


                                                   27
Figure 1. Were unitary status responsible for a large portion of the increases in segregation, we

would expect a break in trend coinciding with or following closely the surge in unitary status

declarations after 1999. But the trends in segregation are not consistent with this supposition;

indeed, with one exception our measures of segregation are not even rising. At first blush,

therefore, we find little reason to blame judicial decisions relating to unitary status for any rise in

segregation levels. This conclusion must be tempered, however, considering that the

counterfactual is not clearly specified and the possibility that any effects of unitary status might

occur with a substantial lag. For these reasons we turn to a more comprehensive multivariate

analysis.



Multivariate Regression Analysis

       Beyond enabling us to simultaneously examine the impact of multiple explanatory

factors, the analysis in this section expands on the simple examination of trends above by

introducing cross-sectional variation in segregation. As Figures 4 and 5 indicate, districts

differed widely in their experiences over time.

       The ordinary least squares regression estimates in Table 3 use three segregation measures

as dependent variables: a racial isolation measure (the fraction of black students attending

schools with nonwhite shares between 90 and 100%) and two racial imbalance measures (the

gap-based measure of segregation between whites and nonwhites and the entropy index).30 The


       30
          The sample covers years from 1993/94 to 2003/04, with these exceptions necessitated
by missing data in the Common Core of Data. Data for Georgia districts in 1992/93 were
missing, which necessitated omitting observations in 1993/94, owing to the use of lagged
variables. School-level data for Tennessee districts were missing in 1997/98 and 1999/2000 to
2002/03, making it impossible to calculate segregation measures for those years.

                                                  28
specifications in columns (1), (2) and (3) include only year fixed effects, to illustrate the overall

time trend in each segregation measure. In all three columns, none of the coefficients on

individual year indicator variables is statistically distinguishable from zero, indicating that we

cannot reject the hypothesis that differences in segregation between 1993 and any subsequent

year are due to random fluctuations in the data.31 In general, the coefficients confirm the

patterns shown in Figure 1: the racial isolation measure trends upward over time, while there is

no discernible trend in either measure of racial imbalance.

        In columns (4) through (6), we add a number of controls for school district

characteristics, including an indicator variable for whether a district had been declared unitary by

a particular year. Comparison of columns (1) and (4) reveals that this set of control variables is

sufficient to explain the upward trend in racial isolation over time. The only statistically

significant coefficient on a time-varying variable in this regression pertains to the lagged

nonwhite share of enrollment in the district. As suggested by much of the simple evidence

presented above, the best explanation for the increasing proportion of black students attending

overwhelmingly nonwhite schools is the relative increase in the nonwhite, non-black population

in the districts they attend.

        We find significant associations between segregation and several time-invariant control

variables. Physically large districts tend to be more segregated, holding enrollment levels

constant. This may reflect the desire in lower density districts to reduce overall transportation

costs by operating more schools. Operating more schools, in turn, enables greater separation of



        31
          Nor do F-tests of the coefficients in columns 1 and 2 allow us to reject the hypothesis
that either racial isolation or racial imbalance was the same in all years.

                                                  29
students by race. Districts with a greater proportion of nonwhite students also tend to be more

segregated by either measure. Such a pattern would occur, for example, if “white flight” tends to

occur when the nonwhite share in a white student’s school exceeds a certain threshold, and

districts take explicit or implied actions to ensure that this threshold is not exceeded (Clotfelter,

Ladd and Vigdor 2003).

       Coefficients on judicial circuit indicator variables show no evidence of persistently higher

segregation levels in the Fourth Circuit. In fact, school districts in the Fourth Circuit have the

lowest proportion of black students attending 90-100% nonwhite schools, controlling for other

factors. It is important to note that this coefficient tests only for a permanent difference in

segregation levels across appeals court circuits. In Table 2 above, we found suggestive evidence

of differential trends in segregation across circuits. We test the hypothesis of differential trends

in a regression framework below.

       As shown in column (4), unitary status is not significantly related to racial isolation. In

contrast, we find evidence in columns (5) and (6) that districts covered by a unitary status ruling

tend to have higher degrees of racial imbalance across schools. The statistically significant

positive coefficient in (5) indicates that such districts tend to have white-nonwhite segregation

indices almost four percentage points, roughly one-third of a standard deviation, higher than

otherwise equivalent districts without unitary status. The estimated effect of unitary status on the

entropy measure is also statistically significant, but smaller, roughly one-fifth of a standard

deviation. Whether these findings represent a causal effect of unitary status or simply a positive

correlation between being unitary and having other factors that raise segregation is impossible to

say.


                                                  30
       Table 4 presents results from two alternative specifications that expand the set of control

variables to include some related to time. To examine the possibility that the Fourth Circuit’s

prohibition of race-conscious school assignments might have led to greater segregation over

time, in columns (1) through (3) we interact the Fourth Circuit indicator with a linear time trend.

The main linear time trend effect in this specification is subsumed by the year fixed effects. The

results in columns (2) and (3) show that racial imbalance in school districts within the Fourth

Circuit increased significantly over time relative to similar districts served by other federal

circuits. A similar result does not hold when the racial isolation index is substituted for the

measure of imbalance (column (1)). Because it was not until 1999 that the Fourth Circuit Court

of Appeals handed down their decisions prohibiting race-conscious student assignments, one

would not expect any effort before that year except to the extent the decision was anticipated.

When we added additional variables to allow for a change in circuit effect in that year, however,

we obtained statistically insignificant estimated coefficients, leaving us unpersuaded that these

decisions were responsible in any increase in segregation by the end of our sample period.

       Columns (4) through (6) test for a potential lagged impact of unitary status rulings, by

replacing the single unitary status indicator variable with a series of four mutually exclusive

indicators, which indicate whether a district was declared unitary in the year of observation, one

year earlier, two years earlier, or three or more years earlier. As in previous specifications, there

is no significant impact of unitary status on our measure of racial isolation, shown in column (4).

The last two regressions in this table, however, show significant evidence of a latency period of

at least three years between the declaration of unitary status and a significant impact on our




                                                 31
measure of racial imbalance. In contrast, more recent unitary declarations are not associated with

higher levels of segregation.

       There are two reasons to be cautious in interpreting the unitary status results in Tables 3

and 4. First, we have only a limited number of district-specific control variables available. The

positive effect of unitary status in Table 3 and for unitary status after three years in Table 4 are

identified largely by comparing districts that have had unitary status for the duration of our panel

to districts that never received unitary status. Differences between these types of districts could

generate significant variation in racial imbalance even in the absence of court rulings. A second

reason is the potential for serial correlation in the outcome measure of interest. In a panel

framework such as ours, we must be attuned to the possibility of spurious difference-in-

difference estimates rooted in serial correlation in outcomes.

       To address both of these concerns, we re-estimated equations (4)-(6) in Tables 3 and 4

using district fixed effects. By so doing, we restricted our ability to observe an association

between segregation and unitary status to those districts in which unitary status actually changed

during the sample period or shortly before. These fixed-effects regressions appear in Table 5.

As in the two previous tables, equation (1) shows that the measure of racial isolation is unrelated

to unitary status. Equations (2) and (3) in the table show that the addition of district fixed effects

greatly attenuates the association with unitary status, the estimated coefficient being about half

the size of the corresponding coefficient in the equation without fixed effects and being

statistically significant only in equation (3). The second set of equations allows for the same type

of lagged effect of unitary status as shown in Table 4. As in those previous equations, there is no

statistically significant association between any of the three measures of segregation and unitary


                                                  32
status declarations in the current year, in the previous year, or in the year before that. However,

for all three of the measures unitary status declarations three or more years before do show a

statistically significant association with the designated measures of segregation. These equations

suggest again that unitary status is associated with increased segregation, but the effect appears

only with a lag. These findings are broadly consistent with those of Lutz (2004). Employing a

model that allows for more flexibility in the time pattern of effects, he finds that the end of court-

ordered desegregation in a district was followed by a gradual linear increase in segregation.32

       This delayed response to unitary status is very much in keeping with the common

tendency for courts to attach conditions when declaring school districts to be unitary. As our

review of specific cases indicated, it was typical for the end of court supervision to be

accompanied by an agreement by the school district to continue certain specified practices for a

period of time that would have the effect of maintaining some degree of racial balance in

enrollments. Only when the period covered by those agreements came to an end were districts

really free to chart their own course regarding student assignments, including the return to

neighborhood school assignments and hence to racially imbalanced schools.



VI. Conclusion

       Analysis of the 100 largest districts in the South and Border regions shows unmistakably

that public schools in these regions have become more nonwhite over the past ten years. They

have not, however, witnessed a systematic increase in the segregation of white students. Rather,

       32
          Lutz’s (2004) paper differs in several other ways from ours, including the use of
slightly different measures of segregation and a sample that is larger and which includes districts
outside of the South and Border states.

                                                 33
black and white students alike now attend schools with greater proportions of Hispanic, Asian,

and students of other races. This development creates the impression of increasing segregation

when segregation is measured by one widely-used index – the proportion of blacks attending 90-

100% nonwhite schools – but the rise in this measure is the result of demographic change rather

than any growing racial imbalance among schools. As a consequence of the increasing racial

diversification of American schools, this particular measure of racial isolation may have lost

much of its meaning as a measure of racial segregation. All of the other school segregation

measures examined in this paper point to a different conclusion – that the average level of

segregation in large Southern school districts has not changed much over the last decade.

        Averages are not the whole story, however. One of our main objectives in this paper has

been to investigate the effect of unitary status declarations by federal courts. A fear has been that

such a declaration essentially gives a district permission to base school assignments solely on

neighborhood residence, which will tend to make schools more racially segregated, given the

segregation in existing housing patterns. The case of Charlotte-Mecklenburg – where a

neighborhood assignment plan and resegregation did indeed follow quickly on the heels of a

unitary declaration – appears to offer graphic justification for this fear. In our regression analysis

examining the experience of 100 districts over 10 years, we found that unitary status is in fact

associated with increased white-nonwhite segregation, in the sense of racial imbalance. Our

estimates suggest that, for the districts serving nearly half of all students in the sample where

courts have issued unitary status declarations, segregation levels were higher than in other

districts. But this result is largely driven by higher segregation rates in districts that were declared

unitary before 1993. For only one of our two measures of racial imbalance do we observe any


                                                  34
effect of unitary status declarations during our sample period, and the size of that effect is only

about as half as large as that implied by previous specifications. The absence of a

contemporaneous effect could be due to the tendency of such declarations to be accompanied by

agreements that placed constraints on the freedom of school districts to return to neighborhood

school assignment or by other factors that delay the effect. We also find that segregation as racial

imbalance increased in districts governed by the Fourth Circuit, the judicial circuit that has most

prominently ruled against racially-conscious student assignments, but that effect is not restricted

to the period after the relevant rulings.

        In all but one of the regressions explaining the percentage of blacks in 90-100% nonwhite

schools, neither unitary status nor Fourth Circuit jurisdiction has any explanatory power,

suggesting, as above, that this measure is driven largely by the steady increase in the nonwhite

percentage in the public school population, not by increases in racial imbalance. Only in the

fixed-effect regression using lags is this measure associated at standard levels of statistical

significance with unitary status.

        A final caveat is worth re-emphasizing. In this paper, we base our measures of

segregation and racial isolation on disparities between schools in districts. Our analysis

measures neither disparities between districts nor disparities within schools. Nor do our

measures account for segregation arising from private school enrollment. Our previous research

suggests that the first two of these sources of segregation is generally quite important and that the

third can be significant in some localities.33 Although it considers only segregation across

schools in public school districts, however, the current paper is quite relevant to the current


        33
             See Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2003) and Clotfelter (2004).

                                                  35
concern over resegregation and the role of federal court rulings, for it finds some justification for

fears that the two are linked. Participants in these debates need to be wary of the evidence they

cite, however, especially when using statistics that reflect racial isolation rather than racial

imbalance.




                                                  36
                                         References

      Armor, David J. 1995. Forced Justice: School Desegregation and the Law. New York:
Oxford University Press.

       Boger, John Charles, “Willful Colorblindness: The New Racial Piety and the
Resegregation of Public Schools,” North Carolina Law Review 78 (September 2000), 1719-
1796.

      Clotfelter, Charles T. 1999. “Public School Segregation in Metropolitan Areas,” Land
Economics 75 (November), 487-504.

       Clotfelter, Charles T. 2004. After Brown: The Rise and Retreat of School Desegregation.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

       Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2003. “Segregation and
Resegregation in North Carolina' s Public School Classrooms,” North Carolina Law Review 81
(May), 1463-1511.

       “The Effects of Segregation and the Consequences of Desegregation: A Social Science
Statement,” Minnesota Law Review 37 (1953), 427-439.

       Frankenberg, Erica and Chungmei Lee. 2002. “Race in American Public Schools: Rapidly
Resegregating School Districts,” The Civil Rights Project, Harvard University, August.

      Frankenberg, Erica, Chungmei Lee, and Gary Orfield, A Multiracial Society with
Segregated Schools: Are We Losing the Dream? Civil Rights Project, January 2003.

        Fulton County Schools. 2003. Annual Report to the Community.
http://www.fulton.k12.ga.us/ez/detail.asp?q=160, 7/6/04.

       Glaeser, E.L. and J.L. Vigdor. “Racial Segregation: Promising News.” in Redefining
Urban & Suburban America: Evidence from Census 2000, Volume I, B. Katz and R. Lang, eds.,
pp.211-234. Brookings Institution Press, 2003.

       Iceland, John. 2002. “Beyond Black and White: Metropolitan Residential Segregation in
Multi-Ethnic America,” paper presented at the American Sociological Association meetings,
August.
www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/resseg/pdf/beyond_black_and_white.pdf, last visited
11/27/04




                                              37
       Logan, John. 2004. “Resegregation in American Public Schools? Not in the 1990s.”
Report, Lew Mumford Center for Comparative Urban and Regional Research, University at
Albany, April 26.

       Lutz, Byron F., “After Brown: The Effects of the End of Court-Ordered Desegregation,”
unpublished paper, MIT Department of Economics, November 2004.

       Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton, “The Dimensions of Residential Segregation,”
Social Forces 67 (December 1988), 281-315.

        NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., Herschel Lee Johnson, ed. 2000
Annual Report. New York: NAACP.
http://www.naacpldf.org/content/pdf/pubs/annual/2000_Annual_Report.pdf (7/7/2004).

       Orfield, Gary, and Susan E. Eaton. 1996. Dismantling Desegregation: The Quiet
Reversal of Brown v. Board of Education. New York: The New Press.

       Orfield, Gary and Nora Gordon, “Schools More Separate: Consequences of a Decade of
Resegregation,” unpublished paper, Harvard University, July 2001.

      Orfield, Gary and Chungmei Lee. 2004. “Brown at 50: King’s Dream or Plessy’s
Nightmare?” The Civil Rights Project, Harvard University, January.

      Orfield, Gary and Frank Monfort. 1992. Status of School Desegregation: The Next
Generation. Cambridge, MA: Metropolitan Opportunity Project, Harvard University. March.

       Theil, Henri. 1972. Statistical Decomposition Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Co.


Cases
         Board of Education of Oklahoma v. Dowell, 498 U.S. 237 (1991).
         Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
         Capacchione v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, 57 F. Supp. 2d 228 (W.D.N.C. 1999).
         Comfort v. Lynn School Committee, 28 F. Supp. 2d 328 (D. Mass. 2003).
         Eisenberg v. Montgomery County Public Schools, 197 F.3d 123 (4th Cir. 1999).
         Freeman v. Pitts, 503 U.S. 467 (1992).
         Green v. County School Board of New Kent County, 391 U.S. 430 (1968).
         Grutter v. Bollinger, 71 U.S.L.W. 4498 (2003).
         McFarland v. Jefferson Co. Public Schools, 330 F. Supp. 2d 834 (W.D. Ky. 2004).
         Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District, No. 1, 377 F. 3d 949
(9th Cir. 2004)
         Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 402 U.S. 1 (1971).


                                               38
       Tuttle v. Arlington County School Board, 195 F.3d 698 (4th Cir. 1999).

G:\teachq\ctcdocs\PUBrown\PUBrowndraft20905.wpd




                                                  39
Table 1. Mean Values of Variables, Weighted by Enrollment, 100 Districts
                                             1993/94                    2003/04
   Variable                           Mean         Std. dev.     Mean         Std. dev.
   Segregation
     %B in 90-100%NW schools              0.269          0.303       0.341          0.331
     %B in 90-100%B schools               0.170          0.233       0.153          0.231
     Black-black exposure                 0.464          0.245       0.464          0.237
     White-nonwhite segregation           0.201          0.120       0.200          0.101
     Dissimilarity index (W-NW)           0.413          0.151       0.426          0.142
     Entropy                              0.197          0.121       0.195          0.103
   District characteristics
     Average district enrollment         88,908         66,188     107,790         82,082
     Average white enrollment            37,352         24,448      36,713         26,083
     Percent nonwhite                     0.503          0.251       0.601          0.225
     %NW: 0 to less than 25%              0.170          0.429       0.048          0.465
     %NW: from 25 to less than 50%        0.416          0.493       0.324          0.468
     %NW: from 50 to less than 75%        0.141          0.349       0.337          0.473
     %NW: from 75 to 100%                 0.272          0.445       0.291          0.454
     Average district land area*            615            543         639            549
   Type
     Central city*                        0.248          0.483       0.208          0.488
     Consolidated*                        0.417          0.493       0.426          0.494
     Suburban*                            0.335          0.472       0.367          0.482
   Region
     Border state*                        0.159          0.366       0.143          0.350
     Southern state*                      0.841          0.366       0.857          0.350
   Judicial characteristics
     Unitary                              0.121          0.326       0.446          0.497
     Fourth Circuit*                      0.241          0.415       0.244          0.407
     Fifth Circuit*                       0.272          0.445       0.260          0.439
     Eleventh Circuit*                    0.374          0.484       0.402          0.490
     All other federal circuits*          0.113          0.316       0.094          0.292
     Unitary status before 1993*          0.176          0.476       0.161          0.477
     Unitary status in ’93-‘03*           0.288          0.453       0.295          0.456
     Never became unitary*                0.535          0.499       0.544          0.498


Source: Common Core of Data, unpublished data from districts, and authors’ calculations, for the
100 largest school districts in the South and Border in 2001/02. See Appendix 1A for a list of
the districts.
* Difference across years are due to difference in weights used in the averages.

11/30/04




                                               40
Table 2. Mean Values of Selected Measures, for Selected Categories, 100 Districts
                                                                        Racial isolation:               Racial imbalance:
                                                                                                                                               Entropy
                                                                 %B in 90-100% NW schools               W-NW segregation
                                   Average growth
                      Number of                       1993/94
                                    rate of whites                  1993/94           2003/04          1993/94        2003/04        1993/94             2003/04
Sample                  districts                      %NW
                                      2003-1993
Full sample               100           -0.017         0.503         0.269             0.341            0.201          0.200           0.197              0.195

Region
Border                     15             -0.026         0.517         0.293            0.370           0.228          0.218           0.193              0.192
South                      85             -0.015         0.501         0.264            0.336           0.196          0.197           0.218              0.213


Type                                       ***            ***           ***              ***             ***             *              ***                ***
Central city               22             -0.044         0.771         0.585            0.660           0.268          0.244           0.304              0.272
Consolidated               36             -0.007         0.448         0.215            0.299           0.196          0.195           0.180              0.191
Suburban                   42             -0.013         0.374         0.101            0.210           0.158          0.180           0.140              0.156

% nonwhite, 93/94                           ***           ***           ***              ***             ***                            ***
0-25%                      24              0.008         0.185         0.019            0.034           0.122          0.159           0.121              0.198
25-50%                     39             -0.004         0.371         0.121            0.200           0.190          0.202           0.149              0.222
50-75%                     19             -0.034         0.602         0.258            0.399           0.208          0.214           0.183              0.192
75-100%                    18             -0.052         0.853         0.655            0.817           0.264          0.220           0.326              0.121

Federal Circuit                              **             **             **
Fourth                       24            -0.010         0.413          0.133           0.210           0.173          0.203           0.152           0.166
Fifth                        32            -0.030         0.629          0.362           0.431           0.191          0.181           0.211           0.190
Eleventh                     32            -0.009         0.466          0.262           0.351           0.211          0.203           0.207           0.206
All others                   12            -0.031         0.503          0.353           0.390           0.255          0.228           0.230           0.235
Source: Common Core of Data, unpublished data from districts, and authors’ calculations, for the 100 largest school districts in the South and Border in
2001/02. See Appendix 1A for a list of the districts. Means are weighted by district enrollment.
*; **; *** : Means are different from each other within the category at 10% level; 5% level and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                               41
Table 3. Regressions Explaining Segregation and Racial Isolation, Pooled Sample

                                (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)
 Independent variable     %B 90-100% NW       W-NW Seg.        Entropy       %B90-100%NW    W-NW seg.   Entropy

 Years (omitted 1993)

 1994                           0.008             0.001          -0.000            0.001      0.008      0.003
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 1995                           0.015             0.001          0.001             -0.002     0.007      0.001
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 1996                           0.022             0.002          0.004             -0.008     0.007      0.003
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 1997                           0.026             -0.003         -0.004            -0.011     0.002      -0.004
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 1998                           0.036             0.003          0.002             -0.007     0.008      -0.000
                               [0.046]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 1999                           0.040             -0.002         -0.002            -0.011     0.003      -0.005
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 2000                           0.047             -0.001         -0.002            -0.011     0.002      -0.007
                               [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 2001                           0.056             -0.002         -0.002            -0.014     0.000      -0.011
                               [0.046]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.023]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 2002                           0.060             -0.001         -0.002            -0.019     -0.001     -0.012
                               [0.046]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.024]    [0.015]    [0.012]

 2003                           0.070             -0.004         -0.005            -0.017     -0.006     -0.018
                               [0.046]           [0.016]        [0.016]           [0.024]    [0.016]    [0.012]




                                                               42
 Lagged log(enrollment)        __               __             __      -0.005      -0.001      0.003
                                                                      [0.011]     [0.007]     [0.006]

 Log(land area)                __               __             __    0.066***      0.039     0.041***
                                                                      [0.008]     [0.005]     [0.004]

 Lagged %NW District           __               __             __    0.972***    0.157***    0.230***
                                                                      [0.029]     [0.019]     [0.015]

 Type (omitted central city)

 Consolidated                  __               __             __    -0.158***   -0.039***   -0.076***
                                                                      [0.019]     [0.012]     [0.010]

 Suburban                      __               __             __    -0.101***    -0.021*    -0.043***
                                                                      [0.107]     [0.011]     [0.009]

 Federal circuit (omitted
 Fifth)

 Fourth Circuit                __               __             __    -0.034**      0.007       -0.005
                                                                      [0.014]     [0.009]     [0.007]

 Eleventh Circuit              __               __             __    0.034**     0.023**     0.020***
                                                                     [0.015]     [0.010]      [0.008]

 All Others                    __               __             __    0.048**     0.042***    0.043***
                                                                     [0.019]      [0.012]     [0.010]

 Unitary status                __               __             __      0.015     0.038***    0.022***
                                                                      [0.013]     [0.009]     [0.007]

 Observations                  1070            1070           1070     1061        1061        1061

 R2                            .00              .00            .00      .72         .20         .41


Note: No GA observations for 2003 due to missing lag of NW%
11/4/04

                                                              43
Table 4. Additional regressions specifications, with time trend (Year-1992) variable

                                    (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)        (6)
 Independent variable          %B 90-100% NW    W-NW Seg.        Entropy        %B90-100%NW        W-NW seg.   Entropy

 Lagged log(enrollment)             -0.005         -0.001          0.003                 -0.004      -0.007      0.005
                                   [0.011]        [0.007]         [0.006]               [0.011]     [0.007]     [0.006]

 Log(land area)                   0.066***         0.039         0.041***              0.066***     0.038***   0.040***
                                   [0.008]        [0.005]         [0.004]               [0.008]      [0.005]    [0.004]

 Lagged %NW District              0.972***        0.157***       0.230***              0.973***     0.159***   0.231***
                                   [0.029]         [0.019]        [0.015]               [0.029]      [0.019]    [0.015]

 Type (omitted central city)

 Consolidated                     -0.158***      -0.039***       -0.076***             -0.154***    -0.031**   -0.072***
                                   [0.019]        [0.012]         [0.010]               [0.019]      [0.013]    [0.010]

 Suburban                         -0.101***       -0.021*        -0.043***             -0.099***     -0.015    -0.040***
                                   [0.107]        [0.011]         [0.009]               [0.017]     [0.011]     [0.009]

 Federal circuit (omitted
 Fifth)

 Fourth Circuit                     -0.031         0.024           -0.021              -0.035**      0.005       -0.007
                                   [0.026]        [0.017]         [0.013]               [0.014]     [0.009]     [0.007]

 Eleventh Circuit                 0.034**         0.024**        0.020***              0.035**      0.025**    0.021***
                                  [0.015]         [0.010]         [0.008]              [0.015]      [0.010]     [0.008]

 All Others                       0.048**         0.041***       0.043***              0.049**      0.045***   0.044***
                                  [0.019]          [0.012]        [0.009]              [0.019]       [0.013]    [0.010]

 Unitary status                     0.015         0.039***       0.022***                 __          __          __
                                   [0.013]         [0.009]        [0.007]




                                                                  44
 Fourth Circuit*Linear time    -0.001         0.005**          0.003      __        __         __
 trend (Year-1992)            [0.004]         [0.002]         [0.002]

 Declared unitary this year     __              __              __       0.005     -0.005     0.001
                                                                        [0.035]   [0.023]    [0.018]

 Declared unitary one year      __              __              __       0.001     -0.005     -0.003
 ago                                                                    [0.039]   [0.025]    [0.020]

 Declared unitary two years     __              __              __       -0.027    -0.003     -0.001
 ago                                                                    [0.040]   [0.026]    [0.021]

 Declared unitary three or      __              __              __       0.022    0.053***   0.029***
 more years ago                                                         [0.015]    [0.010]    [0.008]

 Year fixed effects            Yes              Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes

 Observations                  1061            1061            1061      1061      1061       1061

 R2                             .72             .20             .41       .72       .20        .41


Note: No GA observations for 2003 due to missing lag of NW%

11/4/04




                                                              45
Table 5: Regressions Explaining Segregation and Racial Isolation, Pooled Sample with District
Fixed Effects
                          (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)


                        %B 90-        W-NW            Entropy     %B 90-     W-NW       Entropy
                       100%NW          seg.                      100%NW       seg.

 Lagged                -0.172***      0.044***         0.011     -0.169***   0.045***    0.013
 log(enrollment)        [0.027]        [0.013]        [0.012]     [0.027]     [0.013]   [0.012]




 Lagged %NW            0.762***        0.004          0.087**    0.782***     0.015     0.096***
                        [0.078]       [0.038]         [0.035]     [0.077]    [0.038]     [0.035]


 Unitary status          0.014         0.004          0.011***      __         __         __
                        [0.009]       [0.005]          [0.004]


 Unitary status           __            __              __        -0.001     -0.006      0.003
 current year                                                     [0.012]    [0.006]    [0.006]



 Unitary status past      __            __              __         0.015      0.002      0.009
 year                                                             [0.014]    [0.007]    [0.006]



 Unitary status two       __            __              __         0.004      0.009     0.012*
 years ago                                                        [0.014]    [0.007]    [0.006]



 Unitary status           __            __              __       0.055***    0.022***   0.030***
 three or more                                                    [0.013]     [0.007]    [0.006]
 years ago


 N                       1061          1061            1061        1061       1061       1061

 R2                       .48           .04             .31         .50        .07        .31

 Year fixed              Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
 effects?


11/24/04


                                                 46
Figure 1. Measures of Segregation, Isolation, and Interracial Exposure, 100 Districts, 1993/94 to
2003/04.



             0.5


             0.4
  Measures




             0.3


             0.2


             0.1


              0
                   1993       1995          1997            1999         2001           2003
                                                     Year
                      %B in 90-100% NW                          %B in 90-100% B schools
                      B-B exp rate                              W-NW seg index
                      Dissimilarity index                       Entropy index



Note: Data interpolated for 5 districts in TN due to missing data in 1997, 1999-2002.


11/30/04



                                                47
Figure 2. Exposure Rates by Race and Overall Racial Composition, 100 Districts, 1993/94 and 2003/04




              100%

                90%

                80%

                70%

                60%

                50%

                40%

                30%

                20%

                10%

                 0%
                           ‘93 ‘03         ‘93 ‘03              ‘93 ‘03     ‘93 ‘03     ‘93 ‘03
                             White           Black              Hispanic Other nonwhite   Total
                                       White       Black        Hispanic    Other nonwhite

Source: See Table 1.
Note: Each of the first eight bars gives the racial composition for the school attended by the typical student of each
indicated racial group for the indicated year. The last two bars give the overall racial composition of schools in the
100 districts.




                                                           48
Figure 3. Racial Composition and White Growth Rate, 1993/94 – 2003/04




                                                            96
                                            .05
         Average white growth rate, 1993-2003




                                                      19    82 80
                                                                 71
                                                      45    22       89 14 568 17            30
                               1.39e-17




                                                                 6 4713
                                                                87       15 73 92
                                                            4641     2423
                                                                     20   60 95 121816    55
                                                            31 42         9921        84          76 85
                                                           62     93
                                                                 65        81 94 11535448 7            59
                                                                 28    34
                                                                        44100                 352                                           25 5
                                                                             37
                                                                             6135 78    10
                                                                                                      69
                                                                                                  97 3236                          79
                                                            2                   68                                                                70
                                                                      83                58
                                                                                         64             5726 98     72      51 9
                                                                                                                           75
                                                                                 88                         33 77
                        -.05




                                                                                               39
                                                                                                            4                                90
                                                                                                   86                  29       74
                                                                                                                      50    634391
                                                                                                                         49                 40
                                                                                                      38
               -.1




                                                                                                                    6766
                                                                                        27
     -.15




                                                                                                                                        1

                                                  0           .2               .4             .6                         .8                        1
                                                                           Percent nonw hite 1993/94

                                                                                             Fitted values



Source: See Table 1




                                                                                     49
Figure 4. White-nonwhite Segregation Index, 1993/94 and 2003/04


             .6




                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                   37

                                                                                                                             61
     2003/04 segregation
                     .4




                                                                                                              5         30
                                                                       59            44
                                                                  29 69        36                                 43
                                                                4        95                       40
                                             55                               32                 63
                                                         2    28 81 54                       1
                                                                     79       77                 8
                                              50                        51 18
                                       53             68 17              33 38
                                                            42                 62
                                               26               92        7610
                                                                            7
                                               65          31 22
                                                           88
      .2




                                                               11
                                    82         93 4648
                                                            14
                                                              16          74
                                           9945716039
                                                   12 84           49 58
                                            7352 6498 57 729
                                          100 24 94 85
                                        20 41 34 86
                                   96
                                    8056 47 615
                                     35       97        19 75
                                 7889211323                   27
                                    87                91
                               83
                                       90 67
                                           66
                                 70
             0




                           0                              .2                                 .4                              .6
                                                               1993/94 segregation

                                                                                   45 line



Source: See Table 1




                                                                     50
Figure 5. Percentage of Black Students in 90-100% Nonwhite Schools, 1993/94 and 2003/04




                                                                                                                                      1         70
                   1




                                                                                                                                      90     40
                                                                                                                                           25 5
                                                                                                    29
     %B in 90-100%NW schools, 2003/04




                                                                                                                          7463
                                                                                                                            79
                                                              67                                                     9           43
                                             66                                                49
                                .8




                                                                      50
                                                                                4                               51
                                                                                           3                         30
                       .6




                                                                                      38        77

                                                                    27 32
                                                                        6933                   37 36
                                                              44       7                                        76
                                            26                                                           72
                 .4




                                                                           59
                                                      5416    57                                         61
                                                               91               18
                                                                                 58
                                            81                98      10
                                                     95
                                            5355
       .2




                                            883986
                                                 75      8
                                            22        1197
                                            64 12
                                                28
                                                85
                                            31
                                            65
                                            14
                                            19
                                            42 2 52
                                                  92
                                             48
                                            68
                                            9460                           62
                                            100
                                            84
                                            17
                                            15
                                            56
                                            6
                                            13
                                            21
                                            20
                                            24
                                            23
                                            35
                                            34
                                            41
                                            47
                                            46
                                            45
                                            71
                                            73
                                            78
                                            80
                                            83
                                            82
                                            87
                                            89
                                            93
                                            96
                                            99
                   0




                                        0                    .2                .4         .6                                     .8             1
                                                                      %B in 90-100%NW schools, 1993/94

                                                                                                          45 line



Source: See Table 1




                                                                                               51
Figure 6. Districts in Sample with Unitary Status (fraction of total enrollment)


                          .5
      Proportion of districts with unitary status
         .1         .2    0     .3         .4




                                                    1993   1995   1997           1999   2001   2003
                                                                          Year



Source: See text




                                                                         52
Appendix Table 1. 100 Largest School Districts in South and Border States, 2003/04.

                                                                                                              Percentage
                                                                                                          black students
                                                                        Percent                                in schools
                                                                       nonwhite Segregation Dissimilarity       90-100%     Entropy Unitary
   State                 District                 Obs. #    Enrollment   (%)       index       index        nonwhite (%)    measure status
Alabama      Birmingham City                       01           34,377   98.1      0.291       0.653                 99.1      .341
             Jefferson Co.                         02           38,631 30.7        0.293       0.468                  5.4      .244
             Mobile Co.                            03           64,975 54.1        0.503       0.646                 61.6      .432 1997
             Montgomery Co.                        04           32,521 78.1        0.329       0.614                 68.7      .310
DC           D.C. Public Schools                   05           58,075 95.4        0.397       0.854                 93.5      .448
Florida      Brevard Co.                           06           75,800   24.5      0.096       0.285                  0.0      .095
             Broward Co.                           07         271,353    64.5      0.210       0.393                 45.3      .194 1994
             Collier Co.                           08           38,347 50.5        0.272       0.438                 18.8      .180
             Dade Co.                              09         358,173    89.9      0.136       0.456                 83.3      .330 2001
             Duval Co.                             10         123,786 53.2         0.207       0.358                 25.5      .174 2001
             Escambia Co.                          11           44,572 42.4        0.193       0.353                 13.4      .146
             Hillsborough Co.                      12         181,504    53.9      0.161       0.339                 11.7      .136 2001
             Lee Co.                               13           64,758   39.4      0.076       0.246                  0.0      .082 2004
             Manatee Co.                           14           41,843 37.5        0.172       0.338                  7.0      .116
             Marion Co.                            15           39,983 34.6        0.084       0.236                  1.2      .084 1995
             Orange Co.                            16         168,334    60.4      0.190       0.369                 36.4      .185
             Osceola Co.                           17           43,874 59.2        0.236       0.416                  2.0      .132
             Palm Beach Co.                        18         171,848    56.5      0.256       0.448                 30.3      .202 2002
             Pasco Co.                             19           55,859 17.4        0.099       0.277                  5.2      .091
             Pinellas Co.                          20         119,948    31.6      0.105       0.296                  0.0      .095 2000
             Polk Co.                              21           80,982 40.2        0.073       0.215                  0.0      .077 2000
             Sarasota Co.                          22           39,273   23.4      0.197       0.367                 14.1      .162
             Seminole Co.                          23           64,192 36.3        0.063       0.209                  0.0      .055
             Volusia Co.                           24           63,383   29.9      0.132       0.309                  0.0      .148
Georgia      Atlanta City                          25           51,315 92.8        0.534       0.847                 92.4      .479 1975
             Chatham Co.                           26           33,364 71.7        0.218       0.440                 43.5      .189 1994


                                                                             53
             Clayton Co.                      27    49,854   88.3   0.074   0.321   50.3   .097
             Cobb Co.                         28   100,999   44.4   0.292   0.479   12.2   .246
             DeKalb Co.                       29    96,875   89.8   0.355   0.741   89.1   .405   1996
             Fulton Co.                       30    73,138   57.4   0.392   0.582   62.8   .350   2003
             Gwinett Co.                      31   128,386   49.6   0.205   0.384    9.3   .130
             Muscogee Co.                     32    32,076   67.0   0.309   0.541   51.8   .242   1997
             Richmond Co.                     33    32,969   76.4   0.244   0.492   50.4   .204
Kentucky     Fayette Co.                      34    32,624   32.8   0.114   0.295    0.0   .109
             Jefferson Co.                    35    92,694   42.6   0.088   0.250    0.0   .069   2000
Louisiana    Caddo Parish                     36    43,209   63.6   0.351   0.568   51.1   .309   2001
             Calcasieu Parish                 37    31,096   35.3   0.488   0.615   49.5   .396
             East Baton Rouge Parish          38    44,876   79.2   0.242   0.531   56.6   .245   2003
             Jefferson Parish                 39    49,739   64.6   0.171   0.352   18.1   .144
             Orleans Parish                   40    64,461   96.4   0.329   0.768   97.0   .366
             St. Tammany Parish               41    34,218   20.3   0.111   0.319    0.0   .105
Maryland     Anne Arundel Co.                 42    73,262   27.5   0.223   0.424    5.2   .160
             Baltimore City                   43    91,738   90.7   0.342   0.676   81.2   .368
             Baltimore County                 44   108,792   44.1   0.371   0.523   45.9   .281
             Frederick Co.                    45    38,519   15.8   0.150   0.434    0.0   .133
             Harford Co.                      46    40,015   22.1   0.190   0.475    0.0   .165
             Howard Co.                       47    46,516   34.5   0.102   0.269    0.0   .069
             Montgomery Co.                   48   136,915   55.1   0.185   0.363    4.9   .124
             Prince George’s Co.              49   137,177   91.9   0.166   0.532   80.1   .237   2002
Missouri     Kansas City School District 33   50    30,472   85.7   0.251   0.523   72.7   .317   2003
             St. Louis City                   51    37,142   84.9   0.258   0.599   66.8   .294   1999*
N Carolina   Cumberland Co.                   52    53,584   59.9   0.143   0.333    6.1   .090
             Forsyth-Winston-Salem Co.        53    46,354   49.7   0.244   0.411   21.7   .184   1974
             Guilford Co.                     54    66,733   54.8   0.286   0.458   35.7   .198
             Charlotte-Mecklenburg            55   113,729   58.6   0.302   0.490   22.5   .192   2001
             Wake Co.                         56   108,175   41.6   0.092   0.256    0.6   .085
Oklahoma     Oklahoma City                    57    38,180   72.6   0.142   0.335   34.4   .224   1991
             Tulsa City                       58    41,413   59.7   0.162   0.326   29.2   .157
S Carolina   Charleston Co.                   59    42,901   60.0   0.369   0.569   39.2   .291   1992

                                                             54
          Greenville Co.           60    63,452   35.6   0.156   0.321     3.5   .118   1985
Tennessee Hamilton Co.             61    40,507   38.3   0.433   0.564    36.0   .352   1986
          Knox Co.                 62    52,698   18.1   0.232   0.415     5.1   .214
          Memphis City             63   116,857   92.1   0.308   0.710    86.2   .340
          Nashville-Davidson Co.   64    70,002   59.7   0.151   0.316    11.9   .152   1998
          Shelby Co.               65    47,042   33.1   0.204   0.366     7.5   .154
Texas     Aldine                   66    53,086   93.3   0.031   0.251    79.9   .089
          Alief                    67    43,188   93.1   0.032   0.279    82.5   .045
          Arlington                68    59,301   59.3   0.237   0.425     3.4   .142
          Austin                   69    73,922   68.3   0.347   0.564    49.0   .150   1983
          Brownsville              70    42,687   98.1   0.014   0.379   100.0   .095
          Conroe                   71    38,102   28.4   0.164   0.348     0.0   .126
          Corpus Christi           72    37,899   79.4   0.148   0.419    41.6   .128
          Cypress-Fairbanks        73    72,623   47.2   0.147   0.318     0.0   .084
          Dallas                   74   152,684   93.6   0.192   0.600    86.1   .301   2003
          El Paso                  75    60,615   86.5   0.106   0.408    18.7   .155
          Fort Bend                76    60,067   68.0   0.211   0.439    45.8   .218
          Fort Worth               77    76,080   81.6   0.273   0.552    58.6   .302   1990
          Garland                  78    53,259   59.7   0.074   0.233     0.0   .062
          Houston                  79   195,686   90.4   0.282   0.664    84.6   .344   1983
          Katy                     80    40,881   35.6   0.090   0.273     0.0   .083
          Klein                    81    34,645   44.7   0.290   0.482    27.6   .162
          Lewisville               82    43,249   30.9   0.172   0.373     0.0   .141
          Mesquite                 83    33,591   53.9   0.044   0.187     0.0   .042
          North East               84    55,035   54.2   0.156   0.339     2.5   .114
          Northside                85    69,453   68.2   0.127   0.326    10.4   .090
          Pasadena                 86    43,922   80.0   0.111   0.344    19.1   .142
          Plano                    87    50,228   37.1   0.060   0.192     0.0   .085
          Richardson               88    33,205   58.7   0.202   0.374    19.3   .166
          Round Rock               89    34,792   39.0   0.073   0.225     0.0   .083
          San Antonio              90    52,697   96.3   0.028   0.322    95.6   .253
          Ysleta                   91    44,769   93.1   0.059   0.447    28.4   .124
Virginia  Chesapeake City          92    39,412   40.2   0.218   0.410     6.2   .160

                                                  55
            Chesterfield Co.                  93          54,124     32.8       0.181        0.354                 0.0       .129    1972
            Fairfax Co.                        94        161,890     47.1       0.133        0.305                 2.9       .105
            Henrico Co.                       95          43,958     45.3       0.323        0.496                23.8       .276    1972
            Loudoun Co.                        96         39,004     27.9       0.094        0.265                 0.0       .074
            Newport News City                  97         31,142     64.2       0.097        0.250                12.4       .076
            Norfolk City                      98          32,650     74.3       0.141        0.351                26.1       .123   1986*
            Prince William Co.                 99         64,192     49.0       0.159        0.344                 0.0       .095
            Virginia Beach City               100         75,900     40.0       0.127        0.305                 2.8       .085

* No official designation of unitary status, but effectively treated by courts as such.
Source: Tabulations provided by school districts; authors'calculations.
Note: Following Orfield and Monfort (1992, p. 2), regions are defined as follows: Border: Delaware, District of Columbia, Kentucky, Maryland,
Missouri, Oklahoma, West Virginia; South: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia.

11/16/04




                                                                     56
