NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDUCING THE RISK OF INVESTMENT-BASED
SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 11084
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11084
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005

This paper is a report on a project that is exploring alternative ways of dealing with the risk in investmentbased Social Security pension plans. I am grateful to Eugene Soltes and Xuan Qin for the calculations in this
paper. The research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The
opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author and do not represent the opinions or policy
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.
© 2005 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform
Martin Feldstein

NBER Working Paper No. 11084
January 2005
JEL No. H0, H3, H5
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the risks implied by a mixed system of Social Security pension benefits
with different combinations of pay-as-you-go taxes and personal retirement account (PRA) saving.
The analysis shows how these risks can be reduced by using alternative private market guarantee
strategies. The first such strategy uses a blend of equities and TIPS to guarantee at least a positive
real rate or return on each year’s PRA saving. The second is an explicit zero-cost collar that
guarantees an annual rate of return by giving up all returns above a certain level. One variant of these
guarantees uses a two stage procedure: a guaranteed return to age 66 and then a separate guarantee
on the implicit return in the annuity phase. An alternative strategy provides a combined guarantee
on the return during both the accumulation and the annuity phase.
Simulations are presented of the probability distributions of retirement incomes relative to
the “benchmark” benefits specified in current law. Calculations of expected utility show that these
risk reduction techniques can raise expected utility relative to the plans with no guarantees. The
ability to do so depends on the individual’s risk aversion level. This underlines the idea that
different individuals would rationally prefer different investment strategies and risk reduction
options.
Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
feldstein@nber.org

Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform
Martin Feldstein*
Many governments around the world – including Australia and Britain, Sweden and
Mexico, China and Chile – have shifted from pure pay-as-you-go tax financed Social Security
pensions to plans that rely in whole or in part on investments in stocks and bonds. There is now
active discussion about the desirability of doing so in the United States. The Clinton
administration came close to proposing such a plan. President Bush established a bipartisan
presidential commission to advise on detailed aspects of such a plan and, after his reelection in
2004, reiterated his intention to introduce legislation to change Social Security in this way.
Any consideration of introducing an investment-based component into Social Security
immediately raises the issue of the risk associated with uncertain asset returns. Some individuals
would welcome the opportunity to achieve a higher return on their Social Security contributions
even if that entails accepting additional market risk. Others would be reluctant to subject their
retirement income to the uncertainty of investment returns. More generally, individuals differ in
the extent to which they would accept additional risk in exchange for higher returns.
This paper presents a new market-based approach to reducing the risk of investment*

Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is a report on a project that is exploring alternative ways of
dealing with the risk in investment-based Social Security pension plans. I am grateful to Eugene
Soltes and Xuan Qin for the calculations in this paper. The research was supported by the U.S.
Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The opinions and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the author and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.
-1-

based Social Security that could be tailored to individual risk preferences. With this new form of
risk reduction, substituting an investment-based personal retirement account (PRA) for the
traditional pure pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) plan could achieve both a significantly higher expected
retirement income and a very high probability that the investment-based annuity would be at
least as large as the pay-as-you-go benefit. A key feature of the approach developed here is a
guarantee that the individual would not lose any of the real value of each year’s PRA savings and
might be guaranteed to earn at least some minimum real rate of return.
In one example of such a plan that is presented later in this paper, I examine the effect of
replacing the current 12.4 percent pay-as-you-go tax with a mixed plan that has a 6.2 percent payas-you-go tax and 6.2 percent annual PRA savings. This new mixed plan, when fully phased in,
would have the following desirable characteristics:
- The median value of the combined retirement income (i.e., the sum of the pay-as-yougo benefit and the PRA annuity) would be 147 percent of the traditional pay-as-you-go
benefit.
- There would be a 95 percent probability that the combined retirement income (the payas-you-go benefit and the PRA annuity) exceeds the traditional pay-as-you-go benefit.
- There would be less than one chance in one hundred that the combined retirement
income would be less than 96 percent of the traditional pay-as-you-go benefit.
- Each year’s PRA saving would be guaranteed to earn at least a one percent real rate of
return between the time that it is saved and its value at age 66 (and generally substantially
more). I therefore refer to this as a “No Lose” plan.
- The variable annuity purchased at age 66 would have a similar “No Lose” feature, i.e., a
guaranteed real rate of return of at least one percent.
Section 1 of the paper discusses alternative approaches to risk reduction in investmentbased Social Security plans. The second section summarizes a private market approach to risk

-2-

reduction that I reported on in an earlier paper. The third section presents the idea of the “No
Lose” plan, developed in the current paper, in which private markets provide a guarantee based
on Treasury inflation protected bonds. . Simulation results for these alternative plans are then
presented and discussed in sections 4 and 5 where the distribution of the combined pension
income of the mixed plan (PAYGO plus PRA) is compared to the projected “benchmark”
benefits of the current pure PAYGO plan. An alternative approach that permits tailoring the risk
distribution to individual preferences by using the purchase and sale of equal value (i.e., selffinancing ) derivatives is analyzed in section 6. Section 7 shows the effect of lowering the
combined PAYGO and PRA cost as a way of modeling the adjustment that would be needed to
deal with the ageing of the population without the large rise in the payroll tax that would
otherwise be required.

1. Alternative Approaches to Risk Reduction
The risk born by retirees in an investment-based plan can be thought of as the variability
of the retirement income or as the probability that the retirement income will fall substantially
short of the current-law pay-as-you-go benefits. In previous papers, Elena Ranguelova, Andrew
Samwick and I assessed the magnitude of the risk in a pure investment-based plan and evaluated
the effects of some of the ways of reducing that risk.1
1

"The Transition to Investment-based Social Security when Portfolio Returns and Capital
Profitability are Uncertain," Martin Feldstein, Elena Ranguelova and Andrew Samwick, in J.
Campbell and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Risks Aspects of Investment Based Social Security
Reform,(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000). NBER Working Paper No. 7016;
"Individual Risk in an Investment-Based Social Security System", (Martin Feldstein and Elena
Ranguelova). American Economic Review , Vol. 91, No. 4, September 2001, pp 1116-25. NBER
-3-

One way in which the investment risk to individual retirees could in principle be reduced
would be for the government to accumulate the investment in a single national fund. The
government could use the investment returns from this fund to finance defined benefits, making
up any shortfall with tax revenue or government borrowing. Such a central fund involves
problems of its own that lie beyond the scope of this paper.2 I will assume therefore that the
investment based plans are all structured through Personal Retirement Accounts. In all of these
plans, individuals and/or their employers contribute to their PRAs during their working years and
receive an annuity at retirement. The accumulated assets of individuals who die before reaching
retirement age are assumed to be bequeathed according to the instructions of the deceased.
Strategies for reducing the risk of investment-based PRA plans involve various forms and
mixtures of the following four approaches:
(1)

Restrictions on the investment assets;

(2)

A mixed system that combines PAYGO benefits and investment based annuities;

(3)

Government guarantees;

(4)

Market based guarantees.

I will comment now on each of these.
All actual and proposed investment-based plans restrict the assets in which the personal
retirement accounts can be invested. These restrictions generally preclude investing in
Working Paper No. 8074.
2

See my discussion of these problems in “Comment on P. Diamond, Administrative Costs
and Equilibrium Charges with Individual Accounts,” in John Shoven, ed., Administrative
Aspects of Investment Based Social Security Reform(The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
2000) pp. 162-169.
-4-

individual stocks by requiring that equity investments be limited to broadly diversified mutual
funds. Asset restrictions may also set maximum fractions of the portfolio or of new saving that
can be invested in equities. The analysis in this paper considers the effect of using Treasury
inflation protected bonds (TIPS) to introduce a risk-free real return as a component of the PRA
investment.
While some countries have opted for a pure investment-based plan (e.g., Chile and
Mexico) most countries have chosen a mixed system that combines pay-as-you-go benefits and
investment based annuities. The three proposals analyzed by the President’s Commission were
of this form. The current analysis will focus on plans in which traditional pay-as-you-go benefits
provide half of the benefits projected in current law with additional benefits provided by the PRA
annuity.
In our earlier papers, Elena Ranguelova, Andrew Samwick and I analyzed a variety of
government guarantees. A typical guarantee would stipulate that the government would
supplement the income of retirees if the combined annual annuity payment fell below some level.
To avoid the moral hazard problem of inducing individuals to take excessive risk, the
government supplement would be based on the return on a “standard portfolio” like a 60:40 mix
of the Standard and Poors 500 and the Lehman bond index. To make individuals cost-conscious
about the annuity provider, the guarantee might take the form of allowing the individual to keep
some fraction of the investment-based annuity (say 25%) and then supplementing the annuity if
the remaining portion does not reach some level.
Our earlier analysis showed that providing a guarantee that individuals will receive at

-5-

least as much as the benefits projected in current law (the “benchmark benefits”) would impose
relatively little risk on future taxpayers. Nevertheless, critics of such plans worry that guarantees
could be modified in the future to create expensive new entitlements. The current study therefore
focuses on guarantees that could be provided by private financial markets.

2. A Private Market Solution: Accumulated Pension Collars
A specific proposal for a private market guarantee based on a system of puts and calls is
presented in Feldstein and Ranguelova3. That paper analyzed the potential experience of an
individual who contracts at age 21 to deposit a fraction of his or her earnings each year in a
personal retirement account with the funds invested in a 60:40 portfolio of stocks and bonds. The
accumulated funds are used at age 66 to finance a variable annuity invested in the same asset
mix. This PRA investment is combined with a traditional pay-as-you go system that provides
benefits equal to two-thirds of the projected “benchmark” benefits. The individual augments this
combination with a put contract that provides that the sum of the PAYGO benefit and the annual
PRA annuity would be at least as large as the benchmark benefit, i.e, that the PRA annuity would
be at least equal to one-third of the benchmark benefit. The put contract would be part of the
package provided by the seller of the PRA investment. To finance the cost of this put, the
individual in effect sells a call that gives the buyer of the call any PRA annuity payments in

3

"Accumulated Pension Collars: A Market Approach to Reducing The Risk of
Investment-Based Social Security Reform," (Martin Feldstein and Elena Ranguelova). NBER
Working Paper No. 7861, August 2000, in Tax Policy and the Economy 2000, (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2001)

-6-

excess of an amount that makes the value of the call equal to the value of the put. In short, the
guarantee is based on purchasing a zero-cost “collar” , i.e., a combination of puts and calls of
equal value.
Although this collar approach to guaranteeing that the combination of the PRA annuity
and the pay-as-you-go benefit would at least equal the benchmark benefit is conceptually
interesting, it is not an operationally feasible strategy in practice because it requires individuals
at the time that they enter the labor force to know the future path of their earnings. Only with
this knowledge can they contract the amounts that they will save and calculate the size of the
future pay-as-you-go benchmark benefit.

3. An Annual Contract “No Lose” PRA Plan
The current analysis therefore develops an alternative approach to a market based
guarantee that could be implemented in practice. The key to this is that the guarantee is
purchased each year based on that year’s PRA savings. The basic contract would guarantee the
individual a “No Lose” investment, i.e., that the real value of the PRA account at age 66 will be
at least equal to the amount that the individual contributed during each year of his working life.
More specifically, the amount saved in each year would be guaranteed to retain at least its real
value by age 66. Such a guarantee could be provided by the firm that manages the PRA product
(i.e., the mutual fund, bank, insurance company, etc..). The PRA legislation might require the
PRA manager to offer such an option. Alternatively, the offer of such options might be
voluntary. Similarly, individuals might be free to accept such an option only if they want or

-7-

might be required to select such a guarantee on all or part of their PRA saving. We do not
examine these issues but show the effect of such a guarantee on the possible levels of retirement
income relative to the traditional pay-as-you-go benefit.
The simplest way to achieve such a No Lose PRA account would be to combine TIPS
(Treasury Inflation Protected Securities, which have a guaranteed real return) with equities. The
fraction of the annual PRA saving that would have to be invested in TIPS to guarantee that the
annual PRA saving would retain its real value by age 66 depends on the age of the saver and the
rate of return on the TIPS of the relevant maturity. For example, if the saver is 21 years old and
the real return on TIPS is 2 percent, a $1000 PRA saving would be divided between $410 in
TIPS and the remaining $590 in equities. The 2 percent real return and the 45 year investment
period imply that the $410 would accumulate to $1000 at the initial price level by age 66. Even
if the equity portion became completely worthless, the PRA account would be worth the initial
$1000 real dollars.4
At older working ages, there are fewer years for the TIPS to accumulate and therefore a
larger fraction of the initial saving must be invested in TIPS. For example, a 40 year old would
have to invest $598 out of each $1000 of new saving in TIPS to guarantee the $1000 value of the
account at age 66 with the remaining $402 invested in equities.
In practice of course the value at age 66 of the annual PRA saving would be worth

4

The supply of TIPS created by the Treasury is already being supplemented by privately
issued inflation protected bonds issued by several financial firms. (See Wall Street Journal, July
28, 2004, page D1) The no-risk character of those bonds could be enhanced by requiring that the
issuers have appropriate guarantees backed by capital. An appropriate derivatives market in longterm inflation options could facilitate the expansion of this private market.
-8-

substantially more than the guaranteed amount because the equity portion of the account would
add substantial value. Consider for example the 40 year old. The $598 in TIPS would be worth
$1000 at age 66. If the $402 in equities earned a 7 percent real return (approximately the average
historic real return over the past half century) , the $402 would grow to $2335, making the total
value of that year’s account $3335, more than three times the guaranteed amount.
When the individual reaches age 66, all of the 45 annual PRA accounts would be
combined to provide a single PRA retirement fund. The individual could then buy a conventional
fixed rate annuity or a variable annuity. Alternatively, the No Lose approach could be continued
in the annuity phase of the retirement plan. The annuity provider could offer a guarantee that the
annual annuity payments would be at least as large as the individual’s retirement fund could
purchase with a zero real return. The annuity provider could achieve this guarantee with the
appropriate mix of TIPS and equities. The expected return would of course again be much larger
than the guaranteed minimum.
There is an alternative way of achieving a zero real return during both the accumulation
phase and the annuity phase. The individual in each working year could purchase a real annuity
with a guarantee that the return on the funds saved in that year would provide at least as large a
real annuity starting at age 67 as would be available with a zero real rate of interest during both
the accumulation and annuity phases. This “lifetime contract” has more funds invested in
equities during the annuity phase than the “two stage” process that guarantees the accumulated
value at age 66 and then uses that to buy the annuity with the zero real return guarantee.
This approach can be easily modified to increase the guarantee from a zero real return

-9-

(No Lose) to a one percent real rate of return. For a 40 year old, $1000 saved in a PRA would
grow at a 1 percent real rate of return to a real $1,295 at age 66. To guarantee at least this
amount at age 66 by using TIPS with a 2 percent yield would require purchasing $774 of TIPS.
The reduction in the equity investment from $402 (in the zero real guarantee case) to $226 with a
one percent real guarantee shows the nature of the tradeoff between risk reduction and return
reduction. If the $226 earned the historic average of 7 percent, it would grow to $1312 by age
66, making the total value of the account $2,607. This compares with an expected value of
$3,335 with a zero real guarantee.

4. Simulating the Distribution of PRA Investment Outcomes
We simulate the distribution of the accumulated pension assets at age 66 in a fully
phased-in plan on the basis of the means, variances and covariances of the returns on equities
measured by the Standard and Poors 500 from 1946 to 2003 and on bonds by the Lehman
corporate bond returns for 1973 to 2003. The mean log real returns are 6.9 percent for equities
and 4.4 percent for corporate bonds. We subtract 40 basis points from the mean returns to reflect
potential administrative costs.5
The distributions of pension incomes are based on 10,000 simulations for each plan that
we study. Each simulation begins by drawing a mean rate of return for the proposed mix of
stocks and corporate bonds during the individual’s lifetime. This mean is drawn from a normal
distribution with a mean equal to the estimated mean from the sample of observations and a
5

Actual variable annuity plans like TIAA-CREF have lower cost despite marketing
expenses.
-10-

standard deviation that equals the standard error of that mean. Conditional on this mean, we draw
80 annual rates of return corresponding to the potential returns at ages 21 through 100. These
returns are assumed to be normally distributed and serially independent.6 The TIPS are assumed
to deliver a sure real return of 2 percent.7
Each of the annual PRA accounts evolves in this way to age 66. At that point, we
aggregate the individual accounts and purchase a variable annuity. The annuity is subject to a
“No Lose” guarantee that the annual benefits are at least as large as would be achieved with a
zero real return. Alternatively we calculate the “lifetime contract” annuities based on a
guaranteed real annuity from each year’s PRA saving which are then added together during the
annuity phase.

5. Comparison of Alternative PRA Pensions Relative to the Pay-as-You-Go Benchmark
Our basic analysis compares the retirement annuities produced by different PRA plans
with the level of benefits associated with the pay-as-you-go plan with a 12.4 percent payroll tax.
For the sake of specificity, we consider an individual who earns $25,000 at age 21 and whose
earnings then rise at 2 percent a year in real terms to $60,950 at age 66. We assume that the
benefits at age 67 are then 40 percent of the earnings at age 66. Although a 40 percent
6

See Feldstein and Ranguelova (American Economic Review, 2001) for a detailed
description of the simulation approach and the relation between the parameters of the log returns
and the corresponding parameters in levels.
7

The actual return on TIPS currently (November 2004) varies between 0.8 percent at 5
years and 2.1 percent at 25 years. Our analysis does not vary the TIP return by maturity. This
return has varied over time. Six months earlier it was 1.1 percent at 5 years and 2.25 percent at
25 years.
-11-

replacement rate is standard for an individual with a median level of lifetime income, 40 percent
is higher than such an individual would receive in retirement benefits at the $60,950 level of
immediate pre-retirement income. The 40 percent replacement is intended as a rough
approximation to the combined effects of pre-67 mortality, benefits for a retired spouse, survivor
benefits, etc..8
The first row of Table 1 shows the relative benefit distribution corresponding to a mixed
plan with a tax rate of 6.2 percent and a PRA saving rate of 6.2 percent. All of the PRA funds
are invested in equities (the Standard and Poors 500) with no guarantee. The pay-as-you-go part
of the plan, financed with a 6.2 percent tax rate, would provide benefits equal to half of the
benchmark level. The data show that with no guarantee the mixed plan with a pure equity PRA
investment produces a median combined benefit equal to 2.61 times the benchmark.9 There is
only a one percent chance that the combined benefit would be less than 74 percent of the
benchmark. Some individuals with low risk aversion might prefer to have no guarantee,
accepting the risk of a low combined benefit in order to have a chance to get a high combined
benefit and secure in the knowledge that the pay-as-you-go benefit will provide 50 percent of the
benchmark benefit.
Others however would be prepared to sacrifice some of the potential high return in order
to reduce the risk of relatively low benefits. Row 2 of Table 1 shows the effect of the No Lose

8

All of the calculations of relative benefits for this representative individual do not
depend on the specific level of income.
9

This is higher than the ratios reported in earlier studies with Ranguelova and Samwick
because those studies used a PRA investment equal to 60 percent equities and 40 percent debt.
-12-

plan with a guarantee that the annual real return would be at least zero. The PRA funds are
invested in a mix of equities (the Standard and Poors 500) and TIPS; there are no corporate
bonds. The calculation is based on the two stage approach: the TIPS are selected to guarantee a
No Lose accumulation (zero real return) to age 66 and the accumulated funds are then used to
buy a variable annuity invested in a combination of equities and TIPS selected to give a
minimum zero ex ante real return.
Note first that the median ratio of the combined benefits to the benchmark pure pay-asyou-go benefits is 1.80. That is, there is an even chance that the combination of the reduced payas-you-go benefits and the PRA annuity will be at least 80 percent more than the basic
benchmark pay-as-you-go benefit. Note next that the 5th percentile in the distribution of the
combined benefits corresponds to 99 percent of the benchmark benefits. There is thus only one
chance in 20 that the combined benefits will be less than 99 percent of the benchmark benefits.
Even at the extreme one percent level, the combined benefits would be 90 percent of the
benchmark level. In short, the no lose option offers a level of benefits that is likely to be
substantially higher than the benchmark benefit in the pure pay-as-you-go system and that
involves only a very small risk of receiving less than 90 percent of that benchmark benefit.
Note also that there is a significant chance with this no lose plan of receiving a great deal
more than the benchmark benefit. The 70th percentile in the relative distribution corresponds to
combined benefits equal to more than twice the benchmark benefit; a combined annuity equal to
266 percent of the benchmark benefit corresponds to about 100 percent of the individual’s peak
pre-retirement income. Similarly, there is one chance in 10 (i.e., the 90th percentile) that the

-13-

combined income would be more than five times the benchmark benefit, equivalent to more than
twice the peak pre-retirement income.
Selecting a guarantee of a one percent real return during both the accumulation and
annuity phases instead of the zero percent reported in the second row of Table 1 does little to
reduce the small risk at the first and fifth percentiles and lowers the combined benefits above that
level. The implications of the one percent real return guarantee are shown in Row 3 of Table 1.
Comparing rows 2 and 3 shows that the combined income ratio at the 90th percentile declines
from 5.7 times the benchmark benefit to about 3.6 times the benchmark. The combined median
income falls from 180 percent of the benchmark to 147 percent of the benchmark benefit, still a
substantial gain relative to the current law.
In exchange for these lower payouts at the middle and top of the distribution, the one
percent real guarantee provides only slightly better protection against lower levels of combined
retirement incomes. There is only a one percent risk that the combined benefit would be more
than four percent below the benchmark level, not very different from the ten percent with the r>0
guarantee.
Rows four and five are based on lifetime return guarantees instead of the two-stage
approach reported in rows two and three. The individual during each working year contributes to
a PRA annuity plan that promises to pay a positive rate of return during both the accumulations
and annuity phases. If an individual dies before retirement age the accumulated fund is paid as a
bequest. This lifetime return guarantee approach keeps a larger share of funds invested in
equities, thereby increasing both the risk and the expected return. Comparing the two r > 0

-14-

guarantees (rows 2 and 4) shows that the lifetime guarantee approach raises the median benefit
from 1.8 times the benchmark to 2.14 times the benchmark. The 90th percentile rises from 5.73
times the benchmark to 8.62 times the benchmark but the first percentile declines from 90
percent of the benchmark to 82 percent.
None of the five distributions clearly dominates. A distribution with higher upside
potential also has a greater probability of a low benefit. Individuals with different degrees of risk
aversion will therefore have different preferences among these three options. One way to
represent these preferences is by the expected utility of the different options using a constant
relative risk aversion utility function. We do expected utility calculations for individuals for
CRRA values of 1 through 5 at ages 67, 77, 87 and 97 and then combine these with weights
reflecting survival probabilities to these ages. The expected utility calculations therefore do not
take into account the value of the bequests that might occur under these different plans.
We find that the No Lose option with a zero guaranteed return (row 2) is preferred to the
less risky 1 percent guarantee for every CRRA value between 1 and 5, a not surprising result in
light of the distribution of returns shown in Table 1. More surprising, however, is that the No
Guarantee option (row 1) is preferred to the No Lose zero return option of row 2 for every CRRA
value between 1 and 5. Since there is a substantial risk of a quite low combined benefit, this
suggests that the upside gain potential outweighs this risk even for those with high risk aversion.
With the lifetime contract approach (rows 4 and 5), the zero real return guarantee is again
preferred to the one percent guarantee for all CRRA values, just as it is for the two stage
approach. Comparing the two different ways of achieving the zero real return guarantee shows

-15-

that the expected utility is higher with the lifetime guarantee for CRRA values up to 3.5,
presumably because it permits more risk taking. Even with that greater risk taking implied by the
lifetime contract approach, individuals continue to prefer the no guarantee option (row 1) to
either of the lifetime contract options.
In the overall comparison of the No Guarantee and the four different guarantees shown in
Table 1, the expected utility comparisons show that No Guarantee is preferred for all of the
CRRA values up to 5.0. The lifetime contracts and the one percent negative return are
dominated.
Finally, a calculation comparing the expected utility of these five plans to the expected
utility of the pure pay-as-you-go benefit that pays 100 percent of the benchmark shows that for
all of the risk aversion values between 1 and 5 the investment based plans are preferred to the
pure pay as you go plan.

6. Tailoring the Guarantees to Individual Preferences with Zero Cost Collars
It is possible to extend the range of options in a way that could make a guarantee plan
preferable to the no guarantee option. More specifically, using a combination of puts and calls in
which the cost of the put is financed by selling a call, i.e., a zero cost collar, allows different
ways of shaping the two tails of the distribution, depending on how the put and call are specified.
In this way, the risk protection can be tailored to different groups of PRA participants.
To see why this might be a preferred option, consider row 2 of Table 1. These figures
show that with the no lose real return guarantee the individual has a 10 percent chance of getting

-16-

a retirement income equal to almost six times the benchmark benefit. Although such a large
windfall would no doubt be welcome, a risk averse individual might be willing to forego some of
that very high end possibility for a reduced risk of relatively low benefits and improved
distribution of outcomes in the first 50 percent of the probability distribution.
One way to achieve that alternative distribution would be to buy a put option that
guarantees a real return of at least zero and to finance the cost of this put by selling a call option
that gives its buyer all of the value above some cumulative real rate of return. Such a put-call
strategy that caps the upside rate of return in order to purchase a put that guarantees at least a
zero real return would have a different distribution of combined pension incomes than a zero real
return guarantee achieved with TIPS (since that does not put a cap on the maximum possible rate
of return.)
This strategy can be extended to consider zero cost collars that guarantee other minimum
positive or negative real rates of return. On the basis of some preliminary analysis, the analysis
here focuses on zero cost collars for minimum real returns of zero and minus one percent.
Table 2 compares the distributions shown in Table 1 for the no guarantee option (row
one) and the zero real return option achieved with TIPS (row 2) to the distributions using puts to
guarantee minimum returns of zero (row 3) and minus one (row 4) financed by selling calls on all
of the returns above the level needed to finance those puts.
It is clear that a risk averse individual might well prefer a collar strategy with a minimum
guarantee of minus one percent return to the TIPS zero return guarantee or to no guarantee at all.
With this collar strategy there is only a one percent chance of receiving less than the benchmark

-17-

benefit. The benefit is higher at each point in the distribution up to at least the 50th percentile. At
the 90th percentile, the individual forsakes the one-in-ten chance of a benefit that is more than
five times the benchmark (and therefore more than twice maximum preretirement income) but
still can anticipate a benefit that is twice the benchmark.
This is borne out by the expected utility calculations. In a mixed system with a 6.2
percent PAYGO tax and a 6.2 percent PRA saving rate, an individual with CRRA less than or
equal to four will prefer to invest their PRA in equities with no guaranteed return. But with a
higher degree of risk aversion, the individual prefers to forego the potential high return for a
minimum return of at least minus one percent.
There are of course other collars that might be preferred to this. For example one , one
possible strategy would sell a call that pays (say) 50 percent of the equity returns above some
level and use the proceeds of that call option to buy a put that guarantees at least a minus percent
real return.
7. Lower Cost Mixed Plans: Limiting the Tax Increase
A primary goal of Social Security reform is to avoid the large increase in the tax rate that
will result from the aging of the population if there is no program change. The Social Security
actuaries estimate that the existing benefit rules would require raising the tax rate in the pay-asyou-go system by about 50 percent, from 12.4 percent to about 18.6 percent.10 An advantage of
the investment-based approach is that it is possible to finance the benefits implied by the existing
benefit rules with a lower future cost.
10

The calculation is more complex because of disability benefits that are now financed as
part of the 12.4 percent.
-18-

A useful way to analyze the implication of the long-run demographically caused increase
in the cost of producing the benefits in a pure PAYGO system is to consider the impact on
benefits of cutting the PAYGO tax by one-third with a pure PAYGO system. A pure PAYGO
system with a tax rate equal to two thirds of the current PAYGO 12.4 percent, i.e., an 8.3 percent
combined tax rate, would show the one-third decline in benefits relative to the currently projected
“benchmark”benefits that would be occur as a result of the demographic change. In contrast, a
mixture of a PAYGO tax and a PRA contribution that totals 8.3 percent would show the extent to
which it is possible to reduce the benefit shortfall with no increase in the total cost when the
system is fully phased in.
Analysis of such a mixed plan with a 4.15 percent PAYGO tax and a 4.15 percent PRA
saving rate showed that the expected benefit would exceed the current benefit but that there
would be a significant probability that benefits would be less than 75 percent of the benchmark
benefit.
The current section therefore presents results for a plan that reduces costs by 20 percent
instead of by the one-third needed to stabilize the implied tax rate. One way to interpret this
would be as the net effect of reducing the payroll tax by one-third (from 12.4 percent to 8.3
percent, to stabilize the implied future tax rate) and dividing this between a PAYGO portion of
4.96 percent and a carve out to PRA accounts of 3.35 percent supplemented by individual PRA
contributions of an additional 1.61 percent, bringing the total to 9.92 percent or 80 percent of the
current 12.4 percent.11 This would be equivalent to a future cost increase from 12.4 percent to
11

The individual contribution could be induced on a voluntary basis by making the carveout transfer to the PRA accouant conditional on the additional individual contribution. Making
-19-

14.9 percent (instead of the 18.6 percent rate implied by the 50 percent cost rise that would occur
with a pure PAYGO system) with 2.5 percent of payroll paid as an individual contribution on top
of the tax.
Table 3 shows results similar to Table 1 except that the PAYGO and PRA costs have now
both been reduced to 80 percent of what they were in Table 1. Consider first the results for the
No Guarantee plan in line 1. The median level of the benefits in this probability distribution is
still substantially higher than the benchmark distribution: 2.09 times the benchmark.
At the 10th percentile, the new low cost strategy with no guarantee produces a combined
benefit equal to 86 percent of the benchmark. But at the 1st percentile, the combined benefits in
the low cost plan are only 59 percent of the benchmark, a level that some would consider an
uncomfortably high level of risk.
The second and third rows of Table 3 show how much the risk can be reduced by
introducing guaranteed annual rates of return in a two stage plan. A No Lose annual guarantee of
a real return greater than zero raises the combined benefit at the 1st percentile from 59 percent of
the benchmark to 72 percent of the benchmark. The price of this risk reduction is a decline in
the relative combined benefits starting at about the 10th percentile. Thus at the 30th percentile the
combined benefit declines from 137 percent of the benchmark to 109 percent. At the median, the
drop is from 2.1 times the benchmark to 1.44 times benchmark. The prospect for very high gains
falls even more.
Giving up more of the upside benefits by requiring at least a one percent real return on

the individual contribution the “default option” would increase the participation rate.
-20-

each year’s PRA savings improves the very low probability ratios only slightly and reduces the
combined benefits at all higher percentiles. . Row 3 of Table 3 shows that an annual guarantee of
r>1 raises the 1st percentile only from 0.72 with r>0 to 0.77. Higher points on the distribution
show the kinds of benefit decreases associated with these small risk reductions.
Rows 4 and 5 of Table 3 repeat these calculations for the lifetime annuity plans. Since
these involve a generally larger equity proportion in the PRA account they have higher risk than
rows 2 and 3.
The last two rows of Table 3 use a collar to reduce risk by guaranteeing a minimum
return of at least minus one percent on each year’s savings and finance that put option by selling
returns above a rate of return with an equal Black-Scholes value. This zero cost collar has the
effect of limiting the maximum benefit to 1.65 times the benchmark but uses this limit to raise
the low probability level to 98 percent of the benchmark at 10 percent and 79 percent at the one
percent level.
The implication of Table 3 is that a mixed system with a cost that is 20 percent lower than
the cost required with a pure PAYGO plan, when combined with a zero cost collar that gives up
the possibility of very high benefits in order to reduce the risk of low benefits, could provide
benefits that are likely to be substantially higher than the current law benchmark and that have
only a very small probability of being less than the current law benchmark. More specifically,
using a zero cost collar that guarantees that the real return on each year’s saving is not less than
minus one percent implies a median benefit equal to 1.6 times the benchmark and that there is
only once chance in 10 that the benefit would be less than 98 percent of the benchmark and only

-21-

one chance in one hundred that it would be less than 79 percent of the benchmark.
The expected utility ranking of the alternatives in Table 3 imply that individuals with a
CRRA value up to 4.0 would prefer to have no guarantee while those with higher risk aversion
prefer the collar approach with a guarantee of minus one. Those with a higher risk aversion
would prefer the collar approach with a guarantee of minus one percent.
The final calculations, presented in Table 4, show the implication of dealing with
demographic change with a system that, when fully phased in, is purely investment-based with
no pay-as-you-go component. More specifically, we assume that the accumulation is based on
annual saving of 9.92 percent of payroll which is fully invested in equities except to the extent
that a guarantee is provided by the use of TIPS or zero cost collars.12 With no guarantee, this
pure investment based plan has a one percent probability of a benefit that is less than 38 percent
of the benchmark and a five percent probability that the benefit is less than 68 percent of the
benchmark. A TIPS based two-stage strategy that guarantees that each year’s saving will have a
positive real return substantially reduces this risk, raising the one percent level to 64 percent of
the benchmark and the five percent level to 79 percent of the benchmark.
The risk can be reduced even more by the zero-cost collar that guarantees a real return of
at least minus one percent on each year’s saving by giving up any prospect of returns that would
produce a benefit equal to more than 2.5 times the benchmark. With this collar, there is only a

12

A method of transition from the existing PAYGO system to a pure investment based
system in a way that does not require more than an additional 2 percent of payroll each year
during the transition (equal to less than one percent of GDP) is presented in M. Feldstein and A.
Samwick, “The Transition Path in Privatizing Social Security,” in M. Feldstein, Privatizing
Social Security (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
-22-

one percent risk of benefits that are less than 79 percent of the benchmark. The five percent risk
level corresponds to 93 percent of the benchmark and the ten percent risk level is 116 percent of
the benchmark.
An explicit expected utility calculation implies that with a CRRA value equal to 2.5 or
less, the individual would prefer the pure equity investment with no guarantee. With CRRA
values with 3 or more, the individual would choose the zero cost collar with the guaranteed real
return of at least minus one percent. The progression as risk aversion increases is thus from a
more risky to a less risky approach.
For each CRRA value, the expected utility of the pure investment based plans with the
9.92 percent of payroll saving and with the utility maximizing guarantees exceeds the expected
value with mixed system with taxes and PRA contributions of 4.46 percent of payroll. Additional
calculations would be needed to consider the path of transition before deciding whether the extra
cost in the transition to a pure investment based system is justified by the higher level of long-run
expected utility.
Two other expected utility calculations are worth mentioning. In the mixed plans with
PAYGO taxes equal to PRA saving and with no guarantees, the expected utility of PRA
investments that are 100 percent in equities exceeds the expected utility of PRA investments
divided between equities and corporate debt in the ratio of 60 to 40. In contrast, in a pure
investment based plan with no PAYGO component, the 100 percent equity investment is
preferred only by individuals with low risk aversion (CRRA values up to 3.0) with the 60:40
stock bond portfolios preferred by individuals with higher CRRA values .

-23-

8. A Concluding Comment
This paper has described the risks implied by a mixed system of Social Security pension
benefits with different combinations of pay-as-you-go taxes and personal retirement account
(PRA) saving. The analysis showed how these risks can be reduced by using alternative
guarantee strategies. The first such strategy uses a blend of equities and TIPS to guarantee at least
a positive real rate or return on each year’s PRA saving. The second is an explicit zero-cost collar
that guarantees an annual rate of return by giving up all returns above a certain level. One variant
of these guarantees uses a two stage procedure: a guaranteed return to age 66 and then a separate
guarantee on the implicit return in the annuity phase. An alternative strategy provides a
combined guarantee on the return during both the accumulation and the annuity phase.
Simulations are used to derive the probability distributions of retirement incomes relative
to the “benchmark” benefits specified in current law. Calculations of expected utility show that
these risk reduction techniques can raise expected utility relative to the plans with no guarantees.
The ability to do so depends on the individual’s risk aversion level. This underlines the idea that
different individuals would rationally prefer different investment strategies and risk reduction
options.
There are of course other ways that both types of guarantee could be modified that might
produce higher expected utility. One line of research that should be considered is alternative
designs of the puts and calls in the zero cost collars. Another approach would allow adjustments
in the portfolio composition during the accumulation or annuity phase based on the performance
of the investments to that point.

-24-

Table 1
Guarantee Based on Combination with TIPS
Frequency Distribution of Combined Pension Income
Relative to Benchmark Pay-As-You-Go Benefits with Benchmark T = 12.4
(T = 6.2

S = 6.2)

0.01

0.05

0.10

0.30

0.50

0.70

0.90

None

0.74

0.93

1.08

1.71

2.61

4.38

10.28

Two Stage Guarantee
No Lose (r > 0)
No Lose (r > 1)

0.90
0.96

0.99
1.01

1.06
1.05

1.36
1.22

1.80
1.47

2.66
1.94

5.73
3.58

0.82

0.91

1.00

1.43

2.14

3.58

8.62

Real Rate of
Return Guarantee

Lifetime Contract Guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)

No Lose ( r > 1)
0.90
0.95
1.01
1.27
1.69
2.57
5.63
____________________________________________
Combined Pension Income at age 77 based on PAYGO equal to 0.5 benchmark benefit and PRA accounts invested in equities with
TIPS to achieve the return guarantee. Benchmark based on pay-as-you-go with T = 12.4.

-26-

Table 2
Guarantee Based on Zero-cost Collar
Frequency Distribution of Combined Pension Income
Relative to Benchmark Pay-As-You-Go Benefits with Benchmark T = 12.4
(T = 6.2
S = 6.2)
Real Rate of
Return Guarantee

0.01

0.05

0.10

0.30

0.50

0.70

0.90

None

0.74

0.93

1.08

1.71

2.61

4.38

10.28

Two-stage guarantee
Using TIPS
No Lose ( r > 0)

0.90

0.99

1.06

1.36

1.80

2.66

5.73

Zero cost collar guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)

0.94

1.01

1.13

1.56

1.81

1.85

1.86

0.99

1.08

1.23

1.73

2.00

2.06

2.06

r > minus one

____________________________________________
Combined Pension Income at age 77 based on PAYGO equal to 0.5 benchmark benefit and PRA accounts invested in equities with
TIPS or zero cost collar to achieve the return guarantee. Benchmark based on pay-as-you-go with T = 12.4.

-27-

Table 3
Low Cost Mixed Plans
Frequency Distribution of Combined Pension Income
Relative to Benchmark Pay-As-You-Go Benefits with Benchmark T = 12.4
(T = 4.96
S = 4.96)
Real Rate of
Return Guarantee

0.01

0.05

0.10

0.30

0.50

0.70

0.90

None

0.59

0.74

0.86

1.37

2.09

3.50

8.22

Two Stage Guarantee
No Lose (r > 0)
No Lose (r > 1)

0.72
0.77

0.79
0.81

0.85
0.84

1.09
0.98

1.44
1.17

2.13
1.55

4.58
2.86

Lifetime Contract Guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)
0.65
No Lose ( r > 1)
0.72

0.73
0.76

0.80
0.81

1.15
1.02

1.71
1.35

2.87
2.06

6.89
4.50

Zero cost collar guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)
0.75
0.81
0.90
1.25
1.45
1.48
1.49
r > minus one
0.79
0.86
0.98
1.39
1.60
1.65
1.65
____________________
Combined Pension Income at age 77 based on PAYGO benefits equal to 0.4 benchmark benefit and PRA accounts invested in equities
with TIPS or zero cost collars to achieve the return guarantee. Benchmark based on pay-as-you-go with T = 12.4.
_____________

-28-

Table 4
Low Cost Pure Investment Plans
Frequency Distribution of Combined Pension Income
Relative to Benchmark Pay-As-You-Go Benefits with Benchmark T = 12.4
(T = 0
S = 9.92)
Real Rate of
Return Guarantee

0.01

0.05

0.10

0.30

0.50

0.70

0.90

None

0.38

0.68

0.93

1.94

3.38

6.21

15.65

Two Stage Guarantee
No Lose (r > 0)
No Lose (r > 1)

0.64
0.74

0.79
0.81

0.90
0.88

1.37
1.16

2.08
1.55

3.46
2.31

8.36
4.92

Lifetime Contract Guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)
0.50
No Lose ( r > 1)
0.64

0.65
0.72

0.80
0.81

1.50
1.23

2.62
1.90

4.93
3.31

12.99
8.21

Zero cost collar guarantee
No Lose ( r > 0)
0.70
0.81
1.01
1.69
2.09
2.16
2.17
r > minus one
0.79
0.93
1.16
1.97
2.41
2.49
2.50
____________________
Combined Pension Income at age 77 based on no PAYGO benefits and PRA accounts invested in equities with TIPS or zero cost
collars to achieve the return guarantee. Benchmark based on pay-as-you-go with T = 12.4.
_____________

-29-

