                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MODELING BOND YIELDS IN FINANCE
                                 AND MACROECONOMICS

                                          Francis X. Diebold
                                           Monika Piazzesi
                                          Glenn D. Rudebusch

                                         Working Paper 11089
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11089


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco. We thank our colleagues and, in particular, our many co-authors.The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Francis X. Diebold, Monika Piazzesi, and Glenn D. Rudebusch. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Modeling Bond Yields in Finance and Macroeconomics
Francis X. Diebold, Monika Piazzesi, and Glenn D. Rudebusch
NBER Working Paper No. 11089
January 2005
JEL No. G1, E4, E5

                                           ABSTRACT

From a macroeconomic perspective, the short-term interest rate is a policy instrument under the

direct control of the central bank. From a finance perspective, long rates are risk-adjusted averages

of expected future short rates. Thus, as illustrated by much recent research, a joint macro-finance

modeling strategy will provide the most comprehensive understanding of the term structure of

interest rates. We discuss various questions that arise in this research, and we also present a new

examination of the relationship between two prominent dynamic, latent factor models in this

literature: the Nelson-Siegel and affne no-arbitrage term structure models.

Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

Monika Piazzesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
monika.piazzesi@gsb.uchicago.edu

Glenn D. Rudebusch
Economic Research
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
glenn.rudebusch@sf.frb.org
   From a macroeconomic perspective, the short-term interest rate is a policy instrument

under the direct control of the central bank, which adjusts the rate to achieve its economic

stabilization goals. From a ﬁnance perspective, the short rate is a fundamental building

block for yields of other maturities, which are just risk-adjusted averages of expected future

short rates. Thus, as illustrated by much recent research, a joint macro-ﬁnance modeling

strategy will provide the most comprehensive understanding of the term structure of interest

rates. In this paper, we discuss some salient questions that arise in this research, and we also

present a new examination of the relationship between two prominent dynamic, latent factor

models in this literature: the Nelson-Siegel and aﬃne no-arbitrage term structure models.

I. Questions about Modeling Yields

   (1) Why use factor models for bond yields? The ﬁrst problem faced in term structure

modeling is how to summarize the price information at any point in time for the large

number of nominal bonds that are traded. In fact, since only a small number of sources

of systematic risk appear to underlie the pricing of the myriad of tradable ﬁnancial assets,

nearly all bond price information can be summarized with just a few constructed variables or

factors. Therefore, yield curve models almost invariably employ a structure that consists of a

small set of factors and the associated factor loadings that relate yields of diﬀerent maturities

to those factors. Besides providing a useful compression of information, a factor structure is

also consistent with the celebrated “parsimony principle,” the broad insight that imposing

restrictions–even those that are false and may degrade in-sample ﬁt–often helps both to

avoid data mining and to produce good forecasting models. For example, an unrestricted


                                               1
Vector Autoregression (VAR) provides a very general linear model of yields, but the large

number of estimated coeﬃcients renders it of dubious value for prediction (Diebold and Calin

Li, 2005). Parsimony is also a consideration for determining the number of factors needed,

along with the demands of the precise application. For example, to capture the time series

variation in yields, one or two factors may suﬃce since the ﬁrst two principal components

account for almost all (99%) of the variation in yields. Also, for forecasting yields, using just

a few factors may often provide the greatest accuracy. However, more than two factors will

invariably be needed in order to obtain a close ﬁt to the entire yield curve at any point in

time, say, for pricing derivatives.

   (2) How should bond yield factors and factor loadings be constructed? There are a variety

of methods employed in the literature. One general approach places structure only on the

estimated factors. For example, the factors could be the ﬁrst few principal components,

which are restricted to be mutually orthogonal, while the loadings are relatively unrestricted.

Indeed, the ﬁrst three principal components typically closely match simple empirical proxies

for level (e.g., the long rate), slope (e.g., a long minus short rate), and curvature (e.g., a mid-

maturity rate minus a short and long rate average). A second approach, which is popular

among market and central bank practitioners, is a ﬁtted Nelson-Siegel curve (introduced

in Charles Nelson and Andrew Siegel, 1987). As described by Diebold and Li (2005), this

representation is eﬀectively a dynamic three-factor model of level, slope, and curvature.

However, the Nelson-Siegel factors are unobserved, or latent, which allows for measurement

error, and the associated loadings have plausible economic restrictions (forward rates are

always positive, and the discount factor approaches zero as maturity increases). A third

approach is the no-arbitrage dynamic latent factor model, which is the model of choice

                                                2
in ﬁnance. The most common subclass of these models postulates ﬂexible linear or aﬃne

forms for the latent factors and their loadings along with restrictions that rule out arbitrage

strategies involving various bonds.

   (3) How should macroeconomic variables be combined with yield factors?             Both the

Nelson-Siegel and aﬃne no-arbitrage dynamic latent factor models provide useful statistical

descriptions of the yield curve, but they oﬀer little insight into the nature of the underlying

economic forces that drive its movements. To shed some light on the fundamental determi-

nants of interest rates, researchers have begun to incorporate macroeconomic variables into

these yield curve models.

   For example, Diebold, Rudebusch, and S. Boragan Aruoba (2005) provide a macroeco-

nomic interpretation of the Nelson-Siegel representation by combining it with VAR dynamics

for the macroeconomy. Their maximum likelihood estimation approach extracts three latent

factors (essentially level, slope, and curvature) from a set of 17 yields on U.S. Treasury secu-

rities and simultaneously relates these factors to three observable macroeconomic variables

(speciﬁcally, real activity, inﬂation, and a monetary policy instrument).

   The role of macroeconomic variables in a no-arbitrage aﬃne model is explored by several

papers. In Piazzesi (2005), the key observable factor is the Federal Reserve’s interest rate

target. The target follows a step function or pure jump process, with jump probabilities that

depend on the schedule of policy meetings and three latent factors, which also aﬀect risk

premiums. The short rate is modeled as the sum of the target and short-lived deviations from

target. The model is estimated with high-frequency data and provides a new identiﬁcation

scheme for monetary policy. The empirical results show that relative to standard latent

factor models using macroeconomic information can substantially lower pricing errors. In

                                               3
particular, including the Fed’s target as one of four factors allows the model to match both

the short and the long end of the yield curve.

   In Andrew Ang and Piazzesi (2003) and Ang, Sen Dong, and Piazzesi (2004), the macro-

economic factors are measures of inﬂation and real activity. The joint dynamics of these

macro factors and additional latent factors are captured by VARs. In Ang and Piazzesi

(2003), the measures of real activity and inﬂation are each constructed as the ﬁrst principal

component of a large set of candidate macroeconomic series, to avoid relying on speciﬁc

macro series. Both papers explore various methods to identify structural shocks. They diﬀer

in the dynamic linkages between macro factors and yields, discussed further below.

   Finally, Rudebusch and Tao Wu (2004a) provide an example of a macro-ﬁnance speciﬁ-

cation that employs more macroeconomic structure and includes both rational expectations

and inertial elements. They obtain a good ﬁt to the data with a model that combines an

aﬃne no-arbitrage dynamic speciﬁcation for yields and a small fairly standard macro model,

which consists of a monetary policy reaction function, an output Euler equation, and an

inﬂation equation.

   (4) What are the links between macro variables and yield curve factors? Diebold, Rude-

busch, and Aruoba (2005) examine the correlations between Nelson-Siegel yield factors and

macroeconomic variables. They ﬁnd that the level factor is highly correlated with inﬂation,

and the slope factor is highly correlated with real activity. The curvature factor appears un-

related to any of the main macroeconomic variables. Similar results with a more structural

interpretation are obtained in Rudebusch and Wu (2004a); in their model, the level factor

reﬂects market participants’ views about the underlying or medium-term inﬂation target of

the central bank, and the slope factor captures the cyclical response of the central bank,

                                              4
which manipulates the short rate to fulﬁll its dual mandate to stabilize the real economy

and keep inﬂation close to target. In addition, shocks to the level factor feed back to the

real economy through an ex ante real interest rate.

   Piazzesi (2005), Ang and Piazzesi (2003) and Ang, Dong, and Piazzesi (2004) examine

the structural impulse responses of the macro and latent factors that jointly drive yields in

their models. For example, Piazzesi (2005) documents that monetary policy shocks change

the slope of the yield curve, because they aﬀect short rates more than long ones. Ang and

Piazzesi (2003) ﬁnd that output shocks have a signiﬁcant impact on intermediate yields and

curvature, while inﬂation surprises have large eﬀects on the level of the entire yield curve.

They also ﬁnd that better interest rate forecasts are obtained in an aﬃne model in which

macro factors are added to the usual latent factors.

   For estimation tractability, Ang and Piazzesi (2003) only allow for unidirectional dynam-

ics in their arbitrage-free model, speciﬁcally, macro variables help determine yields but not

the reverse. Diebold, Rudebusch, and Aruoba (2005) consider a general bidirectional char-

acterization of the dynamic interactions and ﬁnd that the causality from the macroeconomy

to yields is indeed signiﬁcantly stronger than in the reverse direction but that interactions

in both directions can be important. Ang, Dong, and Piazzesi (2004) also allow for bidi-

rectional macro-ﬁnance links but impose the no-arbitrage restriction as well, which poses

a severe estimation challenge that is solved via Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods. The

authors ﬁnd that the amount of yield variation that can be attributed to macro factors de-

pends on whether or not the system allows for bidirectional linkages. When the interactions

are constrained to be unidirectional (from macro to yield factors), macro factors can only

explain a small portion of the variance of long yields. In contrast, the bidirectional system

                                             5
attributes over half of the variance of long yields to macro factors.

   (5) How useful are no-arbitrage modeling restrictions? The assumption of no arbitrage

ensures that, after accounting for risk, the dynamic evolution of yields over time is consis-

tent with the cross-sectional shape of the yield curve at any point in time. This consistency

condition is likely to hold, given the existence of deep and well-organized bond markets.

However, if the underlying factor model is misspeciﬁed, such restrictions may actually de-

grade empirical performance. (Of course, the ultimate goal is a model that is both internally

consistent and correctly speciﬁed.) Ang and Piazzesi (2003) present some empirical evidence

favorable to imposing no-arbitrage restrictions because of improved forecasting performance.

As discussed below, this issue is worthy of further investigation.

   (6) What is the appropriate specification of term premiums? With risk-neutral investors,

yields are equal to the average value of expected future short rates (up to Jensen’s inequality

terms), and there are no expected excess returns on bonds. In this setting, the expectations

hypothesis, which is still a mainstay of much casual and formal macroeconomic analysis, is

valid. However, it seems likely that bonds, which provide an uncertain return, are owned

by the same investors who also demand a large equity premium as compensation for holding

risky stocks. Furthermore, as suggested by many statistical tests in the literature, these

risk premiums on nominal bonds appear to vary over time, contradicting the assumption of

risk-neutrality. To model these premiums, Ang and Piazzesi (2003) and Rudebusch and Wu

(2004a, b) specify time-varying “prices of risk,” which translate a unit of factor volatility

into a term premium. This time variation is modeled using business cycle indicators such as

the slope of the yield curve or measures of real activity. However, Diebold, Rudebusch, and

Aruoba (2005) suggest that the importance of the statistical deviations from the expectations

                                              6
hypothesis may depend on the application.

II. Example: An Aﬃne Interpretation of Nelson-Siegel

   In this section, we develop a new example to illustrate several of the above issues, partic-

ularly the construction of yield curve factors and the imposition of the no-arbitrage restric-

tions. By showing how to impose no-arbitrage restrictions in a Nelson-Siegel representation

of the yield curve, we outline a methodology to judge these restrictions. The Nelson-Siegel

model is a popular model that performs well in forecasting applications, so it would be inter-

esting to compare its accuracy with and without these restrictions (a subject of our ongoing

research).

   The 2-factor Nelson-Siegel model speciﬁes the yield on a τ -period bond as

                                        (τ )
                                       yt      = aN
                                                  τ
                                                    S
                                                      + bN
                                                         τ
                                                           S
                                                             · xt ,                           (1)


where xt is a 2-dimensional vector of latent factors (or state variables) and the yield coeﬃ-

cients depend only on the time to maturity τ :


                                aN
                                 τ
                                   S
                                     = 0                                                      (2)
                                                                        
                                bN
                                 τ
                                   S
                                        =          1       1−exp(−kτ )
                                                               kτ
                                                                              .               (3)


The two coeﬃcients in bN
                       τ
                         S
                           give the loadings of yields on the two factors. The ﬁrst loading is

unity, so the ﬁrst factor operates as a level shifter and aﬀects yields of all maturities one-for-

one. The second loading goes to one as τ → 0 and goes to zero as τ → ∞ (assuming k > 0),

so the second factor mainly aﬀects short maturities and, hence, the slope. Furthermore, as

maturity τ goes to zero, the yield in equation (1) approaches the instantaneous short rate

of interest, denoted rt , and, since the second component of bN
                                                              τ
                                                                S
                                                                  goes to 1, the short rate is


                                                       7
just the sum of the two factors,

                                               rt = x1t + x2t ,                           (4)

and is latent as well. Finally, as in Diebold and Li (2005), we augment the cross-sectional

equation (1) with factor dynamics; speciﬁcally, both components of xt are independent

AR(1)’s:

                                         xit = µi + ρi xit−1 + υ i εit ,                  (5)

with Gaussian errors εit , i = 1, 2. Therefore, the complete Nelson-Siegel dynamic representa-

tion, (1), (2), (3), (5), has 7 free parameters: k, µ1 , ρ1 , υ 1 , µ2 , ρ2 , and υ 2 .

    Consider now the 2-factor aﬃne no-arbitrage term structure model. This model starts

from the linear short rate equation (4); however, rather than postulating a particular func-

tional form for the factor loadings as above, the loadings are derived from the short rate

equation (4) and the factor dynamics (5) under the assumption of an absence of arbitrage

opportunities. In particular, if there are risk-neutral investors, they are indiﬀerent between

buying a long bond that pays oﬀ $1 after τ periods and an investment that rolls over cash

at the short rate during those τ periods and has an expected payoﬀ of $1. Thus, risk-neutral

investors would engage in arbitrage until the τ -period bond price equals the expected roll-

over amount, so the yield on a τ -period bond will equal the expected average future short

rate over the τ periods (plus a Jensen’s inequality term.) Risk-averse investors will need

additional compensation for holding risky positions, but the same reasoning applies after

correcting for risk premiums. Therefore, to make the Nelson-Siegel model internally consis-

tent under the assumption of no-arbitrage, yields computed from expected average future

short rates using (4) with the factor dynamics (5) must be consistent with the cross-sectional


                                                       8
speciﬁcation in equations (1) through (3).

    To enforce this no-arbitrage internal consistency, we switch to continuous time and ﬁx the

sampling frequency so that the interval [t − 1, t] covers, say, one month. The continuous-time

AR(1) process corresponding to (5) is

                                                         
                                        dxit = κi θi − xit dt + σi dBti ,                      (6)

where κi , θi and σi are constants and B i is a Brownian motion (which means that dB i is

normally distributed with mean zero and variance dt). (In continuous time, the Nelson-Siegel

has 7 parameters: k, κ1 , θ1 , σ 1 , κ2 , θ 2 , and σ2 .)

    We ﬁrst consider the model with risk-neutral investors, which consists of the linear short

rate equation (4) and the factor dynamics (6) and has 6 parameters: κ1 , θ1 , σ1 , κ2 , θ2 , and

σ 2 . Investors engage in arbitrage until the time-t price Pt(τ ) of the τ -bond is given by
                                                        t+τ       
                                       (τ )                
                                     Pt         = Et exp −    rs ds    .                       (7)
                                                                t


This expectation can be computed by hand, since the short rate is the sum of two Gaussian

AR(1)’s and is thus normally distributed. (The appendix details these calculations.) The

resulting τ -period yield is

                                             (τ )       log Pt(τ )
                                            yt      = −                                        (8)
                                                           τ
                                                    = aN
                                                       τ
                                                         A
                                                           + bN
                                                              τ
                                                                A
                                                                  · xt ,

with the no-arbitrage factor loadings given by
                                                                               
                                 bN
                                  τ
                                    A
                                        =       1−exp(−κ1 τ )
                                                    κ1 τ
                                                                1−exp(−κ2 τ )
                                                                    κ2 τ
                                                                                     .         (9)

    The equations (4), (6), (8), and (9) constitute a canonical aﬃne term-structure speciﬁca-

tion with two Gaussian factors. Intuitively, in the risk-neutral world, where yields are based

                                                            9
only on expected future short rates, the cross-sectional factor-loading coeﬃcients bN
                                                                                    τ
                                                                                      A
                                                                                        are

restricted to be functions of the time series parameters κ1 and κ2 . The constant aN
                                                                                   τ
                                                                                     A
                                                                                       absorbs

any Jensen’s inequality terms. In general, the Nelson-Siegel representation does not impose

this dynamic consistency restriction because the loadings bN
                                                           τ
                                                             S
                                                               are not related to the time

series parameters from the AR(1). However, the no-arbitrage restriction can be applied to

the Nelson-Siegel model under two conditions. First, let κ1 go to zero and set κ2 = k, since

for these parameter values, bN
                             τ
                               A
                                 = bN S                                                    NA
                                    τ . Second, it will have to be case that the constant aτ ,


which embeds the Jensen’s inequality terms, is close to zero for reasonable parameter values,

i.e., aN
       τ
         A
           ≈ aN
              τ
                S
                  = 0. (As a rule, macroeconomists often ignore Jensen’s terms; however,

with near-random walk components in the short rate process as κ1 goes to zero, the Jensen’s

terms may be large, especially for long maturities τ .)

   Now consider the more general case of no-arbitrage with risk-averse investors. To accom-

modate departures from risk-neutrality, we parametrize the risk premiums used to adjust

expectations. For example, suppose the pricing kernel solves

                                  dmt
                                      = −rt dt − λ1t dBt1 − λ2t dBt2 ,
                                  mt

where

                                              λit = λi0 + λi1 xit

and λi0 , λi1 are constants. The variables λit are the prices of risk for each Brownian motion

and are aﬃne functions of the factors and so vary over time. The no-arbitrage factor loadings

are given by
                                                                             
                                          1−exp(−κ∗1 τ )     1−exp(−κ∗2 τ )
                           bN
                            τ
                              A
                                  =           κ∗1 τ              κ∗2 τ
                                                                                   ,     (10)



                                                      10
where

                                             κ∗i = κi + σ i λi1 .

This 2-factor Gaussian model has 10 parameters λ10 , λ11 , λ20 , λ21 , κ1 , θ1 , σ1 , κ2 , θ2 , and σ 2 . Now

it is possible to pick the slope parameters, λi1 , so that the loadings, bN A
                                                                          τ , equal the Nelson-

                                      i
Siegel loadings, bN S
                  τ . The values for λ1 that meet this condition are obtained by setting


κ∗1 = 0 and κ∗2 = k, and these imply that

                                               κ1           k − κ2
                                     λ11 = −      and λ21 =        .
                                               σ1             σ2

The constant terms in the market prices of risk are unrestricted, so we can set λ10 = λ20 = 0.

Again, it will have to be case that the Jensen’s inequality terms should be close to zero, so

aN
 τ
   A
     ≈ aN
        τ
          S
            = 0.

III. The Future

    The macro-ﬁnance term structure literature is in its infancy with many unresolved but

promising issues to explore. For example, as suggested above, the appropriate speciﬁcation

for the time-series forecasting of bond yields is an exciting area for additional research,

especially in a global context (Diebold, Li, and Vivian Yue 2005). In addition, the goal of an

estimated no-arbitrage macro-ﬁnance model speciﬁed in terms of underlying preference and

technology parameters (so the asset-pricing kernel is consistent with the macrodynamics)

remains a major challenge.




                                                     11
                                     REFERENCES


Ang, Andrew and Piazzesi, Monika. “A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Struc-

    ture Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables.” Journal of Monetary Eco-

    nomics, 2003, 50, pp. 745-787.


Ang, Andrew; Dong, Sen and Piazzesi, Monika. “No-Arbitrage Taylor Rules.” Working

    paper, University of Chicago, 2004.


Diebold, Francis X. and Li, Calin. “Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond

    Yields.” Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics, 2005.


Diebold, Francis X.; Li, Calin and Yue, Vivian. “Modeling Term Structures of Global Bond

    Yields.” Working paper, University of Pennsylvania, 2005.


Diebold, Francis X.; Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Aruoba, S. Boragan. “The Macroeconomy

    and the Yield Curve: A Dynamic Latent Factor Approach.” Forthcoming, Journal of

    Econometrics, 2005.


Nelson, Charles R. and Siegel, Andrew. “Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves.” Journal

    of Business, 1987, 60, pp. 473-489.


Piazzesi, Monika. “Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve.” Forthcoming, Journal of Political

    Economy, 2005.


Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Wu, Tao. “A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,

    Monetary Policy, and the Economy.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San

    Francisco, 2004a.

                                           12
Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Wu, Tao. “The Recent Shift in Term Structure Behavior from

    a No-Arbitrage Macro-Finance Perspective.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of

    San Francisco, 2004b.




                                        13
Appendix


   To derive the aﬃne bond pricing formulas and yield curve equations, consider the case
                                      
with prices of risk λt = λ1t λ2t            . (Note that equation (9) can be obtained from (10) by

setting the prices of risk to zero.) There are two ways to derive thes formulas. First, we can

construct a risk-neutral probability measure under which the risk-neutral pricing formula (7)

holds. Second, we can start from the Euler equation E [d (mt Ft )] = 0.


Risk-neutral probability


   Under the risk-neutral probability measure, the process B ∗ which solves dBt∗ = dBt +λt dt

is a Brownian motion. By solving for dBt and inserting this expression into the AR(1)

dynamics of the factors (6) , we get

                                     
                    dxit = κi θi − xit dt + σi (dBt∗i − λit dt)                               (11)
                                                                    
                           =    κi θi − κi xit − σi λi0 − σ i λi1 xit dt + σ i dBt∗i          (12)
                                                                
                           =  κi θi − σ i λi0 − (κi + σi λi1 )xit dt + σi dBt∗i               (13)
                                                                   
                                        i     κi θ i − σi λi0
                           = (κi + σ i λ1 )                   − xt dt + σ i dBt∗i
                                                                  i
                                                                                              (14)
                                              (κi + σ i λi1 )
                                          
                           = κ∗i θ∗i − xit dt + σi dBt∗i ,                                    (15)


where


                                             κ∗i = κi + σi λi1
                                                         κi θi − σi λi0
                                             θ∗i =
                                                          κi + σi λi1

   The price of the τ -period bond is equal to
                                                          t+τ       
                                     (τ )                    
                                   Pt       =   Et∗    exp −    rs ds    ,
                                                                 t


                                                          14
where the expectation operator E ∗ uses the risk-neutral probability measure. Since the

vector x = (x1 , x2 ) is Markov, this expectation is a function of the state today xt . Thus,

the bond price is a function
                                              (τ )
                                             Pt      = F (xt , τ )

of the state vector xt and time-to-maturity τ . The Feynman-Kac formula says that F solves

the partial diﬀerential equation

                                  ∂F    2  ∂F ∗  ∗       i
                                                             1 ∂ 2F 2
                      Ft rt = −      +         κ i θ i − xt  +       σ
                                  ∂τ   i=1 ∂x
                                             i                 2 ∂xi2 i

with terminal condition F (x, 0) = 1.

   We guess the solution


                               F (xt , τ ) = exp (A (τ ) + B (τ ) · xt )                 (16)


which means that

                                 ∂F
                                      = Bi (τ ) F
                                 ∂xi
                                ∂ 2F
                                   i2
                                      = Bi (τ )2 F
                                ∂x
                                 ∂F
                                      = (A (τ ) + B  (τ ) · xt ) F.
                                 ∂τ

Insert these expressions into the partial diﬀerential equation and get

                                                                     
                   x1t + x2t = −A (τ ) − B1 (τ ) x1t − B2 (τ ) x2t
                                        2                         1
                                   +         Bi (τ ) κ∗i θ∗i − xit + Bi (τ )2 σ 2i .
                                       i=1                          2




                                                       15
Matching coeﬃcients results in

                                         2                   1
                           A (τ ) =        Bi (τ ) κ∗i θ∗i + Bi (τ )2 σ2i
                                        i=1                  2
                               1 = −B1 (τ ) − B1 (τ ) κ∗1

                               1 = −B2 (τ ) − B2 (τ ) κ∗2 .


The boundary conditions are


                                        A (0) = 0

                                        B (0) = 02×1 .


The solution to these ODE’s are

                                         (exp (−κ∗1 τ ) − 1)
                               B1 (τ ) =                                     (17a)
                                                κ∗1
                                         (exp (−κ∗2 τ ) − 1)
                               B2 (τ ) =                     .
                                                κ∗2

We can plug these solutions into the yield equation

                                       A (τ ) B1 (τ ) 1 B2 (τ ) 2
                          yt(τ ) = −         −       xt −      xt             (18)
                                         τ      τ         τ
                              = aN A (τ ) + bN A     1    NA      2
                                             1 (τ ) xt + b2 (τ ) xt



and get equations (9).


Euler equation approach


   The Euler equation is
                                         (τ )          mt+τ
                                       Pt       = Et
                                                        mt

and the instantaneous equation is


                                        E [d (mt Ft )] = 0.                   (19)

                                                  16
The bond price is a function F (x, τ ) and we can apply Ito’s Lemma


                                          dF = µF dt + σF dBt ,


where the drift and volatility of F are given by

                              ∂F      2  ∂F            1 ∂2F 2
                     µF = −       +          κi θi − xi +       σ
                               ∂τ    i=1 ∂xi              2 ∂xi2 i
                             2 ∂F
                     σF   =        σ
                                  i i
                            i=1 ∂x


Both mt and Ft are Ito processes, so their product solves


                      d (mt Ft ) = −rt mt Ft dt + mt µFt dt − mt λt σFt dt

                                          −Ft mt λt dBt + mt σFt dBt


We use the Euler equation (19) and get


                0 = −rt mt Ft + mt µFt − mt λt σFt                                     (20)
                                                                
                        ∂F      2  ∂F                1 ∂2F 2        2 ∂F
            Ft rt =   −     +           κ
                                       i i
                                           θ i −  xi
                                                   t  +       σ
                                                            i2 i
                                                                   −        σ λi
                                                                           i i t
                        ∂τ     i=1 ∂x                   2 ∂x         i=1 ∂x

Again, guess the exponential-aﬃne solution (16) and insert the expressions into (20), we get

                                                                  
                   x1t + x2t = −A (τ ) − B1 (τ ) x1t − B2 (τ ) x2t
                                          2               1
                                  +    Bi (τ ) κi θi − xit + Bi (τ )2 σ2i
                                   i=1                          2
                                    2                       
                                  − Bi (τ ) σ i λi0 + λi1 xit .
                                      i=1


Matching coeﬃcients, we get the ordinary diﬀerential equations:

                                      2                          1
                      A (τ ) =       Bi (τ ) (κi θi − σi λi0 ) + Bi (τ )2 σ 2i
                                  i=1                            2
                           1 = −B1 (τ ) − B1 (τ ) (κ1 + σ1 λ11 )

                           1 = −B2 (τ ) − B2 (τ ) (κ2 + σ2 λ21 ).

                                                   17
From this expression, we can see that we get the coeﬃcients (17a) with risk neutral parame-

ters


                          κ∗i = κi + σi λi1
                                                             κi θi − σi λi0
                        κ∗i θ∗i = κi θi − σ i λi0 =⇒ θ∗i =                  .
                                                              κi + σi λi1




                                              18
