                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WHY HAS BLACK-WHITE SKILL CONVERGENCE STOPPED?

                                              Derek Neal

                                         Working Paper 11090
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w110


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2005




I thank Nathaniel Baum-Snow, Mario Macis, and Marie Tomarelli for research assistance. I thank Steven
Durlauf, Eric French, Roland Fryer, James Heckman, Larry Hedges, Steven Levitt, Casey Mulligan, Ananth
Sheshadri, Eric Hanushek, and Finis Welch for their comments. I thank the D&D Foundation for research
support. I thank summer workshop participants at IRP and IZA. This paper is a preliminary version of a
chapter that will be forthcoming Handbook of Economics of Education. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Derek Neal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?
Derek Neal
NBER Working Paper No. 11090
January 2005
JEL No. J0, J1, J7

                                           ABSTRACT

All data sources indicate that black-white skill gaps diminished over most of the 20th century, but

black-white skill gaps as measured by test scores among youth and educational attainment among

young adults have remained constant or increased in absolute value since the late 1980s. I examine

the potential importance of discrimination against skilled black workers, changes in black family

structures, changes in black household incomes, black-white differences in parenting norms, and

education policy as factors that may contribute to the recent stability of black-white skill gaps.

Absent changes in public policy or the economy that facilitate investment in black children, best case

scenarios suggest that even approximate black-white skill parity is not possible before 2050, and

equally plausible scenarios imply that the black-white skill gap will remain quite significant

throughout the 21st century.

Derek Neal
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
d-neal@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
Four decades after the adoption of civil rights laws that prohibit racial dis-
crimination by employers in hiring, pay, and promotion practices, black-white
di¤erences in standards of living remain a fact of life in the United States. These
di¤erences fuel much public debate about the government’s role in regulating the
labor market, the e¤ects of alternative means of …nancing and governing public
schools, procedures that determine admission to institutions of higher education,
and other policies that a¤ect the distribution of income and opportunity. In
this chapter, I do not explore all factors that contribute to observed black-white
di¤erences in employment rates or incomes. Instead, I focus on black-white
di¤erences in skill and how these di¤erences have changed over time.
    According to all available measures, blacks are less skilled than whites.
Black adults of all ages report less completed schooling than their white counter-
parts. Black youth and adults also score much lower than their white counter-
parts on numerous tests that measure cognitive function and academic achieve-
ment, and this is true even among students or adults with the same level of
completed schooling. In modern economies, most wealth takes the form of hu-
man capital, which consists of the knowledge, skills, and abilities that determine
the productive capacities of individual workers. Long before cohorts of young
persons reach adulthood, signi…cant black-white skill gaps emerge, and these
gaps are an important determinant of black-white di¤erences in lifetime earn-
ings. Thus, as long as one assumes that large scale redistribution from white to
black Americans is not politically feasible, one must conclude that closing the
black-white skill gap is a necessary although possibly not su¢ cient condition for
economic equality between blacks and whites in the United States.
    Section two of this chapter documents the evolution of black-white gaps in
completed schooling and measured skill over the past four decades and high-
lights several patterns in the data. To begin, all data sources indicate that
overall black-white skill gaps have diminished over time.         A large literature
documents the progress made throughout most of the previous century in clos-
ing black-white gaps in schooling attainment, and more recent data show a
dramatic closing of the black-white test score gap during the 1970s and 1980s.
Existing trends in 1990 suggested that successive generations of black children
were making steady progress toward approximate skill parity with white chil-
dren. However, during the 1990s, black-white skill gaps as measured by test
scores among youth and educational attainment among young adults remained
constant or increased in absolute value. Further, there is evidence that black
youth in large cities actually lost signi…cant ground relative to white students
during much of the 1980s and 1990s. Data on employment rates and incarcer-
ation rates also indicate that, since 1980, the number of young black men who
spend more time interacting with corrections o¢ cials than employers has grown
at an alarming rate.
    To date, much of the literature on the black-white skill gap explores the de-
terminants of past improvements in relative achievement and attainment among
blacks, but recent developments challenge scholars to think carefully about why


                                         1
the black-white skill gap remains so large and why many black youth may have
actually fallen farther behind their white peers during the past …fteen years or
more. In section three, I argue that low skill levels among black youth can-
not be easily understood as a rational response to labor discrimination against
skilled black adults. In recent decades, estimated gains from investments in
education and skills have almost always been greater among blacks adults than
among whites. This pattern is most striking in data on employment rates and
total labor market earnings.
    Having shown that black youth can expect signi…cant returns from skill
investments, I turn in section four to the determinants of investments in children
and the intergenerational transmission of human capital. Standard models
clearly indicate that current wealth di¤erences between black and white parents
do contribute directly to current black-white skill gaps among youth, and shocks
to the wage structure in recent decades may have lowered wealth among black
families. However, the e¤ects of these shocks or other temporary negative
shocks to black families and communities cannot cause black-white skill gaps
to remain at current levels inde…nitely. Given the stability of black-white
skill gaps since 1990, I explore the possibility that more persistent barriers to
skill development among black youth may exist. I deal explicitly with the
ways that education policies may impede black progress, but I also examine the
potential role of norms concerning academic achievement within black families
and communities.
    The concluding section looks forward. It is possible to form estimates of
future black-white skill gaps by using existing data to calibrate rates of skill con-
vergence between black and white youth. Results based on convergence rates
that represent best case scenarios for black youth suggest that even approximate
black-white skill parity is not possible before 2050, and equally plausible scenar-
ios imply that the black-white skill gap will remain quite signi…cant throughout
the 21st century. Absent changes in public policy or shocks to the economy
that facilitate investment in black children, there is little reason to be optimistic
about the future pace of black-white skill convergence. I close by discussing
the possibility that early childhood interventions among disadvantaged children
may be an important policy tool for closing the black-white skill gap earlier
rather than later in the 21st century.


2    Trends in Measures of the Black-White Skill
     Gap
 At the dawn of the 20th century, the educational attainment of blacks lagged
well behind that of whites for many reasons. In the antebellum period, the
vast majority of blacks were slaves who had almost no access to formal school-
ing. Thus, blacks began the post-war period with low adult levels of education.
Further, most blacks lived in the South, and the South lagged behind the rest of
the nation in providing education. Even whites in the South attended schools



                                         2
that received fewer resources than schools in the rest of the country, and after
reconstruction, the disenfranchisement of blacks and the resulting segregation-
ist policies regarding the provision of public schooling guaranteed that blacks in
the South only had access to schools that were worse yet than the substandard
schools that their white neighbors attended. There is little evidence that blacks
born during the period from the end of reconstruction through the …rst decade
of the twentieth century made any attainment gains relative to their white coun-
terparts, and Collins and Margo (2003) report that, among those born in the
South between 1905 and 1909, the average …nal attainment of six years among
blacks fell three years below the average white attainment. The corresponding
attainment gap for the nation as a whole was almost 3.5 years.1
    For subsequent birth cohorts, the story is di¤erent. A large existing liter-
ature documents how successive cohorts of black young adults born after the
…rst decade of the twentieth century obtained higher and higher schooling levels
relative to whites. In another chapter in this Handbook, Collins and Margo
document these trends and discuss their causes. Collins and Margo focus on
the period before 1960. Smith (1984) and Smith and Welch (1989) employ data
from the period 1940-1980. Table 1 performs similar analyses using data from
the 1960-2000 census …les. The rows of the table give birth years, the columns
give age groups, and each diagonal row running from lower left to upper right
contains results from a particular census. The top diagonal row contains data
from 1960. The bottom such row presents data from the 2000 census.
    Table 1 shows that, during the 1980s, the black-white attainment gap con-
tinued to narrow at a pace that one might expect given the experience of previ-
ous decades. Among men ages 26-30, the black-white education gap fell from
roughly one year to about two thirds of a year between 1980 and 1990, and
this change is simply an extension of the 1960-80 trends in relative attainment.
Starting in 1990 and going back to 1960, the black-white education gap among
men 26-30 is always two thirds of the corresponding gap in the previous decade.
The rate of convergence among women is not quite as rapid over this period,
but the initial gap in 1960 was not nearly as large. Black women made steady
gains in attainment relative to white women over the entire period, and by 1990
the black-white attainment gap among young adult women was just under one
half of a year of schooling.     The results in Table 1 combined with those in
Smith (1984) and Smith and Welch (1989) indicate that each decade from 1940
through 1990 brought a decline in the measured black-white attainment gap
for both men and women at all ages, and in 1990, the overall black-white gap
in years of attainment among young adults ages 26-30 represented less than 5
percent of the average schooling level among whites.2
    However, this trend toward black-white parity in attainment stops in 1990.
   1 Smith and Welch (1989) report an even larger black-white attainment gap for this cohort.
The Smith and Welch number of 3.9 is larger because they report results for males only.
   2 The gaps in 1960-80 are larger in Smith and Welch. The di¤erences result because the

census changed the coding of education in 1990, and in order to make results comparable over
the entire 1960-2000 period, I adopted a less disaggregate coding scheme for education.




                                             3
Among men and women ages 26-30 in 2000, the black-white educational at-
tainment gap is slightly larger than the corresponding gap in 1990. Similar
results hold for men and women ages 31-35.3 In terms of school cohorts, the
black-white gap in educational attainment may have stopped closing and even
begun to widen with the cohorts of children who began their schooling during
the late 1960s and early 1970s. I have examined educational attainment by
individual birth cohorts over the period 1960 to 1974. Regardless of gender,
the black-white attainment gaps for those born after 1965 are almost always
slightly greater than the attainment gaps associated with birth cohorts from
the early 60s.
    Because the black-white attainment gap also increases between 1990 and
2000 within several birth cohorts who reached adulthood before 1990, i.e. as
one goes across rows in the table, there is some concern that the increase in
black-white attainment gaps observed among the most recent cohort of young
adults may, in part, re‡ect a change in sampling procedures between 1990 and
2000. To provide more information about trends in black-white attainment gaps
during the 1990s, I have also examined education gaps in the March Current
Population Surveys and the American Community Surveys. Appendix Table
1 describes the results. These surveys are not exactly comparable to census
…les because the CPS does not include persons in the military or in institutional
quarters, and the ACS does not include persons in institutions. The ACS did
not exist in 1990, but the 1990 March CPS and 1990 Census provide similar
estimates of black-white attainment gaps. Thus it is somewhat surprising that,
in contrast to the census results reported in Table 1, a comparison of results
from the March 2000 and March 1990 CPS …les indicates that three of four
black-white education gaps among men and women in the 26-30 and 31-35 age
groups grew smaller in absolute value over the 1990s. However, the CPS …les
are much smaller than the census …les, and none of these changes is statistically
signi…cant.
    While the CPS results provide some suggestion that young black adults
continued to close the black-white attainment gap during the 1990s, the balance
of the evidence indicates that the attainment gap remained constant at best
during the 1990s. The case for convergence during the 1990s is strongest among
men ages 31-35. Here, the ACS 2000 and 2001 results are clearly more in
line with the CPS results than the census numbers. However, the 2000 ACS
results for men ages 26-30 are quite consistent with the 2000 census results.4
Further, among young adult women, black-white education gaps in the 2000
census, the 2000 ACS, and the 2001 ACS are always larger in absolute value
   3 These   changes are small, but given the large samples sizes in the census …les, they are
statistically signi…cant among women.
   4 In 2001, the implied black-white attainment gap among men ages 26-30 is larger in the

ACS than the CPS but still smaller than the gap implied by the 2000 census data. To
compare census and ACS results directly, one must adjust the census numbers by removing
the insitutionalized population. The prison population grew substantially over the 1990s,
especially among black men. Black-white education gaps among men ages 26-35 in the 2000
census are almost .1 smaller in absolute value when men living in institutions are not included
in the sample.



                                              4
than corresponding gaps taken from either the 2000 or 2001 March CPS …les. In
fact, among women ages 26-35, black-white education gaps in the 2000 census,
2000 ACS and 2001 ACS are always larger than the corresponding gaps in the
1990 census, implying that young adult black women in 2000 were no closer to
educational parity with white women than were their predecessors in 1990.
    In sum, Table 1 provides signi…cant but not de…nitive evidence that black-
white convergence in educational attainment stopped during the 1990s. One can
have more con…dence that convergence in relative attainment actually stopped
if other measures of attainment tell a similar story. Next, I present results
concerning how black-white di¤erences in rates of graduating from high school
and college have evolved over recent decades.
    Although cohorts born in the late seventies or the eighties have not completed
their schooling, one can compare high school graduation rates for cohorts born
in the early 1960s to those of cohorts born in the early 1980s by examining
data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth. Table 2a gives high
school graduation rates by age and birth cohort for samples taken from the
National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth, NLSY79 and NLSY97. The NLSY79
provides panel data on persons born between 1957 and 1964. The NLSY97
provides panel data on persons born between 1980 and 1984. Using recent data
from the NLSY97, I compute the fraction of people born in 1980 or 1981 who
graduated from high school by the date of their 19th, 20th, or 21st birthdays.
I calculate the corresponding graduation rates for all the NLSY79 cohorts, and
in addition, I calculate the number who graduate high school by age 30.
    Each cell in Table 2a contains two graduation rates. The top number is a
graduation rate based on the number of persons with regular high school diplo-
mas. The bottom number includes as graduates those persons who receive a
high school equivalency credential by passing the General Educational Devel-
opment (GED) test. For the moment, focus on the results concerning regular
diplomas. The numbers are averages for people born in adjacent birth cohorts
who share the same race and gender. There is no evidence that black men born
in the early 1980s were generally more likely to graduate high school than black
men born in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Among black men born in 1980-81,
58 percent graduate from high school by their 21st birthday. This graduation
rate is lower than corresponding rates for all the other pairs of adjacent birth
cohorts taken from the NLSY79. In contrast, the 79 percent graduation rate
among white males born in 1980-81 is as high or higher than 3 of the 4 gradua-
tion rates associated with the NLSY79 cohorts of white males. The rate among
white males born in 1957-58 is .83, but the graduation rates for cohorts born in
1959-64 are all below .80. The overall comparison of the NLSY79 and NLSY97
results indicates that, among men, there may have been no net closing of the
black-white gap in high school graduation rates over roughly two decades of
cohorts born between 1960 and 1980, although black-white di¤erences in gradu-
ation rates do diminish over the cohorts born in the late 1950s and early 1960s,
in large part because white graduation rates decline over this period. The time
pattern of black-white gaps in graduation rates is consistent with the results
in Table 1 concerning …nal attainment gaps. The black-white attainment gap

                                        5
among men reached a historic low among those born in the early 1960s and
appears to remain constant or widen slightly among later cohorts.
    The results for women in Table 2a are quite similar. Although high school
graduation rates for those born in 1980-81 are higher than rates for birth cohorts
from the late 50s and early 60s regardless of race, the improvement in graduation
rates since the early 1960s is slightly greater among white females, and thus the
black-white gap in graduation rates is slightly greater among those born in 1980-
81 than among those born in the 1961-64 period. Table 1 indicates that the
black-white gap in attainment among women declined to roughly .45 of one year
of schooling for women born between 1955 and 1964 and then widened slightly
among later cohorts.
    Table 2a also provides a cautionary tale concerning the measurement of ed-
ucational attainment. Data from the NLSY79 cohorts show that a notable
number of those who receive a high school diploma by age 30 are GED recip-
ients who never graduated from a particular high school. Among both black
and white men in NLSY79, the rate of GED receipt was higher among later
birth cohorts, and over 15 percent of all black men born between 1961 and 1964
received a GED. The corresponding …gure for white men is around 10 percent.
Table 2a shows that, within the NLSY79 cohort, most high school credentials re-
ceived after a respondent’s 21st birthday are GEDs. Because census data do not
distinguish between GEDs and regular diplomas, educational attainment data
from census …les do not capture the true magnitude of black-white di¤erences
in actual graduation rates.5
    Table 1 presents overall attainment gaps, and Table 2a explores di¤erences
in high school graduation rates. Another important marker of education attain-
ment is college graduation. Table 2b presents college graduation rates among
men and women ages 26-35 in each census year from 1960 through 2000. The
…nal column in each panel presents ratios of these race-speci…c graduation rates
(white to black). In 1960, the white graduation rate for men was almost four
times greater than the corresponding rate for blacks. This ratio falls to 2.13 by
1990, but increases slightly between 1990 and 2000 to 2.17. College graduation
rates for white women were quite low in 1960. Thus, the time trend in the
ratio of white to black graduation rates among women before 1990 is not nearly
as dramatic. Nonetheless, in the 1990s, graduation rates did not increase as
rapidly among young black women as among young white women.6
    In sum, data on attainment gaps as well as trends in high school and college
graduation rates suggest that, among both men and women, the dramatic black-
white convergence in attainment that began with cohorts born around 1910
came to a halt just over 50 years later. The attainment outcomes among blacks
born in the late 1960s and early 1970s as well as the high school graduation rates
   5 See Cameron and Heckman (1993) for di¤erences in outcomes between GED and regular
diploma recipients.
   6 The 2000 Census and 2000 March CPS provide fairly comparable estimates of race-speci…c

college graduation rates for young adults. The same is true in 1990. Neither data series
indicates that young adult black adults closed the black-white gap in college graduation rates
during the 1990s.



                                              6
of those born in the early 1980s may re‡ect only a pause in the long-term process
of black-white convergence in attainment, but this pause is noteworthy because
it is a clear departure from the trend toward black-white parity in attainment
that dominated most of the 20th century. It is ironic that the cohorts of black
youth born immediately after the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 did
not add to previous decades of progress toward racial equality in educational
attainment. However, the next section demonstrates that the cohorts born in
the late 1960s and the 1970s did participate in a dramatic narrowing of the
black-white test score gap.

2.1    Achievement Gaps
Years of schooling is an indirect measure of human capital. It provides an ac-
counting of time devoted to acquiring skills through formal schooling. However,
schools di¤er in curricula, and some schools facilitate learning more e¤ectively
than others. Further, even within the same school, some children learn faster
than others, and these di¤erences re‡ect more than simple di¤erences in individ-
ual aptitudes. Children di¤er greatly in the extent to which adults direct their
activities outside school toward learning. Thus, for many reasons, persons who
reach the same level of educational attainment may have signi…cantly di¤erent
skill sets.
    In this section, I review existing data on black-white di¤erences in test scores,
and I focus on tests that measure basic math and reading skills among children
and teenagers. These basic skills provide the foundation for acquiring new
skills as an adult both in the work place and in institutions of higher education.
Table 3 presents statistics based on the data found in the National Assessment of
Education Progress - Long Term Trend study (NAEP-LTT). The NAEP-LTT
is a series of nationwide assessments in reading, math, and science. The tests
have been given periodically since 1971 to students who are in school and age 9,
13, or 17. These assessments maintain a consistent testing framework and are
designed to measure trends in achievement over time. Here, I do not employ
data from the tests for the age 17 sample. The assessments of 17 year old
students provide a select sample of scores because the NAEP-LTT …rst samples
schools and then samples enrolled students within schools. All 17 year old
dropouts are therefore not eligible for testing. Because drop out rates are not
the same for blacks and whites, these data are not ideal for inferences concerning
black-white achievement di¤erences among 17 year old students. In addition,
compared to the age 9 and 13 assessments, response rates are signi…cantly lower
in the 17 year old samples.
    Table 3 presents test score gaps for students who share a common age and
birth cohort. To determine the year that a particular test was given simply sum
the appropriate row and column labels. Each entry is the black-white test score
gap for a particular birth cohort in a given subject at a given age. The score
gaps are normalized by the population standard deviation on the particular
assessment in question. The sample standard deviations on these tests vary
from year to year, and although standard deviations tend to be higher in the


                                         7
early assessments, there is no trend in the standard deviation of scores over
most of the period.7 The NAEP-LTT reveal signi…cant test score gaps at both
ages, for both subjects, and among all birth cohorts. Black-white test score
gaps are always greater than .5 standard deviations and several are roughly a
full standard deviation or more.
    The previous section shows that the black-white gap in …nal educational
attainment did not continue to close among cohorts born after 1965. However,
black children born in the 1970s did perform better relative to white children on
both math and reading tests than black children born in previous cohorts. In
terms of birth cohorts, black-white test score convergence proceeds at a steady
rate until the mid to late 1970s. In terms of assessment dates, the relative
test scores of black children improve among both nine and thirteen years old
students from the early 1970s until the late 1980s. Appendix Table 2 provides
more details concerning time trends in achievement by race. From the late
1970s through the late 1980s, black children made striking gains in achievement
while scores for white children remained relatively ‡at. The most dramatic
changes occurred in the 13 year old sample. Figures 1a and 1b plot black-white
test score gaps in the age 13 NAEP-LTT by assessment date. The relative
gains in math and reading between the early 1970s and the late 1980s are large
by any metric.
    However, Table 3 and Figures 1a and 1b show that black-white test score
gaps among 9 and 13 year old students stopped closing in the late 1980s. Since
then, black test scores have shown little improvement in levels, and black-white
test score gaps have either remained constant or increased modestly. Some
may be tempted to draw signi…cance from the fact that, as shown in Table 1,
the 1990s are also the …rst decade in which census data record no further clos-
ing and possibly an increase in the black-white attainment gap among young
adults. However, it is not clear exactly how the trends in Tables 1, 2b and
3 are related. Most adults between 26 and 35 in the 2000 census were born
more than a decade before the cohorts of children who took NAEP-LTT tests
during the late 1980s and throughout 1990s. On the other hand, given the
constraints of mandatory schooling laws, the majority of adults ages 26-35 in
the 2000 census made decisions that determined their …nal educational attain-
ments during the late 1980s or the 1990s. It is possible that a shock common
to many black communities occurred during this period that both restrained
educational attainment among young adults and harmed the development of
math and reading skills among youth during the coming decade. In section
4, I discuss changes in family income and family structure that may in part
re‡ect changes in the wage structure that hurt less skilled workers during the
1980s. I also discuss recent work by Fryer et al (2004) that documents how the
crack epidemic ravaged urban black communities during the late 1980s and early
1990s. However, before turning to possible explanations for the time series of
black-white attainment and test score gaps documented in the census …les and
   7 The score gaps from the 1973 math assessments are normalized by the standard devia-

tions from the 1978 assessments because I cannot …nd a report containing the 1973 standard
deviations.


                                            8
the NAEP-LTT, I present results from other data sets concerning changes in
black-white test score gaps over time.

2.2         Evidence from other test data
The NAEP-LTT is one of the few data sources that provides test scores for
a nationally representative sample of persons sharing the same age.8         Most
data sets containing test scores provide samples of students, often high school
students, who are enrolled in a particular grade at a point in time. However,
the NLSY79 and NLSY97 do provide test scores for samples of students de…ned
by birth cohort who took comparable tests almost twenty years apart. These
data provide an excellent opportunity to determine whether or not the patterns
observed in the NAEP-LTT data concerning black-white progress over the birth
cohorts of the 1960s and 1970s hold given di¤erent tests of reading and math
skills.
    In 1980, the Department of Defense used the NLSY79 sample to construct
a national distribution of scores for the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
Battery (ASVAB). The ASVAB contains 10 tests. Many are designed to
measure aptitude for special military vocations. The Armed Forces Qualifying
Test (AFQT) is a composite of four ASVAB tests that cover basic reading and
math skills. The military uses AFQT scores as proxies for general aptitude in
learning military jobs. Extensive evaluations of the AFQT show that it does
help predict future measured performance on military jobs and that it is not
racially biased. Relationships between AFQT and post-training assessments
are quite similar for black and white recruits9 . The Defense Department gave a
computer assisted version of the ASVAB to NLSY97 respondents during the fall
of 1997 and early 1998. The NLSY79 follows respondents born between 1957
and 1964. The NLSY97 includes respondents born between 1980 and 1984.
    Table 4 presents test scores for three di¤erent groups of birth cohorts drawn
from the NLSY panels. These students took the AFQT at ages 13-17. To facil-
itate comparisons among the NLSY panels and the NAEP-LTT, I transformed
all test score data from the NLSY panels into deviations from the average score
among persons born in the same two month interval.10          The scores are also
   8 The improvement of test scores among black children during the 1970s and 1980s is well

documented. See Hedges and Nowell (1998) for analyses of relative gains in black achievement
during this period that also include results from samples drawn based on grade of attendance.

   9 SeeWigdor and Green (1991).
  1 0 TheNAEP-LTT is a random sample of students who were a particular age at a point
in time. The NLSY samples are drawn according to birth dates. Therefore, over the two
calendar intervals that the AFQT was given to the NLSY panels, the shares of persons with
the youngest and oldest ages in each panel were less than their corresponding shares in the
population. In NLSY79, the share of 15 year olds is too small. In the NLSY97, the share of
17 year olds is to small.
   The NLSY97 provides the date that each respondent took the ASVAB. Thus, in the NLS97,
I standardized scores for birth date and whether or not the student took the test during the
summer of 1997, the fall of 1997, or the winter of 1998. Test dates are not available in the
NLSY79, but the NLSY79 exams were given over a shorter time interval.



                                             9
standardized so that one unit equals one standard deviation in the distribution
of scores for persons of the same birth cohort and gender.
    The NAEP-LTT reports do not provide separate scores for boys and girls
within racial groups. However, the NLSY data allow me to report separate
black-white score gaps by gender. The results for 15-17 year old respondents
allow direct comparisons over time under the assumption that the 1997-98 and
1980 administrations of the ASVAB are comparable assessments. This com-
parison indicates clear improvement for black teenagers relative to their white
counterparts among boys and girls. Note that this improvement mirrors secular
trends in the NAEP-LTT data for age 13 assessments.
    The NAEP reading scores for those born in 1962 and the NAEP math scores
for those born in 1965 are the best points of comparison for the NLSY79 scores.
The estimated size of the black-white reading gap among those age 13 in 1975
was just over one standard deviation. The absolute value of the estimated black-
white gap in math scores among those age 13 in 1978 was about 1.1 standard
deviations. The NLSY79 sample of those tested at ages 15-17 includes persons
born in 1962-64. The black-white test score gaps in this sample are similar in
magnitude to those in the 1975 and 1978 NAEP-LTT for age 13, but the relative
sizes of the reading and math gaps are reversed. The AFQT scores imply that
reading gaps are larger than the math gaps.
    The AFQT scores from the 1997-98 administration of the ASVAB yield
black-white test score gaps in reading of -.79 and -.91 standard deviations
among those ages 13-14 and 15-17 respectively. In math, the corresponding
gaps are -.84 and -.87. Compared to the NLSY79 scores for those ages 15-17,
these gaps represent relative improvements for black youth of .37 to .25 standard
deviations in reading and .11 to .08 standard deviations in math. Because the
NLSY97 respondents were born in 1980-84, the NAEP-LTT scores that provide
the best points of comparison are the age 13 scores for students born in 1981 and
1983 and tested in 1994 and 1996. Relative to the black-white score gaps in
the 1975 reading assessment and the 1978 math assessment, Table 3 shows that
the 1994-96 assessments imply relative score gains for black youth of .2-.25 stan-
dard deviations in reading and .16-.18 standard deviations in math. Taking the
di¤erences between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 results as baselines, the implied
achievement gains in the NAEP-LTT over roughly the same period are slightly
larger in math and somewhat smaller in reading. Nonetheless, the shrinking
of black-white gaps in scores on the math and reading sections of the AFQT
between 1979 and 1997 lends credit to the hypothesis that the NAEP-LTT data
reported in Table 3 capture a real and noteworthy closing of the black-white
test score gap among teenagers.11
    The narrowing of the black-white test score gap is an important development
in the post-civil rights era. Because there are no reliable measures of individual
achievement prior to the NAEP-LTT data, we do not know the extent to which
  1 1 The AFQT data are consistent with the relative improvement of blacks scores in the

NAEP-LTT over the 1978-1999 period. However, existing data do not allow an independent
check on the conclusion, often drawn from the NAEP-LTT, that the post-1978 improvements
in black achievement took place before 1990.


                                          10
the narrowing of black-white test score gaps among cohorts born during the
1970s and early 1980s was part of a long term trend toward skill convergence,
but the amount of convergence documented in Tables 3 and 4 is noteworthy.
Both Neal and Johnson (1996) and Hansen et al (2004) estimate that one year
of high school raises average AFQT scores by roughly .2 standard deviations.
Thus, the …nal column of Table 4 indicates that, between 1980 and 1997-98,
the overall improvement in AFQT scores among those ages 15-17 represents the
addition of roughly one year’s worth of achievement for black students relative to
white students. While this gain is impressive, it also highlights the enormous
magnitude of the black-white skill gap that remains. Work by Neal and
Johnson (1996) and Johnson and Neal (1998) suggests that the black-white
skill gap among teenagers in the NLSY97 will likely translate into at least a 15
percent di¤erence in lifetime earning capacity.12
    I have followed accepted practice by discussing these gaps in terms of units
created by transforming all sets of scores so that the sample average is zero and
the sample standard deviation is one. Because some test score distributions
are approximately normal by design, standard deviation units often serve as a
cardinal metric for test score gaps, and given this metric, the NAEP-LTT data
and the NLSY panels provide fairly consistent information about the magnitude
of the black-white test score gap at di¤erent points in time among di¤erent
birth cohorts. However, ability has no natural units.13 In most cases, test
scores provide only a ranking of individuals. Whatever the scoring system, one
assumes that if person A has a higher score than person B, then A performed
better on the exam than B, but statements about the distance between A’s
performance and B’s performance usually rely on arbitrary scales that have no
inherent cardinal signi…cance.
    Figures 2a and 2b present results for respondents in the NLSY79 and NLSY97
who were ages 15-17 when they took the ASVAB. The …gures give matches
between percentile rankings in white and black math score distributions by gen-
der.14 For example, in the 1980 administration of the test, the tenth percentile
in the distribution of math scores for black males equaled the second percentile
in the distribution of math scores for white males. Several aspects of these
…gures are noteworthy. To begin, these …gures provide a useful perspective on
the size of black-white di¤erences in the distributions of scores that remain in
1997. Roughly 80 percent of black males and females scored below the corre-
sponding median score among whites, and only around 5 percent of black males
  1 2 Neal  and Johnson (1996) employ wage data from the 1990-91 wave of the NLSY79. The
next section includes results from the 2000 wave of the NLSY79, and the results suggest an
even stronger relationship between AFQT and future earnings capacity.
  1 3 If the distributions of black scores and white scores were both normal with the same

variance, then knowledge of the black-white gap in mean scores expressed in standard deviation
units would fully reveal the mapping between percentile ranks in the black distribution and
percentile ranks in the white distribution. However, it is obvious that these conditions do not
hold in many data sets. In fact, distributions of AFQT composites from the NLSY panels
are not always normal and are skewed as well.
  1 4 I do not include reading scores because I was not able to get the required individual

NAEP-LTT data as points of comparison in enough relevant years.



                                              11
and females scored in the top 25% of the corresponding score distributions for
whites. Further, the pattern of changes in relative rankings over time is what
one would expect given the results in Table 4. Compared to blacks born in the
early 1960s, those born in the early 1980s were more likely to be in at least the
middle of the white distribution of scores. Among boys, the fraction of blacks
who scored above the median white score increased from roughly 10 percent to
about 20 percent. Still, progress toward racial equality in scores was not the
same at all percentiles in the black score distributions. While the right tails
of the black score distributions moved farther into the upper half of the white
score distribution, the left tails of the black score distributions remained below
all but a handful of white scores.
    Figures 2c and 2d present similar results based on individual data from the
NAEP-LTT math assessments. The …gures present relative ranks for three
samples of 13 year old students. The …rst two samples are the 1978 and 1982
NAEP-LTT math assessments. The third sample combines data from the 1992,
1994, and 1996 assessments.15 Once again, the NLSY and NAEP-LTT paint
similar pictures. Black teenagers improved their relative ranks over this period,
but they remain far behind white teenagers in terms of math achievement. Fur-
ther, blacks in the lower percentiles of test score distributions are making the
least progress relative to whites. However, the timing of black relative progress
di¤ers by gender. Almost all of the improvements in relative scores for black
males came between 1978 and 1982, but the signi…cant improvements for black
girls come after 1982. In addition, among boys, the overall improvement of
black NAEP scores relative to white scores is not as dramatic as the relative
improvement in the math components of AFQT scores observed between the
two NLSY cohorts. This is somewhat surprising given that results from Ta-
bles 3 and 4, where black-white score gaps are expressed in standard deviation
units, suggest that blacks made larger relative gains in math on the NAEP-LTT
assessments than on the AFQT.16
    Because the NAEP-LTT is designed to test the same math skills in every
assessment year and because all scores from all years are on a common scale,
one can also determine whether or not there was improvement over time within
the black sample. The scale scores of those in the lower percentiles of the black
score distributions did improve between the 1978 and mid 1990s assessments,
but this improvement did not result in noticeable improvements in the rank of
lower scoring black students in the white score distribution for two reasons. To
begin, the black and white math score distributions for those age 13 in 1978
did not e¤ectively share a common support. The lower percentile scores for
  15 I  was not able to obtain individual NAEP data for many years. I combined results from
the 1992-96 wave because the data sets from the 1990s are much smaller than those from
previous years. I present math results because I was not able to verify the quality of the
1996 data on individual reading scores by reproducing the published tables that summarize
the assessment.
  1 6 I do not present graphs for reading scores because I was not able to obtain a reliable version

of the 1996 reading test results from the NAEP. For the analyses involving math scores, I
was able to recreate the published tables that document percentiles in score distributions for
various years and subpopulations.



                                                12
blacks born in 1965 were so low that these scores could have improved without
generating notable changes in the relative ranks of black and white test scores,
even if the white score distribution remained completely constant over time. In
addition, scores at the lower percentiles of the white distribution also improved
over time.
    The NLSY79 respondents took a paper and pencil version of the ASVAB.
Those born in 1961 through 1964 took the test as teenagers, and the distribution
of raw scores among black teenagers in this sample provides some context for
just how poorly less skilled blacks from cohorts born before 1965 performed on
cognitive tests. The version of the AFQT administered to NLSY79 respondents
contains 105 questions. Each question is a multiple choice question with four
possible answers and one correct answer. Thus, if a given respondent simply
guessed randomly, he or she would have expected a raw score between 26 and
27. Further, among a group of respondents who guessed randomly, we expect
over 20 percent to have answered 30 or more questions correctly. Thus, a score
of 30 constitutes far less than decisive evidence against the null hypothesis that
a given respondent knew the correct answer to none of the questions and simply
chose answers randomly. Still, 19 percent of black male respondents and 11
percent of black female respondents answered 27 or less questions correctly, and
almost 27 percent of black males and roughly 18 percent of black females posted
a raw score of 30 or less. In contrast, more than 94 percent of whites scored
above 30 regardless of gender.
    Given these results, it seems fair to conclude that a substantial fraction of
the NLSY79 sample of black males who took the ASVAB test lacked the basic
math and reading skills covered by the exam, lacked any motivation to put forth
e¤ort during the exam, or both. The results for black females are not quite as
bleak, but they still indicate very low levels of performance in the left-tail of the
black score distribution. The NLSY97 and the NAEP-LTT tests do not permit
the type of "number correct" counts that I have done for the NLSY79, but
taken as a whole, the results presented here suggest that cohorts of black youth
and young adults born in the 1980s and 1990s may still contain a signi…cant
number of individuals who do not possess the basic math and reading skills that
young teenagers are expected to acquire in school. Although scaled NAEP-LTT
scores for black youth at the …fth and tenth percentiles of the distributions did
improve between 1978 and the mid 1990s, these achievement gains were not
su¢ cient to create notable changes in the score ranks of lower performing black
youth relative to white students, and Figures 2a and 2b also show little, if any,
improvement between 1980 and 1997 in relative AFQT score ranks for youth
scoring in the lower percentiles of the black score distributions.
    Finally, Figures 3a-b present the relative ranks of black youth from large
cities in the nationwide distribution of white math scores. As in Figures 2c and
2d, the data come from the NAEP-LTT math assessments, and I de…ne large
cities as central cities with a total metropolitan area population of at least two
million in 1990. Note that the relative ranks of blacks in these large cities who
are age 13 actually tended to fall, especially among boys, between 1978 and the
mid 1990s. Compare Figures 2c and 3a. The falling achievement of black

                                         13
boys in large cities over the 1980s and early 1990s is comparable in magnitude
to the signi…cant overall improvements made by black boys during the 1978-82
period. By the mid 1990s, black youth in large cities performed notably worse
than black youth in small towns or rural areas. This development is noteworthy
because prior to 1980, rural blacks performed worse than other blacks on tests
of academic achievement.
    Flanagan and Grissmer (2002) provide evidence that reinforces the results
in Figures 3a-b. Table 5 is taken directly from their paper. In order to create
samples that provide signi…cant numbers of observations for various subgroups
de…ned by race and geography, Flanagan and Grissmer combined data from nine
di¤erent grade level NAEP assessments conducted during the 1990s. These
include three 4th grade reading tests, three 8th grade math tests, two 4th grade
math tests and one 8th grade reading test.
    The population percentage …gures refer to shares in the national sample of
public school students. Among both blacks and whites, students in central cities
perform below average.17 However, less than one in four white students attend
public schools in cities while over half of all black students in the Flanagan
and Grissmer sample are in central cities. Further, with the exception of a
small number of black students in suburbs and rural areas in the West, blacks
in central cities score lower than all other black students. For the vast majority
of the 20th century, any result suggesting that black children in the rural South
were better educated than black children in northern cities would have been
completely incredible, but note that by the 1990s, black students in the rural
southeast score more than .2 standard deviations higher than black students in
northeastern cities.
    Several existing studies of the relative performance of public versus private
schools document particularly poor educational outcomes for black students who
attend public schools in large cities.18 These results as well as the results in
Figures 3a-b and Table 5 stand in stark contrast to a literature that documents
the experiences of blacks during the pre-Civil Rights era. In the decades prior
to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, large numbers of blacks migrated from the rural
South to seek a better life for themselves and their children in cities, especially
northern cities, but by the end of the 20th century, black children in cities
possessed lower levels of skill than black children in the rural South.
    In summary, there is considerable evidence that during the 1970s and 1980s
black youth made signi…cant achievement gains relative to white youth. The
gains are present in math and reading using di¤erent data sets and di¤erent
measures of progress. On the other hand, both the NAEP-LTT and AFQT
data suggest that youth in the lower deciles of black test score distributions did
not improve their relative ranks in distributions of test scores for whites over
this period, and black youth in large cities, especially boys, likely lost ground
relative to white youth.
  1 7 These samples of central city students contain scores from many cities that are not included

in the results for Figures 3a-b because Grissmer and Flannigan do not restrict their attention
to the largest central cities.
  1 8 See Neal (1997) and Grogger and Neal (2000).




                                               14
    In terms of overall trends, it is most important to note that Table 3 provides
no evidence that black-white test score gaps continued to close during the 1990s.
This development is puzzling in light of the sizeable gains made by black youth
during the 1970s and 1980s. It would be useful to examine other measures of
trends in black-white achievement gaps during the 1990s, but the NAEP-LTT
assessments are the only nationally representative data on achievement intended
to measure trends over time. The AFQT data in the NLSY panels provide two
snapshots that are almost two decades apart, and although these snapshots allow
comparisons between two speci…c sets of birth cohorts, the NLSY panels provide
no information about achievement trends during the 1990s. The best available
points of comparison may come from the national NAEP math and reading
assessments for 4th and 8th graders. These assessments are not designed to
be comparable over time, but the National Center for Educational Statistics
(NCES) suggests that they may in some instances provide useful information
about short term achievement trends in samples de…ned by grade attending
rather than age.19 Appendix Table 3 presents results from these assessments.
During the 1990s, the NAEP national assessments suggest that black elementary
and junior high school students gained no ground on their white peers in terms
of overall achievement. Reading scores for black eighth graders rose relative
to scores for their white peers, but the opposite was true for math scores, and
black-white test score gaps among fourth graders were roughly the same at the
end of the 1990s as they were at the beginning. Results from these assessments
are not directly comparable to those from the NAEP-LTT assessments, and the
two sets of assessments do not always paint exactly the same picture. However,
neither set of assessments indicate that the overall black-white skill gap narrowed
during the 1990s.
    It is worth noting that the 2002 reading assessments and the 2003 math as-
sessments show signi…cant gains in achievement for black fourth graders both in
levels and relative to whites. These results may signal the beginning of another
period of test score convergence between black and white youth. However, it
is important not to draw too much from these two data points. The national
NAEP scores are reported on a common scale across years, but the national
NAEP program does not maintain a …xed assessment framework over time. In
addition, even if one is willing to use these data to measure trends from the
early 1900s through 2003, there is no clear evidence of overall progress for black
youth relative to white youth. The black-white gap in fourth grade math scores
is signi…cantly smaller in 2003 than in the early 1990s, but this is not true for
the other three assessments. Finally, the reading assessments in 2002 and the
math assessments in 2003 involved dramatic changes in the administration of
the tests. In these years, the state NAEP assessments were folded into the
 1 9 Seehttp://www.nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/about/national.asp. The di¤erence be-
tween the national and LTT assessment is described as follows: "As the content and nature
of the NAEP instrument evolve to match instructional practice, the ability of the assessment
to measure change over time is reduced. While short-term trends can be measured in many of
the NAEP subjects (e.g., mathematics, reading), the most reliable instrument of change over
time are the NAEP long-term trend assessments."



                                            15
national NAEP assessments creating a set of national assessments that involved
more than 10 times as many students as in previous years. The NAEP-LTT
assessments for 2003 will be released in 2005. These data should tell us much
more about trends in black-white achievement after 1999.


3    Skills and Adult Outcomes
The future will reveal whether the 1990s were only a pause in a secular process
of skill convergence between black and white Americans, or whether the late
1980s and early 1990s marked the beginning of an important period of constant
or falling relative skill levels for blacks. In either case, the results presented in
the previous section raise important questions. Why have relative skill levels
for black youth apparently remained constant at best for the past …fteen years
or more given the large black-white skill gap that remains? Why do so many
black youth apparently fail to master the basic math and reading skills covered
by their schools curricula? Can a large black-white skill gap persist for the
inde…nite future?
    I begin my discussion of these issues by reviewing modern models of statis-
tical discrimination. A large theoretical literature explores the idea that black
youth may fail to acquire skills because they believe that employers are not likely
to view them as skilled regardless of their true skill level. In these models, the
response of black youth to the anticipated prejudice of employers con…rms the
prejudice, and the black community …nds itself in an equilibrium characterized
by low levels of skill investment and low gross returns to the skill investments
that are made. In this section, I ‡esh out the logic of statistical discrimination
models, and I assess whether or not these models can explain recent data on
skill levels and racial wage gaps.
    I begin with a discussion of a particular model that has been quite in‡uential.
In Coate and Loury (1993), …rms must assign workers to one of two tasks. Task
one yields higher output if and only if the worker assigned to task one is a skilled
worker. Workers are skilled if they make particular investments in their own
human capital. These skill investments are costly to workers but not veri…able.
Firms have prior beliefs, b and w , concerning the fraction of black workers
and white workers respectively who invest in skills, and for each worker i, …rms
see only a noisy signal of worker i’s productivity, i , and worker i’s race. Based
on these two pieces of information, …rms form posterior beliefs about worker
i’s productivity and assign the worker to the task that maximizes his expected
output. Firms use a cuto¤ rule such that every worker with a signal greater
than some standard, s, is assigned to task one. Because …rms’ prior beliefs
may di¤er by race, …rms may establish sw 6= sb as race-speci…c standards for
assignment. Individual workers face heterogeneous costs of investing in skill,
but these costs are independent draws from the same distribution G(c) for both
black and white workers. An individual worker invests in skills if the expected
return is positive given the standard he faces. An equilibrium in the model
consists of pairs of beliefs and standards ( w ; sw ) and ( b ; sb ) such that worker


                                         16
investment behavior is an optimal response to the standards set by employers,
and given these optimal responses, employer beliefs are self-con…rming. The
equilibrium is de…ned by the following condition:

                       i   = G(B(s ( i )) where si = s ( i ); i = b; w
    The key term is B(s ( i )): This is the expected wage increase associated
with investing in skill for a member of group i. Although all workers assigned
to the same task earn the same wage regardless of race, B(si ) declines with the
assignment standard si because higher cuto¤s imply lower chances of assignment
to task one.
    There are many variations on this theme in the literature on statistical
discrimination. However, throughout the literature, the structure of models
implies that blacks invest less in skills than whites as a rational response to em-
ployer discrimination. In equilibrium, b < w , is not only a statement about
beliefs but also a statement about racial di¤erences in actual levels of invest-
ment, and here, b < w holds precisely because sb > sw ; which implies directly
that B(s ( b )) < B(s ( w )): The irony is that there is little or no evidence
from recent decades that blacks do earn lower returns from skill investments
and much evidence suggesting that blacks earn equal or higher returns to in-
vestments in skill. It is plausible that, before the 1960s, statistical or other
types of discrimination against highly skilled black workers may have damp-
ened incentives for skill acquisition among black youth, but I demonstrate in
the next section that apparent returns to investments in skills have been as great
or greater among black adults than white adults for many decades. I begin by
discussing returns to skills that are not directly observed by most …rms. These
results speak most clearly to the empirical content of statistical discrimination
models. I then turn to race-speci…c relationships between education and labor
market outcomes. In both cases, the evidence indicates that, in recent decades,
the correlation between skill levels and labor market outcomes has been at least
as strong and likely stronger among blacks than whites.
    The analyses presented below are restricted to samples of adult men. A
signi…cant literature demonstrates that sample selection bias contaminates stan-
dard measures of black-white wage gaps because patterns of selection into work
di¤er by race. Since relationships between participation rates and measured
skills also di¤er by race, selection bias contaminates estimates of black-white
gaps in standard measures of the return to skills.        In analyses of men, it is
possible to make some progress by assuming that men who have not worked for
signi…cant periods of time face relatively low potential wages. However, this is
not a fruitful approach in analyses of women. For signi…cant numbers of white
women, the choice to work at home appears to be driven not by low potential
wages but the high earnings potential of their spouse.20
 2 0 See   Neal (2004) for more on racial di¤erences in selection patterns among women.




                                              17
3.1     Returns to Cognitive Skills
In previous work, Neal and Johnson (1996) and Johnson and Neal (1998),
William Johnson and I have examined race-speci…c returns to skills measured
by the ASVAB tests taken by respondents in the NLSY79. Using labor market
data from the early 1990s, we found that the correlation between AFQT scores
at ages 15-18 and subsequent log wages observed at ages 26-30 was at least
as strong among black males as among white males. We also found that the
AFQT-log earnings gradient was clearly steeper among black males than among
white males. Here, I repeat our previous analyses using wage and earnings data
from the 2000 wave of the NLSY79.21 The speci…cations I adopt here di¤er
from those in the earlier analyses because I use data from all birth cohorts in
the NLSY79 sample. In the previous work, we excluded cohorts that were old
enough to have engaged in a signi…cant period of full-time work before taking
the AFQT. We adopted this approach because we were trying to assess the im-
portance of black-white di¤erences in pre-market skill acquisition. If employers
discriminate against black workers by denying them access to jobs with signif-
icant opportunities for learning, AFQT scores posted after labor market entry
could be contaminated by discrimination in the labor market.22 However, be-
tween the early 1990s and 2000, the NLSY su¤ered noteworthy attrition bias,
and to increase sample sizes, I performed the analyses presented in Figures 4a-5c
on the full NLSY sample.
    Similar …gures based on data from only the 1962-64 birth cohorts are avail-
able upon request. These …gures illustrate the same patterns that I highlight
below. Wage and earnings pro…les with respect to AFQT are as steep or steeper
among blacks than the corresponding pro…les among whites. However, the
absolute value of AFQT-constant wage and earnings gaps is somewhat larger
among respondents from these later birth cohorts.
    Figures 4a-4c present three sets of results on relationships between AFQT
and wages for blacks and whites separately. Figure 4a presents results from
regressions of log wages on a quadratic in AFQT. These regressions are weighted
to account for non-random attrition, and the wage observation used is the hourly
rate of pay associated with the job identi…ed in the 2000 wave of the NLSY79
as the CPS job. The …gure graphs these predicted wages between the 10th
and 90th percentiles of the race-speci…c AFQT distributions. Figures 4b and 4c
present results from median regressions. The median regressions corresponding
to the lines in Figure 4b employ the same samples used in the mean regressions.
However, the median regressions associated with Figure 4c include imputed
  2 1 The sample includes males from all birth years. It does not include respondents from the

oversamples of Hispanics, economically disadvantaged whites or military personnel. However,
the sample does include respondents from the oversample of black males. The white sample
here di¤ers from the white sample used in the Neal and Johnson (1996). Here, I construct
a white category that matches, as closely as possible, the census de…ntion of white. In the
earlier paper, we used the non-black, non-Hispanic category that forms the basis for the NLSY
sampling frame.
  2 2 In this scenario, the age-adjusted score for black respondents from earlier birth cohorts

may measure not only cognitive function but also a separate ability to overcome discrimination.



                                              18
wages of one dollar per hour for all men who report not working any job since
their last interview. Since the previous wave of the NLSY was administered in
1998, the imputations are restricted to men who have not worked at all for at
least two years.23
    Several patterns in these …gures are noteworthy. First, the black and white
AFQT distributions do overlap but the right tail of the white score distribution
and the left tail of the black score distribution represent regions with little if any
overlap. A signi…cant fraction of males in black sample score more than 1.5
standard deviations below the mean, and these males have few white peers.24
There is also a clear absence of black scores in the upper tail of the distrib-
ution Thus, meaningful comparisons of race-speci…c returns to AFQT must
focus on respondents who score from just below -1 to just above 0. Second, in
all three …gures, the wage-AFQT gradient is as steep or steeper among black
men than white men. The di¤erence in slopes for the mean regressions is small
and not statistically signi…cant. The racial di¤erence in slopes for the median
regressions is much more signi…cant economically but still falls short of conven-
tional standards of statistical signi…cance. Third, the low levels of employment
among black men with low AFQT scores drive the important di¤erences be-
tween Figures 4b and 4c. Within the upper half of the black skill distribution,
the wage-AFQT pro…les for black men in Figures 4b and 4c are similar, but the
two pro…les diverge dramatically as one moves down through the bottom half
of the black skill distribution. This result foreshadows a theme that will be
repeated several times in this section. In recent decades, employment levels
among less skilled and less educated black men have been quite low by any
historical standard for adult men. One possible explanation is that changes in
the relative demands for workers of di¤erent skill levels have adversely a¤ected
less-skilled black workers in a manner that has no counterpart among white
workers because there are so few white workers who struggle with basic math
and reading skills.
    Figures 5a-5b present two sets of results based on earnings levels in the pre-
vious calendar year. Figure 5a presents results from a regression of log earnings
on a quadratic in AFQT. Figure 5b presents results from a corresponding me-
dian regression. I do not present results that incorporate earnings imputations
for workers with missing earnings.25 The patterns are similar to those observed
in Figures 4a-4b. However, the di¤erence in slopes is more pronounced for the
median regression. The median regression results are quite robust to the use of
  2 3 Johnson,  Kitamura, and Neal (2000) use panel data from earlier waves of the NLSY79
to show that workers, who report past or future wages rates but are currently in the middle
of a multiple year spell of non-employment, almost always earn less than the median wage
observed among workers with similar demographic characteristics.
  2 4 This result is not surprising given the results reported above concerning the fraction of

black teens who did not do better than one would expect from guessing.
  2 5 There is no 1999 wave of the NLSY79. Wage data are collected with reference to the

time since the last interview. Earnings data are collected with reference to the past calendaer
year. Thus, if someone worked in 1998 but not in 1997 or 1999, his most recent wage is likely
recorded but his most recent calendar earnings are not recorded. Thus, I cannot identify
earnings levels for all persons who worked since their 1998 interview.



                                              19
various cuto¤ rules for trimming earnings levels that imply either coding error
or short spells of employment, and these results indicate that median earnings
rise quite a bit faster with skill among black men.
    Such results present a challenge for models that explain low black skill levels
as a rational response to the presence of statistical discrimination by employ-
ers. The Coate and Loury model is a one period model, but it seems natural
to interpret it in the following way. Firms acquire signals about workers’tal-
ents through interviews, observing their performance in entry level jobs, and
checking their work records with other employers. Based on these signals,
employers make assignment decisions. Because employers statistically discrim-
inate against black workers, blacks who invest in skills will see a smaller increase
in their probability of promotion to good jobs than whites who invest.26 This
implies that the gradient between wages and productive skills, that are not di-
rectly observed by the employer, should be greater among whites than blacks.
Figures 4a-5b provide no evidence that this prediction is true, and they provide
considerable suggestive evidence that this prediction is false.
    Some may argue that what matters is not realized returns to investments
but rather the fact that many blacks believe that the labor market will not
reward them or their children for investing in human capital. The literature
on statistical discrimination began with Arrow (1973) and Phelps (1972). When
Arrow and Phelps …rst developed these ideas, existing cohorts of adult workers
had lived most of their lives in labor markets where blacks may well have earned
lower returns to education and skills than whites workers.27 However, it is hard
to …nd data that would support this belief today. Blacks who reached adulthood
after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 have not earned systematically lower returns
to attainment or achievement than their white peers. During the past decade
or more, black adult respondents in the NLSY79 have earned relatively high
returns to skills measured by the AFQT.28 Further, as I demonstrate below,
apparent returns to formal schooling among black young adults have typically
been as larger or larger than the corresponding returns among whites since at
least 1970.
    In the balance of this section, I present details concerning the relationship
  2 6 Because employers hold all blacks to a higher promotion standard whether they have

invested or not, it may seem possible that discrimination of this type could raise returns from
skill investment for blacks. However, this cannot occur in equilbrium because higher returns
for blacks would generate higher investment levels for blacks and the original discriminatory
beliefs that led to the racial di¤erence in promotion standards would not be self-con…rming.
  2 7 The next section presents wage, earnings, and employment gradients with respect to

education separately by race for recent decades. No data provide gradients of labor market
outcomes with respect to cognitive test scores during the 1970s and early 1980s. However,
Cutright (1973) matched social security earnings data from 1964 with AFQT scores for persons
drafted in the Korean war. His results suggest that prior to the Civil Rights Act, blacks may
well have earned lower gross returns to basic skills.
  2 8 Both Altonji and Pierret (2001) and Lange (2004) present evidence consistent with the

view that employers learn a great deal over time about aspects of worker productivity that
are correlated with AFQT scores. These …ndings raises concerns about all models in which
the reason that blacks cannot earn a market return to skill investments is that they cannot
reveal their true skill levels to employers.



                                              20
between education and labor market outcomes among black and white adult
men. Existing panel data sets do not provide information concerning racial
di¤erences in the relationship between cognitive skills and adult outcomes for
birth cohorts other than those included in the NLSY79. However, census data
document the relationship between educational attainment and labor market
outcomes for a broad range of cohorts. Education di¤ers from reading and
math scores in that it is an indirect measure of skill that is easily observed by
employers, but the patterns documented below are similar to those in Figures 4a-
5b above. Correlations between schooling and positive labor market outcomes
among blacks are as strong or stronger than the corresponding correlations
among whites, especially in recent decades.

3.2    Education and Labor Market Outcomes
The Integrated Public Use Micro Samples (IPUMS) drawn from decennial cen-
sus records provide individual data on education, earnings and labor force ac-
tivity in the various census years. Most of the results below come from 1980
through 2000 census …le, but in some cases, I also include results from 1960
and 1970. I begin by describing data on rates of employment and incarcer-
ation. Table 6 describes outcomes for groups of men who fall in the same
(race*education*age) cell in a given census year. The diagonal rows in the
table provide results from the same census …le, which in this case is either 1980,
1990, or 2000. Moving across a row, one can follow a birth cohort over time.
Moving down columns, one can track the evolution over birth cohorts of out-
comes at speci…c ages. The three education groups are: (1) completed some high
school but no credential (2) …nished high school or obtained a GED but com-
pleted no post-secondary schooling and (3) college degree but no post-graduate
degrees. These education groups provide the opportunity to measure cell means
with respectable sample sizes.
    Each cell contains three numbers. The top number is the fraction working or
enrolled in school at the time of the census. The second number is the fraction
who worked in the previous calendar year. The …nal number is the fraction
institutionalized. For men ages 26-45, correctional institutions are by far the
most common form of institutional housing. Two gradients in Table 6 deserve
particular attention. First, black-white di¤erences in employment rates decline
dramatically with worker education levels. Among those without a high school
diploma or GED, less than half of black men ages 26-45 were employed at their
2000 Census interview date. Further, less than half of these men worked at
all during the calendar year 1999. In contrast, the corresponding employment
rates among less educated white men, whether measured in terms of current
status or employment last year, are all more than 20 percentage points higher
and in two cases are as much as 30 percentage points higher. But, the third
panel shows that employment rates for college graduates do not di¤er greatly
by race. No black-white di¤erence in employment rates for college educated
workers is greater than eight percentage points and several of these di¤erences
are less than …ve percentage points. The racial di¤erences in employment rates


                                       21
among high school graduates fall in between these extremes. It is clear that
the relationship between employment and education is much stronger among
black workers than white workers. This was also true in 1980 and 1990, but the
strength of the relationship between education and employments rates among
black men has grown dramatically over time.
    The second noteworthy gradient in Table 6 involves the sizes of institution-
alized populations. Among black men, the fraction institutionalized declines
dramatically with education, and this is particularly true among men ages 26-
35. Note that over one in four black high school drop outs in this age group
were institutionalized at the time of the 2000 census. This is roughly 5 times
the rate of institutionalization among white men in the same age and education
cells, and at least three times greater than the corresponding rate among black
men in 1980. If one assumes that rates of institutionalization correspond closely
to rates of imprisonment, it is clear that incarceration rates have risen among
black men of all ages and education levels since 1980, but the increase among
black college graduates is trivial compared to increases among black men who
have no high school credential or a high school credential with no post-secondary
schooling.29
    Next, I turn to wages and earnings and their relationships with education.
Table 7 presents black-white di¤erences in mean log wages within cells de…ned
by education and levels of potential experience.30 Because the census gathers
information on income from the past calendar year, the data describe wage
gaps in 1979, 1989, and 1999. In a recent paper, Baum-Snow and Neal (2004),
Nathaniel Baum-Snow and I document serious problems with hours worked
information in census data.31 Thus, I construct predicted log hours per week for
each employed individual using data from the March CPS of the corresponding
year and form log wages for each individual in the census by subtracting reported
log weeks worked and predicted log hours per week from reported log annual
earnings. I present mean black-white gaps in log wages for workers who fall in 45
cells de…ned by three education groups, three census years, and …ve experience
levels. The education groups are the same ones used in Table 6.
    The results in Table 7 demonstrate that, at almost all experience levels in all
census years from 1980-2000, black-white log wage gaps decline with education
level. This decline is larger at lower levels of experience, but even at the highest
experience level, graduating high school is still clearly associated with greater log
  2 9 The  results presented in Table 6 also underscore why results that follow concerning wages
and earnings draw on census data and not data from the Current Population Surveys (CPS).
The CPS do not sample incarcerated individuals and thus, in recent years, are not useful for
constructing representative samples of less educated black men.
   3 0 Here, I de…ne potential experience as the max(min(age-18, age-years of school-6),0). The

education variable used here is a measure of school completed not school attended. Data on
highest grade attended is not available in 1990 and 2000. By marking age 18 as the beginning
of adult work experience, I minimize the number of high school dropouts that are falsely given
credit for a year of potential work experience simply because they started school after age 6,
repeated a grade, or did not graduate from the last grade they attended.
   3 1 We show that many persons respond to the question on usual hours worked per week as if

it were a question about usual hours worked per day. The frequency of these apparent errors
is correlated with race and gender and varies across census years.


                                              22
wage gains for black men, although results concerning racial di¤erences in wage
gains associated with …nishing college are mixed at this experience level. The
results in Table 7 permit the calculation of 45 racial di¤erences in the log wage
gain associated with a given increase in completed schooling. These include
di¤erences in the wage gains associated with …nishing high school, …nishing
high school and going on to …nish college, and completing college given a high
school credential. In 42 of 45 cases, the implied gain for black men is either
greater than or not statistically di¤erent than the implied gain for white men.
The exceptions involve wage gains associated with obtaining a college education
among workers with more than 16 years of experience. Table 8 presents black-
white log earnings gaps in the same format as Table 7. Table 8 also includes
data from the 1960 and 1970 census …les. Here, the implied gains from …nishing
college or high school are as great or greater for blacks compared to whites in
almost every comparison from the 1980-2000 census …les. Even in earlier census
years, implied log earnings gains associated with education tend to be as large
or larger for blacks. However, the pattern of racial di¤erences in returns in
1960 is more mixed.
    Table 6 demonstrates that, across a broad age range, black-white employ-
ment ratios rise with education levels. Similar patterns emerge if one calculates
employment rates by race for groups de…ned by education and potential expe-
rience. Even among workers with decades of potential experience, employment
rates among black men with no post-secondary schooling have fallen dramati-
cally in recent decades, both in absolute terms and relative to those of compa-
rably educated white men.32 Economists often assume that, among men who
share a common set of demographic characteristics, the mean observed wage is
greater than the mean of potential wages among those who do not work. Thus,
the mean wage among workers can only be used as a reasonable approximation
of the mean potential wage in a given group when only a small percentage of
men in the group do not work. This is not the case among less educated black
men in recent decades. The entries in Tables 7 and 8 for high school dropouts
in 2000 are calculated based on samples of black men who report employment
rates of 55 percent or less at all experience levels. Thus, selection bias may
attenuate the measured racial wage and earnings gaps in Tables 7 and 8, and
this bias may be most severe among less educated workers.
    Tables 9 and 10 represent versions of Tables 7 and 8 that are corrected for
selection in the following manner. For each cell de…ned by race, experience
level, and education, I calculate the average log wage and average log earnings.
I subtract .4 from these log averages to form imputed average log wages and
earnings for men in these same cells who did not work in the previous calendar
year. I then calculate the implied averages for overall log potential wages and
log potential earnings in each cell and calculate black-white di¤erences in these
  3 2 The participation rates in Table 6 do not provide precise information about racial di¤er-

ences in selection rates for the entries in Tables 7 and 8 because Table 6 presents results for
age groups rather than experience groups and because Table 6 includes self-employed persons
in the sample of workers even if they have no wage and salary income.




                                              23
averages.33    These tables indicate that, in the 2000 census data, the largest
black-white di¤erences in log wages and earnings are consistently found among
workers who have not obtained any high school credential, and in recent decades,
new cohorts of college educated blacks have fared much better relative to whites
than less educated blacks.
    Here, I am using the cross-section relationships between education and earn-
ings or education and wages as indicators of the gains from education that in-
dividual young persons might expect at a given point in time. Heckman et al
(2004) adopt a life-cycle investment framework and calculate rates of return on
investments in education by following the earnings histories of synthetic cohorts
over recent census years. They …nd consistent evidence that blacks earn higher
rates of return to education than whites.


4     Investments in Children

Section 2 of this paper demonstrates that cohorts of black youth born after the
late 1970s appear to have either fallen farther behind their white counterparts or
simply made no progress toward closing the black-white skill gap. The preced-
ing section demonstrates that the black-white skill gap among youth stopped
closing during a time when the correlations between adult labor market out-
comes and measured skills were at least as strong and likely stronger among
black adults than among white adults. It is possible that race-speci…c corre-
lations between measured skills and labor market outcomes paint a misleading
picture concerning racial di¤erences in the distributions of potential gains from
skill investments, but no existing studies provide clear evidence that this is the
case.34 Regardless of the degree to which blacks still su¤er from labor market
discrimination, recent labor market data do not support the view that discrim-
ination harms skilled blacks more than unskilled blacks. Thus, taken at face
value, the results presented here rule out discrimination against skilled black
adults as a compelling explanation for low levels of skill acquisition among co-
horts of black youth born after 1970. Further, there is no evidence that some
recent surge in discrimination against skilled black workers could serve as a
plausible explanation for the recent lack of progress toward closing black-white
  3 3 After examining wage levels of workers in the NLSY79 who were not employed for entire

interview years, I have concluded that .4 is a conservative adjustment factor. I also per-
formed analyses in which I calculated the average log wage and average log earnings among
workers between the 40th and 60th percentiles of the wage and earnings distributions asso-
ciated with each of the cells in Tables 7 and 8. I then calculated selection adjustments for
these averages under the assumption that all persons non-workers who report multiple years
of non-employment or insitutional living quarters face potential wages and earnings below the
40th percentile of the relevant potential wage and earnings distributions for each cell. This
approach generated even greater black-white di¤erences in the slopes of the gradients between
education and log potential wages or log potential earnings.
  3 4 See Card (1999), Carnerio and Heckman (2002) and Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman

(2003) for work on individual heterogeneity and measured returns to schooling.




                                             24
skill and attainment gaps among youth.35
     Because black youth can apparently expect relatively high returns from in-
vestments in skills, the observed low and stagnant relative skill levels among
black youth suggest that there exist barriers to skill acquisition in black fam-
ilies and communities. In this section, I discuss black-white skill convergence
in terms of a simple model of the intergenerational transmission of human cap-
ital that illustrates how various factors a¤ect investments in children and the
evolution of group di¤erences in human capital over time.
     Assume that each person lives two periods, and each family has one par-
ent and one child. Children make no decisions. Parents allocate time between
di¤erent activities and divide their income between current household consump-
tion and investment in their child’s human capital. Each parent has a utility
function


    U (c; h0 )

    where c = family consumption, and h0 = the human capital that her child
enjoys in adulthood. In this framework, h0 enters the utility function directly.
Parents may care about the future well-being of their children, but parents also
derive utility directly from having a well educated child.36 Each parent has one
unit of time and devotes a fraction s to investments in her child and a fraction
(1 s) to market work. Three factors determine human capital accumulation
for a child. These are purchased inputs, d, e¤ective parental time, sh, and the
child’s ability, : Thus, each parent faces the following constraints.

    h0 = g( ; sh; d)

    (1    s)h = pc + td

    where h is the human capital of the parent. p is the price of the consumption
good. t is the price of the purchased investments in children, and wages are
normalized to one. A key …nding in the literature on black-white skill gaps
is that black children often …nd themselves well behind their white peers at
young ages. I use this model, in large measure, to analyze parents’decisions
to invest in young children, and thus I assume that a parent does not know
  3 5 Some may argue that black families incorrectly perceive that their children would not

bene…t from improved reading and math skills. However, in considering this argument, it
is important to remember that the NAEP data from the 1990s indicate that a signi…cant
fraction of black youth still perform at levels that are approximately below the support of
the white skill distribution. For the parents of these black students, what information could
sustain the belief that their children have little to gain from improving their reading and math
skills, especially given the well documented increase in the apparent labor market returns to
education and cognitive skills during the past two decades or more?
  3 6 This assumption simpli…es the presentation of the model. However, it is not central to

the analysis. Below, I solve a speci…c version of the model to illustrate several basic points.
It is straightforward to reformulate this version of the model as a recursive problem in which
parents care only about their consumption and the indirect utility of their children.


                                              25
her child’s ability to learn, , when making investment decisions concerning
investments early in life. The abilities of individual children are i.i.d. draws
from an ability distribution F ( ).37 I impose the standard restriction that
parents cannot borrow on behalf of their children. I also ignore bequests, but
the results that I highlight remain in a slightly modi…ed version of the model
that permits …nancial transfers to children.
   Consider the following special case of the model.

    U (c; h0 ) = ln(c) +    ln(h0 ) ,     h0 = (sh) (d) ,             > 0; > 0; ( + ) < 1

   Given this speci…cation, it is straightforward to derive the following equation
describing the evolution of human capital over generations.

    lnh0 = ln + ( + ) ln h + k( ; ; )                 ln t

   where k is a constant determined by preference and production parameters.
I maintain the assumption that the distribution of does not vary by race.
Existing psychometric studies o¤er many results that are inconsistent with the
view that the black-white skill gap is genetic in origin.38 Further, I assume
that blacks and whites have the same utility functions and home production
functions.
   A little algebra gives the following equation for the evolution of the black-
white skill gap across generations,

       ln h0      ln h = [( + )         1] ln h          ln t

    where x denotes the mean value of x among blacks minus the corresponding
mean among whites. This equation highlights three factors that determine the
evolution of black-white skill gaps across generations.39 To begin, the current
black-white skill gap a¤ects the skill gap in the next generation. All wealth
in this model is held in the form of human capital, and wealth matters here
because all investments in children are …nanced through forgone consumption.
Second, the size of this wealth e¤ect varies inversely with (1 ( + )), the
degree of diminishing returns to investments in a given child. Finally, racial
di¤erences in the cost of investment goods, ln t, in‡uence future human capital
gaps through their e¤ect on the racial gap in current investments in children.
    The black-white skill gap, ln h, reaches a steady-state level when the left
hand side of this equation equals zero, and two steady-state scenarios present
themselves. First, if blacks and whites face the same investment cost, ln t = 0;
  3 7 In the special case of the model that I solve below, investment decisions are not a function

of F ( ), and the analysis of group di¤erences would not change if I allowed correlations within
families among realizations of :
  3 8 See Ceci (1991) and Nisbett (1995).
  3 9 The form of the utility function in this example is such that preference parameters do not

enter this equation. Here, the income elasticity of demand for h0 would equal one if parents
acquired h0 at a constant price. If h0 is a luxury good, there will be less regression to the
mean in human capital across generations.


                                               26
and there are diminishing returns to investments in a given child, ( + ) < 1;
the black-white skill gap will equal zero in steady state regardless of the size of
the initial black-white skill gap. This outcome is not peculiar to this model.
In models with perfect capital markets, full convergence may take place in one
generation, but even in models with borrowing constraints, diminishing returns
to child-speci…c investments tend to eliminate group di¤erences in human capital
as long as both groups enjoy the same opportunities to invest in children.40
Diminishing returns is a natural assumption in this context because each child’s
own time and energy are …xed factors in the production of h0 .
    On the other hand, if blacks face higher costs than whites, ln t > 0; then
   ln h < 0 will be the steady state outcome. A large literature documents
signi…cant relative improvements in school quality for blacks during the 20th
century. Further, compared to the pre-Civil Rights era, blacks enjoy much
greater freedom to choose communities, schools, and colleges. The extent to
which black and white families now face the same costs of investing in their
children will in‡uence the degree to which the skills of black youth converge to
those of white youth in future generations.
    The census data provide the …rst national records of individual educational
attainment in 1940, and each census …le from 1940 through 1990 shows that
successive cohorts of young black adults came closer and closer to educational
parity with their white peers. The NAEP-LTT studies began in the early
70s, and these data show fairly rapid convergence between the test scores of
black and white youth until the late 1980s. However, neither the 2000 census
or subsequent waves of the NAEP-LTT indicate any further narrowing of the
black-white skill gap during the 1990s. The 1990s may constitute only a brief
pause in a secular process of black-white skill convergence, but this pause could
not have been predicted from previous trends.
    It is possible that the last …fteen years or more have marked the beginning
of a long period of constant and large skill gaps between black and white youth,
but one should not expect this outcome unless one can identify persistent racial
di¤erences in the costs paid for investments in children, the technologies used to
invest in children, or the preferences of parents. The logic of standard models
of the intergenerational transmission of human capital clearly indicates that
although racial wealth gaps resulting from past discrimination a¤ect current
skill gaps, these e¤ects should steadily diminish over successive generations as
long as black and white parents of similar wealth levels invest in children at the
same prices. Given the dramatic closing of the black-white skill gap that took
place over much of the 20th century, pure wealth e¤ects resulting from historical
discrimination against blacks cannot be easily invoked as an explanation for why
the process of black-white skill convergence appeared to stop during the past
generation.
    Below, I examine three possible reasons that black-white skill convergence
did not continue in the 1990s. I begin by discussing shocks that black families
  4 0 See Becker and Tomes (1986) and Loury (1981) for examples. Mulligan (1997) provides

a useful expostion of these models and provides analyses of intergenerational correlations for
consumption as well as potential income.


                                             27
and communities su¤ered during the 1980s and 1990s. I then turn to the roles
of schools and culture. These potential explanations have very di¤erent impli-
cations for black-white skill convergence in the future. One time shocks to black
families or communities can only slow the process of black-white skill conver-
gence for a limited period of time, but persistent racial di¤erences in access to
quality schooling or racial di¤erences in social norms concerning investments in
children or the organization of families can create more permanent barriers to
black-white skill convergence.

4.1     Shocks to Families and Communities
The importance of family resources comes into sharper focus when one realizes
that black-white achievement gaps are large even among children in their …rst
few years of school. Figures 6a-b present results based on …rst grade reading
scores from the Equality of Education Opportunity Study of 1965 (EEO) and
the Educational Childhood Longitudinal Study - Kindergarten Class of 1998-99
(ECLS-K). The …gures give matches between percentiles in the black and white
score distributions separately by gender. While black …rst graders did make
signi…cant gains relative to their white counterparts over the last three and one
half decades of the 20th century, roughly 70 percent of black …rst-graders in
2000 still performed below the median score among white …rst-graders of the
same gender.41
    The fact that test scores among black children lag well behind scores among
white children at early ages is consistent with the idea that the black-white
skill gap among young adults can be traced, in large measure, to black-white
di¤erences in the types of investments made in children at early ages. These in-
vestments are, for the most part, made by families, and Tables 11 and 12 show
that, among young children, the black-white gap in family resources remains
large today. Table 11 describes trends in family structure for children ages …ve
and under. The data come from the 1960-2000 census …les. The numbers
in each cell give the fraction of children of given race in a given census year
who live with either one parent, two parents, or neither of their parents. In
2000, only 1/3 of black pre-school children lived with two parents, and just over
one in ten lived with neither of their parents. Black family structures di¤ered
from white family structures even in 1960, and in the decades that followed,
the rate of decline in two-parent households was much more dramatic in the
black community. However, rising black incomes more than made up for the
adverse e¤ects of changes in family structure on black household incomes dur-
ing the period 1960 to 1980. Table 12 presents weighted averages of household
incomes by race, census year, and family structures for families with children
ages …ve and under. The weights are the number of pre-school children in each
household. The table shows that between 1960 and 1980, black incomes in-
  4 1 Measured in standard deviation gaps, the black-white gaps for boys are .65 and .57 for the

EEO and ECLS-K respectively. The corresponding gaps for girls are .66 and .53. Brooks-
Gunn et al (1996) document IQ gaps of roughly one full standard deviation in a sample of
…ve year olds.



                                              28
creased dramatically regardless of family structure, and despite adverse changes
in family structures, overall average black household incomes rose considerably
relative to white household incomes.
    Yet, beginning around 1980, many factors worked together to diminish the
resources available to black children. Two-parent families became even more
rare in the black community, and for the …rst time, never-married motherhood
became quite common.42 Further, real wages for less skilled workers fell, and
the real value of transfers o¤ered by various welfare programs declined. Thus,
Table 12 shows that mean black household income fell during the 1980s and
that the ratio of mean black income to mean white income remained lower in
2000 than it was in 1980. It is clear that much of the relative decline in black
family income since 1980 is related to changes in black family structure and the
weak growth of household income among black single parents. Mean household
incomes for black children in two-parent families rose considerably during the
1980s and 1990s, but two-parent black families declined in numbers over this
period. Further, mean household income for black children in single parent
homes barely increased in real terms during the 1980s and grew at an anemic
pace during the 1990s.
    A large literature documents dramatic changes in the wage structure during
the 1980s and 1990s.43 These changes involved falling real wages for less skilled
workers throughout the 1980s, and because black adults entered the 1980s with
less human capital than white adults, these changes in the wage structure low-
ered the earnings of black adults relative to white adults, especially in the early
1980s.44 This earnings shock lowered wealth among black adults, and may have
also lowered gains from marriage in the black community, helping foster changes
in family structures that further widened the e¤ective family resource gap be-
tween black and white children. The 1980s were preschool years for most of the
nine and thirteen year old respondents tested in the NAEP-LTT assessments
of the late 1980s and early 1990s, and these assessments were the …rst NAEP
assessments that showed no closing of the black-white test score gap. The tim-
ing of these episodes may be purely coincidental, but the model outlined above
suggests that a negative shock to parental wealth should lower human capi-
tal accumulation among children, and several recent empirical studies, Mayer
(1997) and Blau (1999), …nd that increases in family wealth are associated with
increases in cognitive test scores among children.
    Although the magnitudes of existing estimates of the e¤ects of long-term
family income on achievement are not large, the sharp declines in family income
among black families during the early 1980s were likely accompanied by many
episodes of job displacement and family disruption that harm development in
  4 2 Neal (2004b) shows that, between 1980 and 1990, the prevalence of never-married moth-

erhood among black women with no postseconday schooling increased quite dramatically.
Never-married mothers may receive much less …nancial support than divorced mothers.
  4 3 See Katz and Autor (1999)
  4 4 See Bound and Freeman (1992) and Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991).          Further, CPS
data on yearly averages of household income indicate that the signi…cant declines in black
family income prior to 1985 contributed greatly to the overall decline in black family incomes
during the 1980s.


                                             29
children.45 If negative shocks to black families in the 1980s did reduce invest-
ments in black preschoolers, these shocks likely played a role in creating the large
and stagnant black-white test score gaps observed during the 1990s. Further,
the rising relative incomes of black families during the late 1990s may provide
a reason to expect smaller black-white test score gaps in the near future.46
    Fryer et al (2004) point to another shock to black families and communities
that occurred in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The crack epidemic began
around 1985, and it may be no coincidence that this increase in drug market
activity began as real wages for unskilled workers were declining. Although
the crack epidemic was generally con…ned to cities, crack distribution did create
signi…cant disruptions in urban black communities during the late 1980s and
early 1990s. I noted above how Figures 3a and 3b show that between 1982 and
the period 1992-96, black youth in large cities actually lost ground in math,
relative to the overall distribution of scores for whites. This is quite striking
given that overall results for black youth show a narrowing of black-white test
score gaps during most of the 1980s and relatively constant gaps during the
1990s. I have not been able to acquire individual NAEP-LTT data for years
between 1982 and 1992, and thus I cannot determine the extent to which black
achievement in large cities moves with the spread of crack among large cities.
However, Figures 3a-b suggest that this may be an important task for future
research.

4.2     Schools
The discussion above focuses on the possibility that changes in the wage struc-
ture may have harmed black families and communities in ways that have tem-
porarily stalled the process of black-white skill convergence.47 However, the
model of investment in children presented earlier demonstrates that, if black
families face persistently higher costs of investing in their children, black-white
skill convergence is not inevitable, and the experience of the past 15 years or
more could mark the beginning of a long period of large and stable black-white
skill gaps. In this section, I discuss schools as potential sources of …xed racial
di¤erences in the levels of investments made in children.
    Governments greatly in‡uence the cost of investing in children by selecting
policies that regulate the funding and operation of public schools serving dif-
ferent groups in society, and there is no doubt that, during much of the 20th
century, blacks were only allowed to attend schools that were funded poorly rela-
tive to schools that served predominately white populations. In contrast, black
and white students today attend schools that receive comparable resources in
  4 5 Mclanahan and Sandefur (1994) and Sandefur and Wells (1999) present much suggestive

evidence that children bene…t in many ways from growing up in stable homes with two parents.
  4 6 CPS data indicate that the rising black incomes during the late 1990s generated much of

the overall increase in black family incomes during the 1990-2000 period.
  4 7 Note that even if the drop in real wages for unskilled workers is permanent, this change

amounts to a one time negative shock to the relative wealth of black families. This shock
would slow but not stop the process of black-white skill convergence.




                                             30
terms of standard measures of school inputs.48 Still, there is some evidence that
blacks attend less e¤ective schools than white students, and although this racial
gap in school quality cannot be linked to racial di¤erences in school funding
levels, it may indicate that blacks pay higher implicit, if not explicit, costs to
attend quality schools. Here, I review some of the evidence on the contribution
of schools to the black-white achievement gap.
    In a recent paper, Fryer and Levitt (2004) analyze data from a panel of
students who entered kindergarten in 1998.         Fryer and Levitt report that
black-white gaps in reading and math are large when students begin kinder-
garten, and they also report that these gaps grow as children progress through
kindergarten and …rst grade. When they control for school …xed e¤ects, they
…nd little evidence that black-white test score gaps grow over time among stu-
dents attending the same school, and they interpret this result as suggestive
evidence that blacks, on average, attend schools that are less e¤ective than the
schools that whites attend.
    De los Santos et al (2004) use a di¤erent methodology to address black-white
di¤erences in school quality. Using data from the NLSY79, they estimate how
AFQT scores change with years of schooling prior to the date of the test. They
control for endogeneity in attainment at the time of the test using two methods
developed in Hansen et al (2004) and conclude that, on average, AQFT scores
do increase with schooling faster among white students than black students.
However, their results also suggest that these racial di¤erences in how scores
change with additional schooling may only be important among children with
low latent ability, which they interpret as poor pre-school preparation.
    These studies suggest that either racial di¤erences in available school quality
or black-white di¤erences in how families and children interact with schools
cause the black-white skill gap to grow as children age. However, several other
data sets o¤er little evidence that the black-white achievement gap grows at all
with time in school. Table 13a summarizes results from three di¤erent panel
studies of achievement. Each study follows a nationally representative cohort
of students who are in the same grade in the …rst year of the panel. The table
describes how the black-white test score gap evolves as students in these cohorts
progress through school. The High School and Beyond Study of 1980 (HSB80)
follows 10th graders through high school. Follow-up testing took place in 1982
when most respondents were high school seniors. The National Educational
Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS88) began with a cohort of eighth graders
and included follow up testing in 1990 and 1992. In the ECLS-K, black-white
test score gaps are clearly wider at the end of …rst grade than the beginning of
kindergarten, and this widening appears to be slightly more dramatic among
boys. The NELS88 data show small increases in the absolute value of test score
gaps between 8th and 10th grade. However, neither the HSB80 or NELS88 data
show that blacks fall farther behind whites after 10th grade. In some cases,
black-white gaps in raw test scores widen as students progress through school
even though the corresponding gaps measured in standard deviation units shrink
 4 8 See   Neal (2004b), Grogger (1996), and Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon (1992) for details.



                                              31
over the same time interval. This re‡ects the fact that, with the exception of
the ECLS-K data, the changes in black-white test score gaps reported here are
quite small and in some cases they are signi…cantly smaller than the increase in
the overall standard deviation of scores between two grades.
     Table 13b compares how the relative ranks of black students in distributions
of white test scores change between assessments. I assign each black student
a percentile score based on where his or her score falls in the corresponding
distribution of scores for white students and then calculate the average for these
percentile scores. The change in the average percentile rank of black students
within the white test score distribution is an attractive index of the change in the
achievement of blacks relative to whites because it is invariant to all monotonic
transformations of the distributions of test scores. Using this metric, there is
no clear evidence that black students lose ground relative to their white peers
after 8th grade, and some suggestion of improvement between grades 10 and 12
in the relative ranks of black students in the HSB. The ECLS-K results follow
the same pattern found in Table 13a, but the average changes in relative rank
among young black girls are quite small.
    Table 14 addresses the issue of black-white test score divergence during
school ages using synthetic cohort data from the NAEP-LTT studies. I calcu-
late the change in the black-white score gap between ages 9 and 13 for various
birth cohorts by subject using published reports from the NAEP-LTT. For nine
di¤erent birth cohorts from 1962 to 1983, there is not one instance of a statisti-
cally signi…cant increase in the absolute value of the black-white test score gap
in either math or reading. Further, the most notable entries in Table 14 involve
instances where black students gained ground on white students, especially in
reading. Other studies have found that black-white test score gaps widen as
children age,49 but the ECLS-K is the only nationally representative sample in-
volving multiple waves of testing which provides consistent evidence that blacks
fall farther behind whites as they progress through school.
    Black-white achievement gaps are quite large before students enter school,
and before children leave elementary school, black-white test score gaps are
comparable to the gaps that will be observed later when these children are young
adults. It seems unlikely that one can understand the black-white skill gap and
its recent stability without a better understanding of black-white di¤erences in
experiences during early childhood. Because parents play such a large role
in preparing children for school and then aiding their children’s transition into
school, it is worthwhile to consider the potential obstacles that black families
may face as they attempt to build their children’s human capital. I take up
this task in the next section.
    However, before turning to the role of families, I must add one clarifying
comment about schools and education policy. It is well known that black stu-
dents now, on average, attend public schools that receive resource levels equal
 4 9 See Carneiro and Heckman (2002) and Phillips et al (1998). These studies examine the

Children of the National Longitudinal Survey (CNLSY) samples and the Prospects sample.
Both studies provide evidence that achievement gaps widen during elementary school years.




                                           32
to or slightly greater than national averages.50 Given this fact, and the result
that black students do not fall farther behind their white peers after elemen-
tary school, some may conjecture that schools per se contribute little to the
black-white skill gap among today’s youth, but this conjecture does not imply
that changes in education policy cannot help close the black-white achievement
gap. A recent book edited by Chubb and Loveless (2002) reviews evidence from
several experiments involving class size changes, vouchers for disadvantaged stu-
dents, changes in school management and curriculum, and the introduction of
test-based accountability systems. Many of the papers conclude that speci…c
policy changes could contribute to a narrowing of the black-white achievement
gap. Krueger and Whitmore (2002) argue that, even though no racial di¤er-
ence in class size currently exists, further across the board reductions in class
size would shrink the black-white test score gap because black students bene-
…t more than white students from class size reductions. Howell and Peterson
(2002) argue that vouchers targeted to economically disadvantaged students in
cities should reduce the black-white skill gap because black students make up
a large portion of disadvantaged urban students and because voucher experi-
ments in cities have shown particularly impressive gains from vouchers for black
students.51
    These results and others reported in the Chubb and Loveless (2002) volume
are important for stimulating informed debate about potential changes in public
policy that may be particularly bene…cial for black children. However, I know
of no public policy during the last 20 years that could form the basis of a
credible explanation for why black-white skill convergence stopped in the late
1980s. Changes in education policy may be needed to restart the process of
convergence, but it is di¢ cult to identify a speci…c policy or policy change that
caused black-white convergence in achievement and attainment to suddenly halt
after decades of steady progress.

4.3     The Role of Norms
Black-white di¤erences in family wealth play some role in determining black-
white skill gaps among children by shaping investments in children at early ages,
and the extremely slow growth of black household income during the 1980s may
have contributed to the lack of progress toward closing the black-white skill gap
among children born at the end of the 1970s and during the 1980s. However, as I
  5 0 See Boozer et al (1992), Grogger (1996) and Neal (2004c) for recent statistics on black-

white di¤erences in public school resources.
   Ferguson (2004) adds a cautionary note concerning teacher quality. He reviews several
studies that report a negative correlation between the average level of academic quality among
teachers and the percentage of minority students in their classrooms. The measures of teacher
quality in these studies include teacher test scores and college major.
  5 1 The Krueger and Whitmore paper follows up Krueger’s earlier 1998 paper that evaluates

the Tenessee STAR experiment. The Howell and Peterson paper summarizes selected results
from a larger study of voucher experiments in Dayton, New York City, and Washington, DC,
Howell and Peterson (2002b).
   Slavin and Madden (2002) contribute another interesting chapter on the use of the "Success
for All" school management model in predominately minority schools.


                                             33
noted earlier, negative wealth shocks should only slow the process of black-white
skill convergence for a period of time, and black household income per child
began to grow again at a respectable rate at some point during the 1990s. If
the below-trend academic performance of black-children born during the 1980s
and early 1990s is attributable to the relatively weak growth of black family
incomes during this period, the process of black-white skill convergence may
resume in the near future.
    However, there is a more ominous potential explanation for the recent sta-
bility of the black-white skill gap. Black families may pay consistently higher
costs to invest in their children and these cost di¤erences may support persis-
tent and signi…cant black-white gaps in test scores and attainment. Recall
the simple model outlined above. It demonstrates that blacks and whites will
converge to di¤erent steady state skill levels if blacks face di¤erent investment
costs, ln t > 0:
    This scenario is not compelling unless one can be speci…c about the form that
these cost di¤erences might take, and I have already noted that black and white
children now attend schools that receive comparable resources. Further, in stark
contrast to the state of a¤airs a century ago, no legal structures today explicitly
place black families at a legal disadvantage relative to whites when investing in
their children. Civil Rights laws now guarantee that black families have the
right to live in any neighborhood in any house they can a¤ord and also apply
to any school they choose without fear of being denied admission solely because
of their race. On the other hand, race appears to matter per se in determining
how persons organize their social interactions. Rates of inter-marriage are far
too low to be explained by economic di¤erences between blacks and whites.
Further, neighborhoods and schools are much more segregated by race than one
would expect if purely economic considerations determined patterns of sorting.
Because social interactions are so segregated by race, one must ask whether or
not black-white di¤erences in norms or culture a¤ect patterns of investment in
children.
    This issue is salient because some evidence suggests that black-white di¤er-
ences in parenting styles contribute to black-white skill gaps among children.52
Brooks-Gunn et al (1996) follow a sample of low-birth weight infants through
age 5. At age 5, these children took IQ tests that revealed a full standard
deviation gap in IQ between black and white children. The authors found that
measures of family wealth and neighborhood quality did account for roughly
half of the black-white gap in IQ scores. However, the analyses also included
measures of maternal parenting behavior that were constructed from data gath-
ered at ages 12 and 36 months by trained observers who made visits to each
child’s home. These measures of parenting behavior accounted for over half
of the black-white IQ gap among children from families who enjoyed compa-
rable wealth and neighborhood quality even in regression speci…cations that
controlled for maternal education and verbal ability. It is possible that parent-
ing behaviors serve as proxies for unmeasured dimensions of maternal human
 5 2 See   Ferguson (2004) for a discussion of black-white parenting di¤erences in ECLS-K data.



                                               34
capital. Even among mothers with similar measured skills, those with greater
intellectual sophistication likely make better parenting choices. Nonetheless,
the fact that parenting behaviors di¤er greatly by race among families that are
similar with respect to wealth, neighborhood quality, family structure, and mea-
sured maternal human capital raises the possibility that norms concerning child
rearing di¤er among blacks and whites in important ways.53
    In the economics and sociology literature, there are at least two di¤erent lines
of argument that deal with social norms and human capital accumulation among
children. I begin with the literature on "acting white." A substantial literature
examines the possibility that blacks may invest less in human capital than whites
because they fear social sanctions from other blacks. If academic achievement is
viewed as a "white" accomplishment, higher achieving blacks may be ostracized
by other blacks. Austen-Smith and Fryer (2003) develop an explicit model
of human capital investment in a setting where this type of social sanction is
possible. In their model, residents of a particular neighborhood or social group
who invest in academic achievement risk being excluded from social interactions
in their neighborhood or group. Contributing to group functions is more costly
for skilled people because they have a higher shadow price of time. Thus, the
group expects that persons who invest in market skills are more likely to default
on future obligations to the group. This social dynamic reduces aggregate
investment in human capital because the expected loss of cooperation within
the group acts as an extra cost of investing in market skills. Anecdotal evidence
in media reports and ethnographic work often suggests that something like this
pattern of social interactions hinders human capital accumulation among black
youth,54 but at this point, the existing empirical literature does not provide
conclusive evidence that high-achieving black children experience di¤erent social
bene…ts or sanctions than high-achieving white children. Further, there is no
evidence that black parents su¤er social sanctions when they encourage their
children to excel in school.55
    Another important argument about group norms involves attitudes towards
marriage and single motherhood. Nechyba (2001) describes a model of unwed
motherhood in which the fraction of women who are unwed mothers in one
generation determines the stigma associated with unwed motherhood in the next
generation. Nechyba argues that, because behavior today a¤ects group norms
tomorrow, changes in economic returns to marriage versus single motherhood
can create changes in behavior that endogenously generate new norms. Thus, a
return to previous economic conditions will not guarantee a return to previous
marriage and fertility behavior.
    The most striking demographic di¤erence between black and white children
  5 3 Lightfoot (1978) explores how black families and schools interact and discusses the role

of culture in these relationships.
  5 4 Ogbu (1990) presents the hypothesis that historical discrimination against blacks has

created a belief among blacks that investment in individual skills is a "white" strategy for
success and not an attractive strategy for them.
  5 5 Austen-Smith and Fryer survey this literature.   Cook and Ludwig (1998) is one well-
known study that …nds no support for the claim that highly skilled black students su¤er
social penalties for "acting white."


                                             35
is the greater likelihood that a black child will live in a home with one or no
parents. Further, many single parent homes in the black community do not
arise because of divorce or the death of a parent. Neal (2004b) demonstrates
that never-married motherhood became common among black women by 1990,
and never-married mothers likely have less direct support from the fathers of
their children or the families of these fathers than women who are widowed or
divorced.
    Weiss and Willis (1985) present a model that shows how investments in
children are likely to be below e¢ cient levels when parents do not live in the same
household because parents who live together can better coordinate investments
in children. When parents live apart, an agency problem arises. The non-
custodial parent cannot be sure that transfers intended for expenditures on
children are spent entirely on the child. This monitoring problem acts as a tax
on investments in children.
    The existing literature does not provide clear answers concerning the degree
to which black-white di¤erences in family structure simply re‡ect racial dif-
ferences in distributions of human capital among potential parents that create
racial di¤erences in the distribution of gains from marriage. However, if im-
portant black-white di¤erences in norms concerning the desirability of marriage
exist, these di¤erences could be a source of racial di¤erences in investment in
children, even among sets of parents with similar wealth and education levels.
Further, to the extent that black-white di¤erences in norms concerning marriage
a¤ect the expected stability of existing marriages or the likelihood that single
mothers will marry the father of their children in the future, black-white di¤er-
ences in parenting behaviors may arise even among families that currently share
the same structures and enjoy the same wealth levels.         In sum, black-white
di¤erences in norms concerning marriage may create di¤erences in the mapping
between parental human capital and investments in children that could support
persistence black-white skill di¤erences among adults across generations.


5    Conclusion
It is not clear why the process of black-white skill convergence appeared to stop
around 1990. In the previous section, I highlight several possible explanations,
but the task of gathering de…nitive evidence concerning the relative merit of
these competing hypotheses remains for future research. I have stressed how
some potential explanations imply that the 1990s will one day be seen as an
aberration, while other scenarios highlight the possibility that black-white skill
gaps may be constant and large inde…nitely.
    However, no plausible scenario implies that one should expect anything ap-
proaching black-white skill parity over the next several generations. After
some experimentation, I conclude that even the most optimistic projections im-
ply that the black-white skill gap will be large throughout much of this century.
To construct a best-case scenario, I draw on NAEP-LTT data from the late
1970s and the 1980s. Between 1978 and 1986, the black-white test score gap


                                        36
in math for 13 year old students shrank from 1.08 standard deviations to .79
standard deviations. Further, between 1980 and 1988, the reading gap for those
age 13 shrank from .91 to .53. These gaps of .53 and .79 are the smallest gaps
ever recorded in the NAEP-LTT for reading and math respectively, and the
rates of convergence between blacks and whites test scores during these eight
year periods are more rapid than rates observed during any other periods of
equal or greater length. What would happen if test scores for black and white
youth converged at these rates throughout the 21st century using 1999 gaps
as baselines?56 The black-white test score gap among teenagers in 1999 was
roughly .75 standard deviations in reading and .9 standard deviations in math
in 1999.57 Given the rates of convergence observed during the 1978-88 period
and the 1999 baselines, one would expect the black-white reading gap to remain
above .1 standard deviations until roughly 2030 and above .05 standard devi-
ations until after 2040. For math, one would expect the gap to remain above
these thresholds until after 2055 and 2070 respectively.
    These dates represent best-case scenarios.58 It is easy to construct plausible
scenarios in which black-white test score gaps remain large throughout the next
century. Further, Figures 2a-d demonstrate that the relative achievement gains
among black students observed during the 1980s were concentrated in the middle
and upper percentiles of the black skill distribution. In terms of relative ranks
in white test score distributions, black students in the lower percentiles of the
black skill distribution appear to have made little progress since the late 1970s,
and black students in large cities have actually lost ground.
    Now is an appropriate time to consider what policy makers can do now to
enhance the skill levels of black youth in this generation and those to come. In
a recent book, James Heckman and Alan Krueger (2003) engage in a detailed
debate concerning the desirability of various human capital policies. The two
disagree on much, but both agree that high quality pre-school programs may
  5 6 I use NAEP-LTT data and the formula gap(t) = gap(0) exp( rt) evaluated at t=8 to pin

down r: Assume that a generation equals 20 years. The rates of convergence that I recover
imply that the ratio of the math test score gaps at t+20 and t is .46. The corresponding
…gure for reading gaps is .26.
  Solon (2002) surveys the literature on intergenerational earnings mobility. He concludes
that the expected value of the ratio of a son’s log earnings to his father’s log earnings, given
the father’s earnings, is "about .4 or a bit higher." In more recent work, Haider and Solon
(2004) present results suggesting that the expected value of this ratio may well be between .5
and .6.
  Thus, my best case projections assume that measured cognitive achievement is even less
persistent across generations than log earnings.
  5 7 I use these …gures as approximations based on the results in Table 4 from the NLSY97 and

the results for 13 years old in the 1999 wave of NAEP-LTT. The black-white test score gaps
in these NAEP-LTT samples are roughly one standard deviation in math and .75 standard
deviations in reading.
  5 8 Sampling error a¤ects each of the NAEP-LTT estimates of race-speci…c achievement

means for a given year. Since I chose convergence rates by selecting the most rapid doc-
umented period of convergence and since the end points of these periods represent record
lows for the absolute value of these black-white score gaps, it is reasonable to suspect that
the NAEP-LTT data overstate the actual convergence that occured during these two period.
True rates of convergence may have never been this rapid.



                                              37
yield large returns for disadvantaged youth. Further, this debate and the related
literature provide considerable support for the view that many of the important
consequences of black-white di¤erences in parental wealth arise during the pre-
school years.
    I argue above that the black-white di¤erences in early childhood experiences
contribute signi…cantly to measured black-white skill gaps later in life. In an-
other chapter in this Handbook, Blau and Currie (2004) review the literature on
the e¤ectiveness of early childhood intervention programs. Many early inter-
ventions have yielded positive results, but I will not review that literature again
here. Rather, I focus on one particular experiment that is rather distinctive
because it involved intense interventions that began while children were still
infants. The Carolina Abecederian Project (CAP) began in the early 1970s
in North Carolina. 98% of the children in the study were black and all were
economically disadvantaged. The study randomly assigned infants to four dif-
ferent treatment and control groups. One group received high-quality day care
services with special emphasis on skill and social development during pre-school
years. Another group received these services as well as mentoring services dur-
ing school years. A third group received no pre-school treatment but mentoring
services while in school. The …nal group received no treatment. Treatments
for school aged children were associated with few bene…ts. However, the day
care services provided during pre-school years had long lasting impacts on adult
employment, attainment, and test scores. Campbell et al (2001) report that
the achievement gains associated with pre-school treatment at age 15 are .45
standard deviations in reading and .37 standard deviations in math. Figures
4a-5b above suggest that such large increases in basic reading and math skills
may translate into signi…cant increases in lifetime earnings.
    Prudence requires that one refrain from drawing too many conclusions from
a single study which involved only slightly over 100 children. The pre-school
treatment services were quite expensive, and no existing studies provide a full
cost-bene…t analysis for the project. Nonetheless, the results of the CAP show
that direct interventions at an early age can generate signi…cant increases in
basic skills even among black children who are quite disadvantaged. This
is an important …nding because the results presented in section 2 show that a
signi…cant portion of black youth still possess basic reading and math skills that
place them in the far left tails of the white skill distribution. Further, Figures
2a-d show that, relative to their white peers, youth in the lower percentiles of
the black skill distribution have made the least progress in recent decades.
    Among the mothers of children in the CAP, the average IQ is 85 and the
average education level is 10.6 years of schooling.59 Women with such low skill
levels may …nd it di¢ cult to provide early childhood experiences for their chil-
dren that stimulate cognitive growth and prepare them for school. A large
literature explores the e¤ect of credit market imperfections on investments in
post-secondary education,60 but the large and lasting bene…ts of the CAP treat-
 5 9 See   Campbell and Ramey (1994).
 6 0 See   Cameron and Heckman (2001), Carnerio and Heckman (2002) and Card (1999).



                                            38
ments suggest that, for women in these circumstances, the inability to …nance
the type of high quality pre-school instruction provided by CAP may be the sin-
gle most important credit constraint they face as parents. Further, seen in the
light of the Brooks et al (1996) results concerning racial di¤erences in parenting
behaviors, the CAP results also suggest that the mothers in the CAP control
group may have bene…ted greatly from mentoring, instruction and education in
e¤ective parenting practices.
    There is much evidence that changes in government policies concerning the
funding and governance of schools contributed in important ways to the relative
academic progress of blacks during the 20th century, but at the dawn of the
21st century, black-white di¤erences in family environments are by far the most
important source of black-white di¤erences in levels of resources devoted to
children. Important future work is required to more fully understand black-
white di¤erences in how parents invest in young children because the black-
white skill gap among today’s young children is considerably larger than existing
estimates of the potential achievement gains associated various education reform
proposals.61 The …rst generation of black children who enter kindergarten with
the same basic language and arithmetic skills as white children may well be the
…rst generation of black adults to enter the labor market on equal footing with
their white peers.



  6 1 There are also reasons to worry that gains from class size reductions, voucher programs

and other experiments may be dii…cult to replicate on a large scale.




                                             39
References
 [1] Altonji, Joseph G. and Pierret, C. R. (2001) "Employer Learning and Sta-
        tistical Discrimination", Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 116(1), 313-350.
 [2] Arrow, K., (1973) “The Theory of Discrimination,” in O. Ashenfelter and
        A. Rees Eds., Discrimination in Labor Markets, Princeton University
        Press.
 [3] Austen-Smith, David and Fryer, R. G. Jr. (2003) "The Economics of Acting
       White", mimeo, Harvard University.
 [4] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Neal, D. (2004) "Data Problems and the Mea-
        surement of Racial and Gender Wage Gaps over Time", mimeo, Uni-
        versity of Chicago.
 [5] Becker, Gary S. and Tomes, N. (1986) "Human Capital and the Rise and
        Fall of Families", Journal of Labor Economics 4 (3), S1–S39.
 [6] Blau, David, and Currie, Janet. (2004) "Pre-School, Day Care, and After
        School Care: Who’s Minding the Kids", in Handbook of Economics of
        Education, New York: Elsevier.
 [7] Blau, D. M. (1999) "The E¤ect of Income on Child Development", Review
        of Economics and Statistics 81 (2), 261–276.
 [8] Boozer, Michael A., Krueger, A. B. and Wolkon, S. (1992) "Race and School
        Quality Since Brown Versus the Board of Education", Brookings Papers
        on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 269-338.
 [9] Bound, John and Freeman, R. B. (1992, February) "What Went Wrong?
        The Erosion of Relative Earnings and Employment Among Young Black
        Men in the1980s", Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 201–232.
[10] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Duncan and G. J. Klebanov, P. (1996) "Ethnic
        Di¤erences in Children’s Intelligence Test Scores: Role of Economics
        Deprivation, Home Environment and Maternal Characteristics", Child
        Development 67 (2), 396–408.
[11] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Phillips, M., Duncan, G. J., Klebanov, P. and Crane,
        J. (1998) "Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the Black-
        White Test Score Gap", in Christopher Jencks and Meredith Philips,
        Eds., The Black-White Test Score Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
        Institution.
[12] Cameron, Stephen V. and Heckman, J. J. (1993) "The Nonequivalence of
       High School Equivalents", Journal of Labor Economics, 11 (1), 1-47..
[13] Cameron, Stephen V. and Heckman, J. J. (2001) "The Dynamics of Edu-
       cational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White Males", Journal of
       Political Economy 109 (3), 455–499.




                                     40
[14] Campbell, Frances A. and Ramey, C. T. (1994) "E¤ects of Early Interven-
       tion on Intellectual and Academic Achievement: A Follow-up Study of
       Children From Low-income Families", Child Development 65, 684–698.
[15] Campbell, Frances A., Pungello, E. E., Miller-Johnson, S., Burchinal and
       M., Ramey, C. T. (2001) "The Development of Cognitive and Acad-
       emic Abilities: Growth Curves From an Early Childhood Educational
       Experiment", Developmental Psychology 37 (2), 231–242.
[16] Card, D. (1999) "The Causal E¤ect of Education on Earnings", in Handbook
        of Labor Economics Vol. 3A. New York: Elsevier.
[17] Carneiro, Pedro and Heckman, J. J. (2002) "The Evidence on Credit Con-
        straints in Post-secondary Schooling". Economic Journal 112 (482),
        705–734.
[18] Carneiro, Pedro, Hansen, K. and Heckman, J. J. (2003) "Estimating Dis-
        tributions of Treatment E¤ects With an Application to the Returns to
        Schooling and Measurement of the E¤ects of Uncertainty on College
        Choice", International Economic Review 44 (2), 361–422.
[19] Ceci, S. (1991) "How Much Does Schooling In‡uences General Intelligence
        and Its Cognitive Components? A Reassessment of the evidence", De-
        velopment Psychology 27 (5), 703–722.
[20] Chubb, John E. and Loveless, T. Eds. (2002), Bridging the Achievement
       Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[21] Coate, Stephen and Loury, G. C. (1993) "Will A¢ rmative-Action Policies
        Eliminate Negative Stereotypes?" American Economic Review 83 (5),
        1220–1240.
[22] Collins, William J. and Margo, R. A. (2003) "Historical Perspectives on
        Racial Di¤erences in Schooling in the United States", NBER Working
        Paper #9770.
[23] Cook, Philip J. and Lugwig, J. (1998) "The Burden of "Acting White": Do
        Black Adolescents Disparage Academic Achievement?" in Christopher
        Jencks and Meredith Philips, Eds., The Black-White Test Score Gap,
        Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[24] Cutright, P. (1973) "Achievement, Mobility, and the Draft: Their Impact
        on the Earnings of Men", Social Security Administration.
[25] De los Santos, Babur, Heckman, J, Larenas, M, (2004) "Explaining the Gap
        in Achievement Test Scores for Blacks, Hispanics and Whites", mimeo,
        University of Chicago.
[26] Ferguson, Ronald F. (2004) "Why America’s Black-White School Achieve-
        ment Gap Persists", in Glenn C. Loury, Steven Teles and Tariq Modood,
        Eds., Ethnicity, Social Mobility and Public Policy, Cambridge Univer-
        sity Press, in press.
[27] Flanagan, Ann and Grissmer, David (2002) ”The Role of Federal Resources
        in Closing the Achievement Gap”, in John E. Chubb and Tom Loveless,

                                     41
        Eds., Bridging the Achievement Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings In-
        stitution.
[28] Fryer, Roland G. Jr., Heaton, P., Levitt, S. and Murphy, K. (2004) "The
        Impact of Crack Cocaine", mimeo, University of Chicago.
[29] Fryer, Roland G. Jr. and Levitt, S. (2004) "Understanding the Black-White
        Test Score Gap in the First Two Years of School", Review of Economics
        and Statistics 86 (2), 447–464.
[30] Grogger, Je¤rey and Neal, D. (2000) "Further Evidence on the E¤ects of
        Catholic Secondary Schooling", Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban
        A¤ airs 1 (1), Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[31] Grogger, Je¤rey. (1996) "Does School Quality Explain the Recent Black-
        White Wage Trend", Journal of Labor Economics 14 (2), 231–253.
[32] Haider, Steven and Solon, G. (2004) "Life-Cycle Variation in the Associ-
        ation Between Current and Lifetime Earnings" mimeo, University of
        Michigan.
[33] Hansen, Karsten T., Heckman, J. J. and Mullen, K. J. (2004) "The Ef-
       fect of Schooling and Ability of Achievement Test Scores". Journal of
       Econometrics 121 (1)
[34] Heckman, James J., Lochner, L. and Todd, P. (2004) "Fifty Years of Mincer
        Earnings Equations", mimeo, University of Chicago.
[35] Heckman James J., and Krueger, A. (2003) Inequality in America: What
        Role For Human Capital Policy? Cambridge: MIT Press.
[36] Hedges, Larry and Nowell, A. (1998) "Black-White Test Score Convergence
        since 1965", in Christopher Jencks and Meredith Philips, Eds., The
        Black-White Test Score Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[37] Howell, William G. and Peterson, P. (2002) The Education Gap: Vouchers
       and Urban Schools, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[38] Howell, William G. and Peterson, P. (2002b) "Voucher Programs and the
       E¤ect of Ethnicity on Test Scores,” in John E. Chubb and Tom Love-
       less, Eds., Bridging the Achievement Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
       Institution.
[39] Johnson, William, Kitamura, Y. and Neal, D. (2000) "Evaluating a Simple
        Method For Estimating Black-White Gaps in Median Wages", Ameri-
        can Economic Review 90.
[40] Johnson, William and Neal, D. (1998) "Basic Skills and the Black-White
        Earnings Gap" in Christopher Jencks and Meredith Philips, Eds., The
        Black-White Test Score Gap, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[41] Juhn, Chinhui, Murphy, K. and Pierce, B. (1991) "Accounting For the
        Slowdown in Black-White Wage Convergence", in Workers and Their
        Wages: Changing Patterns in the U.S., American Enterprise Institute.



                                     42
[42] Katz, Larwence and Autor, D. (1999) “Changes in the Wage Structure and
        Earnings Inequality.” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
     Eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-
        North Holland.
[43] Krueger, Alan. (1999) "Experimental Estimates of Education Production
        Functions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (2), 497-532.
[44] Krueger, Alan B. and Whitmore, D. (2002) ”Would Smaller Classes Help
        Close the Black-White Achievement Gap?,” in John E. Chubb and
        Tom Loveless, Eds., Bridging the Achievement Gap, Washington, D.C.:
        Brookings Institution.
[45] Lange, Fabian (2004) "The Returns To Schooling and Ability During the
        Early Career: Evidence on Job Market Signaling, Employer Learning,
        and Post School Investments," mimeo, Yale University.
[46] Lightfoot, Sarah.L. (1978) Worlds Apart, Basic Books, New York.
[47] Loury, Glenn. C. (1981) "Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution
        of Earnings", Econometrica 49 (4), 843–867.
[48] Mayer, Susan. (1997) What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Chil-
       dren’s Life Chances, Harvard University Press.
[49] McLanahan, Sara and Sandefur, G. (1994) Growing Up With a Single Par-
       ent, What Hurts, What Helps, Harvard University Press.
[50] Mulligan, Casey B. (1997) Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality,
       University of Chicago Press.
[51] Neal, Derek (1997) "The E¤ects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Edu-
        cational Achievement", Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1)
[52] Neal, Derek (2004) "The Measured Black-White Wage Gap Among Women
        Is Too Small", Journal of Political Economy 112, S1–S28.
[53] Neal, Derek (2004b) "The Relationship between Marriage Market
        Prospects and Never-Married Motherhood", The Journal of Human Re-
        sources, 39 (4), 938-957.
[54] Neal, Derek (2004c) "Resources and Educational Outcomes Among Black
        Children", in Paul Peterson editor, In One Generation: The Elimi-
        nation of Race Di¤ erences in Educational Achievement, Rowman &
        Little…eld.
[55] Neal, Derek and Johnson, W. (1996) "The Role of Pre-Market Factors
        in Black-White Wage Di¤erences", Journal of Political Economy 104,
        869–895.
[56] Nechyba, Thomas (2001) "Social Approval, Values, and AFDC: A Reexam-
        ination of the Illegitimacy Debate", Journal of Political Economy 109,
        637–672.
[57] Nisbett, Richard E. (1995) "Race, IQ, and Scientism", in The Bell Curve
        Wars, New York, NY: Basic Books.

                                     43
[58] Ogbu, Jonathan (1990) "Minority Education in Comparative Perspective"
       Journal of Negro Education 59, 45-57.
[59] Phillips, Meredith, Crouse, J. and Raplh, J. (1998) "Does the Black-White
        Test Score Gap Widen After Children Enter School?" in Christopher
        Jencks and Meredith Philips, Eds., The Black-White Test Score Gap,
        Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
[60] Phelps, Edmund. S. (1972) "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism",
        American Economic Review 62 (4), 659–661.
[61] Sandefur, Gary D. and Wells, T. (1999) "Does Family Structure Really In-
        ‡uence Educational Attainment?" Social Science Research 28 (4), 331–
        357.
[62] Slavin, Robert E. and Madden, N. (2002) ”’Success For All’ and African
        American and Latino Student Achievement”, in John E. Chubb and
        Tom Loveless, Eds., Bridging the Achievement Gap, Washington, D.C.:
        Brookings Institution.
[63] Smith, James P. and Welch, F. R. (1989) "Black Economic Progress after
       Myrdal", Journal of Economic Literature 27 (2), 519–564.
[64] Smith, J.P. (1984) "Race and Human Capital", American Economic Review
       74 (4), 685–698.
[65] Solon, G. (2002) "Cross-Country Di¤erences in Intergenerational Earnings
        Mobility", Journal of Economic Perspectives 16 (3), 59–66.
[66] Weiss, Yoram and Willis, R. J. (1985) "Children as Collective Goods and
       Divorce Settlements", Journal of Labor Economics 3 (3), 268–292.
[67] Wigdor, Alexandra K. and Green, B. F. Jr. E. (1991) Performance Assess-
       ment For the Workplace, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.




                                     44
                        Table 1
     Black-White Differences in Average Education
                                        Men

  Year of birth/age              26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50
     1910-1914                                            -3.13
     1915-1920                                      -3.03
     1920-1924                                -2.81       -2.60
     1925-1929                          -2.48       -2.30
     1930-1934                    -2.26       -1.95       -1.81
     1935-1939                          -1.71       -1.53
     1940-1944                    -1.50       -1.38       -1.29
     1945-1949                          -1.21       -1.29
     1950-1954                    -0.99       -0.97       -1.10
     1955-1959                          -0.76       -0.84
     1960-1964                    -0.66       -0.76
     1965-1969                          -0.81
     1970-1974                    -0.72
Notes: Data are from the decennial census IPUMS. Mean education for whites 26-30
years old was 11.6 in the 1960 census, 12.5 in the 1970 census, 13.3 in the 1980 census,
13.1 in the 1990 census and 13.6 in the 2000 census. The ipums variables used for
constructing years of schooling are "higraded" for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and "educ99" for
1990 and 2000. Individuals with allocated age, sex, race or education have been dropped
from the sample. Sample weights "perwt" are used for year 2000.


                                     Women

  Year of birth/age              26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50
     1910-1914                                            -2.53
     1915-1920                                      -2.25
     1920-1924                                -2.04       -2.00
     1925-1929                          -1.68       -1.54
     1930-1934                    -1.46       -1.21       -1.06
     1935-1939                          -1.07       -0.80
     1940-1944                    -1.06       -0.72       -0.73
     1945-1949                          -0.68       -0.65
     1950-1954                    -0.64       -0.64       -0.71
     1955-1959                          -0.47       -0.63
     1960-1964                    -0.45       -0.59
     1965-1969                          -0.64
     1970-1974                    -0.62
Notes: Data are from the decennial census IPUMS 1960-2000. Mean education for whites
26-30 years old was 11.3 in the 1960 census, 12.1 in the 1970 census, 13.0 in the 1980
census, 13.3 in the 1990 census and 13.9 in the 2000 census. The ipums variables used
for constructing years of schooling are "higraded" for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and "educ99"
for 1990 and 2000. Individuals with allocated age, sex, race or education have been
dropped from the sample. Sample weights "perwt" are used for year 2000.
                                         Table 2a
                  High School Graduation Rates By Age, Gender and Race


                            Top Number Excludes GED, Bottom Number Includes GED

                                               Men                                    Women
            Year of Birth     19         20           21      30        19         20       21          30
 Whites      1957-1958       0.75       0.81         0.83    0.84      0.80       0.83     0.84        0.85
                             0.77       0.84         0.85    0.89      0.82       0.86     0.87        0.91
             1959-1960       0.69       0.78         0.79    0.79      0.79       0.81     0.81        0.83
                             0.71       0.81         0.83    0.86      0.81       0.85     0.86        0.90
             1961-1962       0.69       0.74         0.75    0.75      0.74       0.79     0.79        0.79
                             0.73       0.79         0.81    0.84      0.78       0.83     0.84        0.89
             1963-1964       0.66       0.72         0.72    0.74      0.74       0.78     0.78        0.78
                             0.71       0.78         0.79    0.85      0.79       0.83     0.84        0.88
             1980-1981       0.67       0.78         0.79              0.76       0.85     0.86
                             0.71       0.84         0.86              0.78       0.87     0.89
 Blacks      1957-1958       0.51       0.61         0.65    0.66      0.64       0.74     0.75        0.77
                             0.55       0.66         0.71    0.74      0.67       0.78     0.80        0.86
             1959-1960       0.48       0.62         0.67    0.68      0.62       0.70     0.70        0.72
                             0.50       0.67         0.72    0.79      0.66       0.74     0.76        0.82
             1961-1962       0.50       0.61         0.61    0.63      0.69       0.76     0.76        0.77
                             0.56       0.68         0.71    0.80      0.71       0.79     0.80        0.85
             1963-1964       0.53       0.64         0.67    0.68      0.66       0.72     0.73        0.74
                             0.59       0.72         0.76    0.83      0.68       0.77     0.78        0.84
             1980-1981       0.43       0.56         0.58              0.66       0.76     0.78
                             0.47       0.62         0.65              0.68       0.79     0.82
Notes: Data are from NLSY 1979 and NLSY 1997. Only individuals who were observed after the age of interest are
included. Individuals with coding errors for the age variable have been dropped from the sample.
                             Table 2b
     College Graduation Rates By Gender and Race - Ages 26-35

                         Women                                    Men
               Black       White         Ratio       Black        White        Ratio

   1960        4.45         7.74         1.74        4.05         16.08        3.97
   1970        5.30         12.04        2.27        5.38         20.27        3.77
   1980        11.73        21.30        1.82        12.23        29.08        2.38
   1990        13.41        23.50        1.75        11.48        24.50        2.13
   2000        17.90        32.75        1.83        13.91        30.22        2.17
Notes: Data are from the decennial census IPUMS 1960-2000. The variable used for
constructing college graduation rates is "educrec". Individuals with allocated age, sex,
race or education have been dropped from the sample. Sample weights "perwt" are used
for year 2000.
                                      Table 3
                 Black-White Math and Reading Score Gaps in NAEP
                 Entries are black-white gaps in mean scores expressed in standard deviation units.


                                  Reading                                                      Math
  cohort/age               9                     13                                    9               13

      1958                                     -1.08

      1960                                                                                            -1.18

      1962               -1.04                 -1.02

      1964                                                                          -0.97

      1965                                                                                            -1.08

      1966               -0.92

      1967                                     -0.91

      1969                                                                          -0.88             -1.02

      1971               -0.84                 -0.74

      1973                                                                          -0.84             -0.79

      1975               -0.79                 -0.53

      1977                                     -0.58                                -0.74             -0.87

      1979               -0.71                 -0.73                                                  -0.93

      1981               -0.79                 -0.77                                -0.81             -0.90

      1983               -0.83                 -0.82                                -0.82             -0.92

      1985               -0.80                                                      -0.74

      1986                                     -0.74                                                  -0.98

      1987               -0.74                                                      -0.75

      1990               -0.91                                                      -0.82



Notes: Data are from 1999 NAEP Long-Term Trend Summary Data Tables. Entries are calculated as
the score gap divided by the overall standard deviation for the corresponding test year. The standard
deviations for the 1973 age 9 and age 13 math tests are not available, and therefore the standard
deviations of the 1978 math tests are used instead.
                                                                 Table 4
                                                   Black-White Test Score Gaps in NLSY

                                              Boys                                        Girls                                Full Sample
     year and age             Reading          Math        Composite      Reading         Math       Composite       Reading        Math   Composite
         1979
        13-14
        15-17                   -1.15           -0.94         -1.11         -1.17         -0.96         -1.14         -1.16        -0.95       -1.13
         1997
        13-14                   -0.87           -0.90         -0.93         -0.69         -0.79         -0.78         -0.79        -0.84       -0.86
        15-17                   -0.87           -0.82         -0.89         -0.96         -0.92         -0.99         -0.91        -0.87       -0.94


Notes: Data are from NLSY 1979 and NLSY 1997. Test scores have been transformed into deviations from the average score among persons born in
the same two-month interval and standardized so that one unit equals one standard deviation in the distribution of scores for persons of the same birth
cohort and gender.
                                                   Table 5
       Average test scores and population percentages by race, region and locality


                                                                                               Avg Score
                                                                    Student Population
        Race                 Locality               Region                                     (Standard
                                                                       Percentage
                                                                                               Deviation)

        White               Suburban               Northeast                9.4                    0.47
        White               Suburban                Midwest                  11                    0.37
        White                 Rural                Northeast                3.3                    0.37
        White                 Rural                 Midwest                 5.1                    0.31
        White               Suburban               Southeast                10.1                   0.23
        White               Suburban                 West                   8.5                    0.18
        White               Central city           Southeast                5.1                    0.17
        White                 Rural                  West                    2.9                   0.16
        White               Central city             West                    4.6                   0.15
        White               Central city            Midwest                 4.1                    0.14
        White               Central city           Northeast                2.2                    0.03
        White                 Rural                Southeast                5.6                      0
        Black               Suburban               Northeast                1.4                   -0.38
        Black               Suburban                Midwest                 0.8                   -0.49
        Black                 Rural                Southeast                1.2                   -0.65
        Black                 Rural                Northeast                0.2                   -0.68
        Black                 Rural                 Midwest                 0.1                   -0.71
        Black               Suburban               Southeast                3.1                   -0.76
        Black               Central city           Southeast                3.7                   -0.79
        Black               Central city            Midwest                 1.9                   -0.79
        Black               Central city             West                    0.6                  -0.81
        Black               Central city           Northeast                2.2                   -0.84
        Black               Suburban                 West                   0.7                   -0.93
        Black                 Rural                  West                   0.1                   -0.99


Notes: This Table is taken from Flanagan and Grissmer (2002), Table 4. Column 4 reports the students living in
each location as a percentage of the national student population.
                                    Table 6

        (1) Fraction working or at school in reference week
               (2) Fraction worked last calendar year
                     (3) Fraction Institutionalized

                            White                           Black

 Year of Birth
                 26-30   31-35   36-40   41-45   26-30   31-35   36-40   41-45
and Education
  9-11 years

 1935-1939                               0.86                            0.77
                                         0.91                            0.79
                                         0.01                            0.03

 1940-1944                       0.86                            0.75
                                 0.92                            0.80
                                 0.01                            0.03

 1945-1949               0.84            0.81            0.71            0.64
                         0.91            0.85            0.75            0.68
                         0.02            0.01            0.06            0.05

 1950-1954       0.81            0.80            0.62            0.62
                 0.90            0.85            0.70            0.65
                 0.02            0.02            0.09            0.09

 1955-1959               0.80            0.71            0.56            0.47
                         0.86            0.76            0.62            0.49
                         0.03            0.03            0.14            0.13

 1960-1964       0.79            0.73            0.51            0.49
                 0.86            0.77            0.57            0.51
                 0.04            0.04            0.19            0.19

 1965-1969               0.74                            0.44
                         0.78                            0.45
                         0.05                            0.28

 1970-1974       0.73                            0.43
                 0.78                            0.45
                 0.05                            0.26
                            White                           Black
 Year of Birth
                 26-30   31-35   36-40   41-45   26-30   31-35   36-40   41-45
and Education
   12 years
 1935-1939                               0.93                            0.84
                                         0.95                            0.84
                                         0.00                            0.01

 1940-1944                       0.93                            0.81
                                 0.95                            0.85
                                 0.01                            0.03

 1945-1949               0.91            0.89            0.80            0.76
                         0.95            0.92            0.84            0.79
                         0.01            0.01            0.03            0.04

 1950-1954       0.89            0.89            0.77            0.75
                 0.95            0.92            0.82            0.77
                 0.01            0.01            0.04            0.06

 1955-1959               0.89            0.85            0.73            0.65
                         0.93            0.86            0.76            0.68
                         0.01            0.02            0.07            0.07

 1960-1964       0.89            0.85            0.74            0.67
                 0.93            0.86            0.77            0.69
                 0.02            0.02            0.08            0.09

 1965-1969               0.85                            0.67
                         0.87                            0.69
                         0.03                            0.11

 1970-1974       0.84                            0.65
                 0.86                            0.66
                 0.03                            0.11
                                   White                             Black
    Year of Birth
                       26-30   31-35    36-40   41-45    26-30   31-35    36-40   41-45
   and Education
      16 years

    1935-1939                                    0.97                              0.91
                                                 0.97                              0.91
                                                 0.00                              0.01

    1940-1944                            0.97                             0.94
                                         0.97                             0.93
                                         0.00                             0.01

    1945-1949                   0.97             0.96             0.93             0.92
                                0.97             0.97             0.93             0.90
                                0.00             0.00             0.01             0.02

    1950-1954           0.96             0.96            0.91             0.90
                        0.97             0.97            0.92             0.89
                        0.00             0.00            0.01             0.03

    1955-1959                   0.97             0.95             0.93             0.90
                                0.97             0.94             0.89             0.89
                                0.00             0.00             0.02             0.01

    1960-1964           0.97             0.96            0.95             0.89
                        0.96             0.95            0.91             0.87
                        0.00             0.00            0.01             0.02

    1965-1969                   0.96                              0.90
                                0.95                              0.89
                                0.00                              0.02

    1970-1974           0.96                             0.91
                        0.95                             0.87
                        0.00                             0.01

Notes: Data for this table are from the decennial census IPUMS 1960-2000. The Table
displays the fraction of males working or in school in the census reference week, fraction
who worked last year and fraction of people institutionalized. People working last year
include individuals who reported (a) positive, non-allocated weeks worked or (b) positive,
non-allocated wage/business/farm income or (c) positive, allocated weeks worked and non-
allocated indication of working in the reference week or (d) positive, allocated weeks
worked and non-allocated indication of having worked last year. Sample weights "perwt"
are used for year 2000.
                                           Table 7
                                  Black-White Differences in
                                 Average Log Hourly Wages
                                 (Predicted Hours from CPS)

                                         No Imputations
                                Standard Deviations in Parentheses

   Year and
  Education/           1-5              6-10            11-15            16-20             21-25
  Experience

  9-11 years
     1980              -0.21            -0.23            -0.25            -0.27            -0.25
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
     1990              -0.17            -0.23            -0.21            -0.20            -0.17
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
     2000              -0.15            -0.13            -0.22            -0.24            -0.25
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)

   12 years
     1980              -0.13            -0.17            -0.16            -0.19            -0.19
                      (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
     1990              -0.12            -0.21            -0.22            -0.17            -0.19
                      (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
     2000              -0.07            -0.14            -0.16            -0.17            -0.21
                      (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)

   16 years
     1980              -0.02            -0.07            -0.11            -0.15            -0.26
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.04)
     1990              -0.03            -0.15            -0.17            -0.20            -0.17
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
     2000              -0.04            -0.12            -0.16            -0.27            -0.27
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)



Notes: This table displays black-white average log wage gaps. Data are from the decennial census IPUMS
1960-2000. Log hourly wages are created using the IPUMS variables "incwage" and "wkswork1" and
predicted hours using CPS data. The sample includes non self-employed males with positive wage income
and weeks worked. Sample weights "perwt" are used for year 2000. Wages are trimmed at the 1st and
99th percentile. Values are expressed in 1999 USD. Current monetary values have been adjusted using
the CPI-U. Potential experience is defined as max{0,min(age-18, age-years of schooling-6)}.
                                           Table 8
                                   Black-White Differences in
                                     Average Log Earnings

                                          No Imputations
                                 Standard Deviations in Parentheses

   Year and
  Education/           1-5              6-10            11-15            16-20             21-25
  Experience
  9-11 years
     1960              -0.37            -0.46            -0.49            -0.39             -0.44
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     1970              -0.26            -0.35            -0.39            -0.37             -0.39
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     1980              -0.38            -0.34            -0.35            -0.34             -0.31
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.02)
     1990              -0.38            -0.40            -0.41            -0.35             -0.28
                      (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)
     2000              -0.35            -0.33            -0.34            -0.31             -0.36
                      (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)
   12 years
     1960              -0.34            -0.43            -0.48            -0.46             -0.42
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     1970              -0.16            -0.30            -0.31            -0.34             -0.36
                      (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     1980              -0.31            -0.35            -0.29            -0.31             -0.31
                      (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     1990              -0.22            -0.36            -0.40            -0.33             -0.33
                      (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.02)
     2000              -0.24            -0.30            -0.27            -0.28             -0.34
                      (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.01)            (0.01)
   16 years
     1960              -0.27            -0.36            -0.47            -0.42             -0.54
                      (0.06)           (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.08)
     1970               0.00            -0.24            -0.28            -0.41             -0.48
                      (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.05)            (0.06)
     1980              -0.15            -0.20            -0.21            -0.30             -0.37
                      (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.04)            (0.05)
     1990              -0.04            -0.22            -0.30            -0.31             -0.22
                      (0.03)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.03)
     2000              -0.12            -0.18            -0.24            -0.32             -0.34
                      (0.03)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.03)
Notes: This table displays black-white average log earnings gaps. Data are from the decennial census
IPUMS 1960-2000. The IPUMS variable used is "incwage". The sample includes non self-employed males
with positive wage income and weeks worked. Earnings are trimmed at the 1st and 99th percentile. Values
are expressed in 1999 USD. Current monetary values have been adjusted using the CPI-U. Potential
experience is defined as max{0,min(age-18, age-years of schooling-6)}. Sample weights "perwt" are used
for year 2000.
                                              Table 9
                                     Black-White Differences in
                                    Average Log Hourly Wages
                                    (Predicted Hours from CPS)

                                    With Imputations for Non-Workers
                                   Standard Deviations in Parentheses

    Year and
   Education/              1-5               6-10              11-15              16-20            21-25
   Experience

   9-11 years
      1980                 -0.31             -0.32              -0.31              -0.32            -0.28
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)
       1990                -0.28             -0.34              -0.31              -0.27            -0.22
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)
       2000                -0.27             -0.25              -0.35              -0.34            -0.34
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)

     12 years
       1980                -0.20             -0.21              -0.20              -0.22            -0.23
                          (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.01)
       1990                -0.18             -0.26              -0.27              -0.22            -0.23
                          (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.01)
       2000                -0.15             -0.22              -0.23              -0.23            -0.27
                          (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.01)

     16 years
       1980                -0.04             -0.09              -0.12              -0.17            -0.28
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)           (0.04)
       1990                -0.04             -0.16              -0.19              -0.22            -0.18
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)
       2000                -0.07             -0.14              -0.18              -0.29            -0.29
                          (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)

Notes: This table displays black-white average log wage gaps, with imputations for non-workers. See notes
to Table 7 for sample and variable definitions.
Each entry is equal to [pb*xb+(1-pb)*(xb-.4)]-[pw*xw+(1-pw)*(xw-.4)], where xw (xb) is the mean log wage in the
white (black) year-experience-education cell among working men, and pw (pb) is the fraction working in the
white (black) year-experience-education cell.
                                              Table 10
                                      Black-White Differences in
                                        Average Log Earnings

                                     With Imputations for Non-Workers
                                    Standard Deviations in Parentheses

    Year and
   Education/             1-5               6-10             11-15             16-20              21-25
   Experience
   9-11 years
      1960                -0.41             -0.48             -0.51             -0.41              -0.46
                         (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      1970                -0.32             -0.38             -0.42             -0.40              -0.41
                         (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      1980                -0.48             -0.42             -0.41             -0.38              -0.34
                         (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.02)
      1990                -0.49             -0.51             -0.51             -0.43              -0.34
                         (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.03)
      2000                -0.47             -0.46             -0.47             -0.42              -0.45
                         (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.03)
    12 years
      1960                -0.37             -0.45             -0.50             -0.48              -0.44
                         (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      1970                -0.20             -0.32             -0.32             -0.35              -0.38
                         (0.02)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      1980                -0.37             -0.39             -0.32             -0.35              -0.35
                         (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      1990                -0.28             -0.42             -0.46             -0.38              -0.37
                         (0.02)            (0.01)            (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.02)
      2000                -0.32             -0.38             -0.34             -0.34              -0.40
                         (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.01)             (0.01)
    16 years
      1960                -0.28             -0.38             -0.47             -0.42              -0.54
                         (0.06)            (0.04)            (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.08)
      1970                -0.01             -0.26             -0.28             -0.42              -0.50
                         (0.05)            (0.04)            (0.04)            (0.05)             (0.06)
      1980                -0.17             -0.21             -0.22             -0.31              -0.40
                         (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.04)             (0.05)
      1990                -0.06             -0.24             -0.32             -0.33              -0.23
                         (0.03)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.03)             (0.03)
      2000                -0.14             -0.21             -0.26             -0.34              -0.36
                         (0.03)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.03)

Notes: This table displays black-white average log earnings gaps, with imputations for non-workers. See
notes to Table 8 for sample and variable definitions.
Each entry is equal to [pb*xb+(1-pb)*(xb-.4)]-[pw*xw+(1-pw)*(xw-.4)], where xw (xb) is the mean log earnings in
the white (black) year-experience-education cell among working men, and pw (pb) is the fraction working in the
white (black) year-experience-education cell.
                             Table 11
       Fraction of children with zero, one, and two parents

                               Black                                      White
                  Zero          One           Two            Zero         One            Two
   1960           0.08         0.24           0.68           0.01         0.06           0.93
   1970           0.06         0.36           0.58           0.01         0.09           0.90
   1980           0.06         0.49           0.46           0.01         0.13           0.86
   1990           0.07         0.59           0.34           0.02         0.18           0.80
   2000           0.11         0.56           0.33           0.03         0.19           0.79


Notes: The Table displays fractions of children aged 0-5 who live in a household with zero, one or
two parents. Data are from the decennial census IPUMS, 1960-2000. The ipums variables used
for defining the number of parents are "momloc" and "poploc". Individuals with allocated sex, age
or race have been dropped from the sample. Sample weights "perwt" are used for year 2000.
                                           Table 12
               Average Household Income of children with zero, one, and two parents

                                                 Black                                                        White
    year/parents          Average           Zero       One                Two           Average          Zero       One                 Two
       1960                18,280          15,730     13,282             20,323          34,769         24,386     21,076              35,725
       1970                28,065          23,376     19,264             33,934          45,779         34,477     27,427              47,664
       1980                31,017          29,674     22,150             40,670          45,480         41,464     27,671              48,136
       1990                30,933          29,299     22,590             45,634          52,828         42,965     31,773              57,740
       2000                35,756          35,591     25,197             53,894          64,065         46,149     37,495              71,016


Notes: The Table displays average total household income for children aged 0-5. Data are from the decennial census IPUMS, 1960-2000. The
ipums variable used for constructing total household income is "inctot". Total household income is the sum of "inctot" across individuals who live
in the same household. Negative values of "inctot" have been recoded to zeros. Values are expressed in 1999 USD. Current monetary values
have been adjusted using the CPI-U. The variables used for defining the number of parents are "momloc" and "poploc". Individuals with allocated
sex, age or race have been dropped from the sample. Sample weights "perwt" are used for year 2000.
                                                            Table 13a
                                                Changes in Black-White Score Gaps
                                              Gap in Followup Year - Gap in Base Year

                                                          Boys                                        Girls
                                              Reading               Math                  Reading                Math
                                      Score Gain Stand Dev. Score Gain Stand Dev. Score Gain Stand Dev. Score Gain Stand Dev.
Data Set                                 (se)        Gain      (se)       Gain       (se)        Gain       (se)      Gain

High School & Beyond Sophomore           -0.123        0.005        0.188         0.078        -0.302       -0.021       -0.206        0.047
1980 Cohort (10th - 12th Grade)           0.371                     0.744                       0.323                     0.627

NELS 1988-1990                           -1.151       -0.013        -1.169        0.037        -0.517       0.025        -1.872        -0.046
(8th - 10th Grade)                        0.844                      1.066                      0.738                     0.954

NELS 1990-1992                           -0.326       -0.018        -0.757       -0.012        -0.217       -0.012        0.515        0.069
(10th - 12th Grade)                       0.904                      1.165                      0.723                     0.996

ECLS 1998-1999                           -4.386       -0.122        -2.417       -0.130        -3.429       -0.096       -1.876        -0.071
(Fall K - Spring 1st Grade)               1.171                      0.846                      1.217                     0.837


This table displays the changes in the black-white score gaps (referred to as score gains) in score terms and in standard deviation terms for
the HSB, NELS and ECLS data. The ECLS base period is fall kindergarten and followup period is spring first grade for 1998-99. The HSB
base period is 10th grade and the followup period is 12th grade for the 1980 cohort. The NELS data covers two time periods. In the first the base
period is 8th grade and followup is 10th grade for 1988-90. The second has a base period of 10th grade and a followup of 12th grade for 1990-
92.
                                 Table 13b
         Average Percentile Ranking in White Test Scores
                     Among Black Children

                                               HSB
     Year                   Reading                          Math
                     Male             Female          Male          Female
     1980            0.34              0.33           0.27           0.28
     1982            0.35              0.32           0.30           0.30

                                               NELS
                            Reading                          Math
                     Male             Female          Male          Female
     1988            0.31              0.32           0.27           0.28
     1990            0.32              0.32           0.27           0.29
     1992            0.31              0.31           0.27           0.31

                                               ECLS
                            Reading                          Math
                     Male             Female          Male          Female
     1998            0.36              0.36           0.32           0.30
     1999            0.34              0.35           0.28           0.29




Notes: each entry represents the average white percentile for black scores. The
ECLS data corresponds to fall kindergarten in 1998 and to spring first grade in
1999. The HSB data are for 10th grade in 1980 and 12th in 1982. The NELS data
are for 8th grade in 1988, 10th grade in 1990 and 12th grade in 1992.
                             Table 14
           Relative Test Score Gains of Black Students
                         Ages 9-13 NAEP-LTT

                     Reading                        Math
 Cohort     Score Gain    Stand Dev.      Score Gain    Stand Dev.
               (se)          Gain            (se)          Gain
    1962       7.50          0.03              -            -
              (2.37)
    1969         -             -              -2.30         -0.14
                                             (2.36)
    1971       5.80           0.11              -              -
              (2.38)
    1973         -              -             4.70           0.04
                                             (3.28)
    1975      14.10           0.26              -              -
              (3.12)
    1977         -              -             -1.90         -0.13
                                             (3.20)
    1979       0.40           -0.02             -              -
              (3.80)
    1981       4.40           0.01            -2.50         -0.09
              (4.13)                         (4.31)
    1983       1.50           0.01            -2.00         -0.10
              (3.69)                         (2.67)
Notes: The Table displays the change in the black-white reading and
math score gap between ages 9 and 13 for various birth cohorts. The
data are taken from the 1999 NAEP Long-Term Trend Assesment
Summary Data Tables.
                                                                                    Appendix Table 1
                                                   Average Years of Schooling and Black-White Education Gaps

Men

  Year/Age    Dataset                  26-30                             31-35                             36-40                             41-45                             46-50
                            black       white       gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap
              Cps           12.58       13.03      -0.45      12.55      13.28       -0.73      12.85      13.58       -0.73      12.41      13.60       -1.19      11.80      13.10       -1.30
      1990    Census        12.47       13.13      -0.66      12.56      13.33       -0.77      12.66      13.64       -0.98      12.40      13.68       -1.28      11.94      13.23       -1.29


              Cps           13.12       13.43      -0.31      13.14      13.52       -0.38      13.10      13.39       -0.29      12.93      13.55       -0.62      13.09      13.83       -0.74
              Census        12.88       13.59      -0.71      12.83      13.64       -0.81      12.83      13.59       -0.76      12.84      13.68       -0.84      12.84      13.95       -1.11
      2000
              Acs           12.88       13.47      -0.59      13.13      13.50       -0.37      12.89      13.53       -0.64      12.99      13.57       -0.58      12.94      13.90       -0.96


              Cps           13.09       13.44      -0.35      13.07      13.56       -0.49      13.03      13.41       -0.38      12.85      13.55       -0.70      13.09      13.76       -0.67
      2001    Acs           13.03       13.45      -0.42      13.12      13.58       -0.46      12.89      13.53       -0.64      12.92      13.56       -0.64      12.93      13.84       -0.91




Women


  Year/Age    Dataset                  26-30                             31-35                             36-40                             41-45                             46-50

                            black       white       gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap       black      white        gap
              Cps           12.65       13.18      -0.53      12.92      13.26       -0.34      12.76      13.38       -0.62      12.28      13.14       -0.86      11.95      12.74       -0.79
      1990    Census        12.82       13.27      -0.45      12.88      13.35       -0.47      12.85      13.50       -0.65      12.63      13.28       -0.65      12.12      12.85       -0.73


              Cps           13.35       13.72      -0.37      13.25      13.64       -0.39      13.32      13.50       -0.18      13.23      13.57       -0.34      13.10      13.70       -0.60
              Census        13.30       13.92      -0.62      13.20      13.84       -0.64      13.17      13.75       -0.58      13.16      13.79       -0.63      13.14      13.85       -0.71
      2000
              Acs           13.30       13.80      -0.50      13.15      13.74       -0.59      13.16      13.64       -0.48      12.95      13.70       -0.75      13.04      13.80       -0.76


              Cps           13.31       13.77      -0.46      13.45      13.72       -0.27      13.19      13.63       -0.44      13.10      13.55       -0.45      13.24      13.78       -0.54
      2001    Acs           13.31       13.79      -0.48      13.19      13.82       -0.63      13.14      13.68       -0.54      13.14      13.68       -0.54      13.06      13.77       -0.71




Notes: This Table compares average years of schooling and black-white gaps across three datasets: CPS, Census and ACS. The calculations use sample weights for ACS, CPS and Census 2000.
Individuals with allocated age, sex, race or education have been dropped from the samples. Entries for the black-white gaps using Census data may differ from Table 1 because of rounding. Table 1
calculates black-white gaps rounding to the neareset hundreth while Appendix Table 1 rounds average years of schooling and then calculates the black-white gap.
                            Appendix Table 2
                            NAEP Test Scores

        (standard errors in parenthesis, standard deviations in brackets)

                                          Math Scores
                          9 Year-Olds                    13 Year-Olds
     Year           White           Black          White           Black
      73           225 (1.0)       190 (1.8)      274 (.9)        228 (1.9)
                       -               -              -                -
      78           224 (.9)        192 (1.1)      272 (.8)        230 (1.9)
                     [34]           [34.5]         [35.7]            [36]
      82           224 (1.1)       195 (1.6)      274 (1.0)       240 (1.6)
                    [32.8]          [33.7]          [31]             [31]
      86           227 (1.1)       202 (1.6)      274 (1.3)       249 (2.3)
                    [32.6]          [31.7]         [29.4]           [28.3]
      90           235 (.8)        208 (2.2)      276 (1.1)       249 (2.3)
                    [31.2]          [31.5]          [29]            [28.7]
      92           235 (.8)        208 (2.0)      279 (.9)        250 (1.9)
                     [31]           [31.8]         [28.5]           [30.1]
      94           237 (1.0)       212 (1.6)      281 (.9)        252 (3.5)
                    [31.4]          [30.8]         [29.8]           [31.5]
      96           237 (1.0)       212 (1.4)      281 (.9)        252 (1.3)
                    [32.4]          [31.1]         [28.7]           [29.5]
      99           239 (.9)        211 (1.6)      283 (.8)        251 (2.6)
                    [31.8]           [33]          [30.3]           [28.8]

                                      Reading Scores
                         9 Year-Olds                  13 Year-Olds
     Year           White          Black         White          Black
      71           214 (.9)       170 (1.7)     261 (.7)       222 (1.2)
                    [39.4]         [38.3]        [32.9]          [33.5]
      75           217 (.7)       181 (1.2)     262 (.7)       226 (1.2)
                    [36.1]         [35.8]        [32.9]          [34.9]
      80           221 (.8)       189 (1.8)     264 (.7)       233 (1.5)
                    [35.2]         [37.6]        [32.7]          [32.7]
      84           218 (.9)       186 (1.4)     263 (.6)       236 (1.2)
                    [38.8]         [38.9]        [33.8]          [34.1]
      88           218 (1.4)      189 (2.4)    261 (1.1)       243 (2.4)
                    [39.3]         [39.4]        [33.9]          [32.1]
      90           217 (1.3)      182 (2.9)     262 (.9)       242 (2.2)
                    [42.9]         [41.7]        [34.5]          [35.3]
      92           218 (1.0)      185 (2.2)    266 (1.2)       238 (2.3)
                    [37.5]         [39.8]        [36.6]          [39.8]
      94           218 (1.3)      185 (2.3)    265 (1.1)       234 (2.4)
                    [37.4]         [40.6]        [37.5]           [38]
      96           220 (1.2)      191 (2.6)    266 (1.0)       234 (2.6)
                    [36.5]         [38.6]        [36.5]          [36.4]
      99           221 (1.6)      186 (2.3)    267 (1.2)       238 (2.4)
                    [35.6]         [37.9]        [36.6]          [37.6]

Notes: The Table displays average NAEP scores and standard deviations for
math and reading tests, ages nine and thirteen. Data are taken from the 1999
NAEP Long-Term Trend Summary Data Tables.
                Appendix Table 3
             NAEP National Test Scores

               (standard errors in parenthesis)

                         Math Scores
              4th Grade               8th Grade
 Year     White       Black       White       Black
  90    220 (1.00) 188 (1.80) 270 (1.30) 237 (2.70)
  92    227 (0.80) 193 (1.40) 277 (1.00) 237 (1.30)
  96    232 (1.00) 198 (1.60) 281 (1.10) 240 (1.90)
  00    234 (0.80) 203 (1.20) 284 (0.80) 244 (1.20)
  03    243 (0.20) 216 (0.40) 288 (0.30) 252 (0.50)

                        Reading Scores
              4th Grade                8th Grade
 Year     White       Black        White        Black
  92    224 (1.20) 192 (1.70) 267 (1.10) 237 (1.70)
  94    224 (1.30) 185 (1.80) 267 (1.00) 236 (1.80)
  98    225 (1.00) 193 (1.90) 270 (0.90) 244 (1.20)
  00    224 (1.10) 190 (1.80)     -      -    -       -
  02    229 (0.30) 199 (0.50) 272 (0.40) 245 (0.70)
  03    229 (0.20) 198 (0.40) 272 (0.20) 244 (0.50)



Notes: The Table displays average NAEP National scores and
standard errors for math and reading tests, grades 4 and 8.
Data are taken from the NAEP sponsored The Nation's Report
Card. In 2000, reading tests for 8th graders were not
administered.
                                                                    Figure 1a
                       0
   -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5        Mean NAEP Reading Score Gaps, 13 Years Old
                     Score Gaps




                                                71   76         81          86        91          96
                                                                 Year of Assessment




                                                                    Figure 1b
                                                      Mean NAEP Math Score Gaps, 13 Years Old
                       0
   -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5
                     Score Gaps




                                                73    78         83           88           93          98
                                                                 Year of Assessment

Notes: Data are from the 1999 NAEP Long-Term Trend. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals.
                                                            Figure 2a
                                                 Math Section of AFQT, Boys 15-17

   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Percentile in White Distribution




                                       .1   .2     .3     .4       .5     .6       .7   .8   .9
                                                    Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                         1980               1997-1998




                                                            Figure 2b
                                                 Math Section of AFQT, Girls 15-17
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Percentile in White Distribution




                                       .1   .2     .3     .4       .5     .6       .7   .8   .9
                                                    Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                         1980               1997-1998


Notes: The figures use standardized AFQT scores from the 1979 and 1997 NLSY.
                                                          Figure 2c
                                           Math Section of NAEP, 13 Year-Old Boys
   Percentile in White Distribution
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                      .1   .2   .3     .4       .5     .6       .7     .8   .9
                                                 Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                      1978                      1982
                                                      1992-1996




                                                         Figure 2d
                                           Math Section of NAEP, 13 Year-Old Girls
   Percentile in White Distribution
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                      .1   .2   .3     .4       .5     .6       .7     .8   .9
                                                 Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                      1978                      1982
                                                      1992-1996


Notes: The figures use math scores from the 1978, 1982 and 1992-1996 NAEP.
                                                           Figure 3a
                                           NAEP Math, 13 Year-Old Boys, Urban Areas
   Percentile in White Distribution
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                      .1   .2     .3     .4       .5     .6       .7     .8   .9
                                                   Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                        1978                      1982
                                                        1992-1996




                                                           Figure 3b
                                           NAEP Math, 13 Year-Old Girls, Urban Areas
   Percentile in White Distribution
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                      .1   .2     .3     .4       .5     .6       .7     .8   .9
                                                   Percentile in Black Distribution

                                                        1978                      1982
                                                        1992-1996


Notes: The figures use math scores from the 1978, 1982 and 1992-1996 NAEP for MSAs with
population greater than 2 million.
                              Figure 4a
                            Mean Regression
           3.2
           3.1
            3
           2.9
           2.8
Log Wage




           2.7
           2.6
           2.5
           2.4
           2.3
           2.2
           2.1
                 -2   -1                    0             1
                           Adjusted AFQT Score

                             whites              blacks




                              Figure 4b
                           Median Regression
           3.2
           3.1
            3
           2.9
           2.8
Log Wage




           2.7
           2.6
           2.5
           2.4
           2.3
           2.2
           2.1
                 -2   -1                    0             1
                           Adjusted AFQT Score

                             whites              blacks
                                             Figure 4c
                               Median Regression With Imputations
              3.2
              3.1
               3
              2.9
              2.8
   Log Wage




              2.7
              2.6
              2.5
              2.4
              2.3
              2.2
              2.1

                    -2               -1                    0                          1
                                          Adjusted AFQT Score

                                            whites               blacks


Notes: The figures show predicted values from a regression of log wages on a quadratic in
adjusted AFQT score for black and white males separately. Data are from the 2000 wave of the
NLSY79. In the median regressions for Figure 4c individuals who did not work since their 1998
interview are imputed a wage equal to one dollar.
                                              Figure 5a
                                            Mean Regression
                    11
                  10.9
                  10.8
                  10.7
                  10.6
   Log Earnings




                  10.5
                  10.4
                  10.3
                  10.2
                  10.1
                    10
                   9.9
                   9.8
                   9.7
                         -2           -1                    0                         1
                                           Adjusted AFQT Score

                                             whites              blacks




                                              Figure 5b
                                           Median Regression
                    11
                  10.9
                  10.8
                  10.7
                  10.6
   Log Earnings




                  10.5
                  10.4
                  10.3
                  10.2
                  10.1
                    10
                   9.9
                   9.8
                   9.7
                         -2           -1                    0                         1
                                           Adjusted AFQT Score

                                             whites              blacks


Notes: The figures show predicted values from a regression of log earnings on a quadratic in
adjusted AFQT score for black and white males separately. Data are from the 2000 wave of the
NLSY79.
                                                           Figure 6a
                                                  First Grade Reading - Boys

   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Percentile in White Distribution




                                       .1   .2    .3     .4       .5     .6       .7   .8     .9
                                                   Percentile in Black Distribution

                                             EEO (Spring 1965)                ECLS (Spring 2000)




                                                           Figure 6b
                                                   First Grade Reading - Girls
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Percentile in White Distribution




                                       .1   .2    .3     .4       .5     .6       .7   .8     .9
                                                   Percentile in Black Distribution

                                             EEO (Spring 1965)                ECLS (Spring 2000)


Notes: The figures use verbal and reading EEO and ECLS test scores.
