                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           URBAN GROWTH AND HOUSING SUPPLY

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Joseph Gyourko
                                             Raven E. Saks

                                         Working Paper 11097
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11097


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2005




We are grateful to the Taubman Center for State and Local Government at Harvard University and the
Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at The Wharton School of the University
of Pennsylvania for financial support. We thank the editor (Gilles Duranton), the referees, Kathy O’Regan,
Jesse Shapiro, and session participants at the Winter 2004 APPAM meetings for helpful comments.
Naturally, we are responsible for any remaining errors.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Growth and Housing Supply
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks
NBER Working Paper No. 11097
January 2005
JEL No. R0

                                           ABSTRACT

Cities are physical structures, but the modern literature on urban economic development rarely

acknowledges that fact. The elasticity of housing supply helps determine the extent to which

increases in productivity will create bigger cities or just higher paid workers and more expensive

homes. In this paper, we present a simple model that provides a framework for doing empirical

work that integrates the heterogeneity of housing supply into urban development. Empirical

analysis yields results consistent with the implications of the model that differences in the nature

of house supply across space are not only responsible for higher housing prices, but also affect

how cities respond to increases in productivity.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Joseph Gyourko
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Raven E. Saks
Harvard University
saks@fas.harvard.edu
   I.      Introduction


The modern literature on urban growth and economic geography generally ignores
housing supply. In the index of the recent Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography,
the subject of housing only appears in John Kain’s essay on racial and economic
segregation (Kain (2000)). The subject “real estate” does not appear at all. In this paper,
we argue that it is impossible to understand many aspects of urban dynamics without
understanding housing supply, and that it is difficult to think sensibly about real estate in
many contexts without understanding the urban equilibrium which determines the price
and quantity of housing.


This observation is not new, as the leading early urban economists including William
Alonso (1964), John Kain (1962, 1968), Edwin Mills (1967), and Richard Muth (1969)
were keenly focused on the interplay between housing markets and the urban economy.
However, in the years since their seminal work, real estate and urban economics
increasingly have become separate subject areas. Virtually none of the papers on urban
growth that have appeared in general interest economics journals over the past 20 years
mention the supply of housing. At the same time, the real estate literature has focused on
a variety of other issues such as housing as a financial asset that tend to be orthogonal to
housing’s larger role in economic geography.


In this paper we re-unite the topics of urban and real estate by exploring the role that
housing supply has played in mediating urban dynamics over recent decades. Our
particular interest is how the nature of supply impacts the form that urban success takes.
That is, how do differences in supply-side conditions across areas help determine whether
demand shocks translate primarily into changing prices or quantities? While our
empirical analysis at the metropolitan area level leads us away from the micro-level
issues such as segregation and bid-rent patterns that were discussed by the authors cited
above, our intellectual debt to them is clear.




                                                                                               2
Figure 1 illustrates the key issues. If a city’s housing supply is relatively elastic, we
should expect an outward shift in demand to result in an increase in population, while the
corresponding increase in housing prices should be relatively modest (see point A). Even
in the face of a major positive demand shock, unfettered new supply should prevent the
price of housing from rising much above construction costs. Moreover, new construction
helps ensure that an increase in labor demand will not lead to large increases in wages
because an elastic supply of homes helps create an elastic supply of labor. However, if
housing supply is inelastic, then positive shocks to urban productivity will have little
impact on new construction or the urban population. Because the number of homes does
not increase significantly, housing prices must rise (point B). Wages should rise as well,
both because firms have become more productive and because workers must be
compensated for rising housing prices. In contrast, if an amenity level rises in a city with
an inelastic housing supply, then nominal wages (which are determined by labor demand)
will be unchanged and housing prices will rise, implying a decline in real wages.


Our analysis begins in Section II with a review of the extraordinarily tight link between
population and the stock of housing across areas within the United States. The number of
people in an area can be thought of as a multiple of the number of housing units.
Moreover, this relationship is strong in term of growth rates, not just in the levels. To
break the tight link between the number of homes and the number of people, it would
have to be true that there is significant variation in vacancy rates or household size over
space and time. While there certainly is variation in these variables, it has not been large
enough to create meaningful changes in population across cities without commensurate
changes in the size of the local housing stock.


The correlation between housing supply and population change provides a necessary, but
not sufficient, element of the case that the nature of the supply of housing is important for
understanding urban dynamics. In principle, city growth could be completely determined
by other variables, with the housing supply simply responding to those factors.
Consequently, we discuss particular features of the housing supply that have an
exogenous impact on the course of economic growth in cities. One such factor is the



                                                                                              3
durability of housing, which implies that cities will lose housing units only very gradually
after they receive a negative shock. Recent research by Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)
examines declining cities and reports much evidence that urban decline is mediated by
durable housing. In this paper we provide additional evidence on the durability of
housing, documenting that net losses from a city’s housing stock almost never exceed 1%
per year over decade-length periods.


Another increasingly important aspect of the housing supply that has the potential to
change the pattern of economic growth in cities is land use policy. Following Saks
(2004) and Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005), we argue that housing supply has become
very inelastic in some places because of restrictive zoning and other land use regulations.
Section III presents a simple model to establish a framework for our empirical work that
integrates heterogeneity of the housing supply into urban change studies. In doing so, the
model formalizes the observation that shocks to places with more inelastic housing
supply will have bigger impacts on wage and house price growth and smaller impacts on
population growth.


Section IV provides empirical evidence of the importance of the housing supply in
metropolitan areas across the United States. Using proxies for the severity of restrictions
on new construction, we show that in places where land use regulation is less severe, the
population response to positive labor demand shocks is stronger. As high levels of land
use regulation restrict population growth, housing prices and ultimately wages are kept
high. Thus, the housing supply is important not only for understanding changes in
population within metropolitan areas, but also changes in prices within those areas as
well. A brief conclusion summarizes our results and discusses potential avenues for
future research.


   II.     Stylized Facts on Housing and Urban Dynamics


Correlations between the Housing Stock and Urban Growth




                                                                                            4
The deep connection between urban change and the housing stock is clearly evident in
the strong correlation between population levels and housing units. The top panel of
Table 1 reports the correlation between the logarithm of the number of housing units and
the logarithm of the population in every decade between 1970 and 2000 in the 316
metropolitan areas of the continental United States. The correlations are quite tight, with
an R2 of .99 in each regression. Not only is the fit of the relationship almost perfect, but
the estimated coefficients are remarkably close to one, ranging from 0.981 to 0.997
across the census years.


Of course, a tight correlation between population and housing units at a point in time
does not necessarily imply that changes in population and changes in the housing stock
also line up perfectly. To examine this issue, the bottom panel of Table 1 reports the
correlations between the change in the logarithm of population and the change in the
logarithm of the number of housing units. While the point estimates and R2s are below
those seen in the cross-section, they still reflect quite strong relationships. These findings
suggest that the overwhelming variation in population is accomplished through changing
the number of units, not in changing the number of people per unit. Nevertheless, for
completeness we next discuss the reasons why population might differ from the housing
stock—namely, vacancy rates and household size.


Vacancy Rates and Changing Household Size


The number of people in an area equals the number of housing units times the number of
people per housing unit. There are two ways in which the number of people per housing
unit can change. First, the number of people in an occupied unit can grow or contract.
Second, the vacancy rate—that is, the share of housing units that are unoccupied--can
change. In principle, if either the vacancy rate or household size is sufficiently flexible,
then the stock of housing might not be so tightly linked with the size of the population.


Examining the distribution of vacancy rates across metropolitan areas in 1990 reveals that
changes in vacancies are not likely to be a dominant explanation of changes in population



                                                                                               5
growth. The mean residential vacancy rate across our sample of metropolitan areas is
9.1%, with the standard deviation being 5.4%. There is about a 10-percentage point
difference between the 14.8% vacancy rate for the area in the 90th percentile of the
distribution and the 4.9% rate for the area in the 10th percentile of the distribution. Thus,
if a market changed from being one of the one-tenth least vacant locations in the nation to
one of the one-tenth most vacant locations, the total decline in population (holding people
per occupied unit constant) would be 9.9%. In growing areas especially, vacancy rates
are already fairly low, so there is little chance that decreases in vacancy rates could
account for population growth in those places.


Figure 2 provides additional evidence that changes in city populations are unlikely to
have been achieved through changes in vacancy rates. While there is a negative
relationship between the growth rate of population from 1990 to 2000 and the change in
the vacancy rate over the same time period, a 0.1 log point increase in population is
associated with only a 0.8 percentage point decrease in vacancy rate. This magnitude
implies that as a city grows by 10 percent, that city’s vacancy rate would decline by
eight-tenths of one percent. Furthermore, the R2 of the reverse regression reveals that
only 13% of changes in population can be explained by changes in vacancy rates during
this decade.1 Thus, population growth in cities is not likely to be achieved solely or even
largely through changes in the fraction of occupied housing units.


Even if the amount of occupied housing remains the same, changes in the local
population could occur if the number of people per household changed. For example,
rising housing prices might cause larger households to crowd into smaller homes, thus
weakening the link between the total population and the size of the housing supply.2
Over the past thirty years, the average number of people per housing unit has declined as
families have become smaller. The average number of people in each occupied housing

1
  Further evidence suggesting that vacancy rates do not play a large role in urban dynamics can be found in
Hwang and Quigley (2004), who find that local macroeconomic conditions such as income and
unemployment do not have a significant impact on vacancy rates.
2
  Although in a very different context, the issue of ‘crowding’ was central to some of the early work in
modern urban economics. In addition to the works cited above, see Kain and Quigley (1975) for an
examination of crowding in the context of race and discrimination.


                                                                                                          6
unit in our sample of metropolitan areas fell from 3.15 in 1970 to 2.56 in 2000, with the
bulk of that decline occurring in the first ten years (there were 2.75 people per household
in 1980).3 These changes help to explain how the population in certain locations such as
Detroit was able to decline more quickly than the housing stock during the 1970s. If the
typical household size in an area shrank by the national average and if no new homes
were built, the population in a metropolitan area could have fallen by as much as 13% in
the 1970s. In contrast, declines in household size were substantially smaller in the 1980s
and 1990s. Therefore, changes in household size cannot account for the changes in
population we observe during these later decades.


The weak connection between household size and metropolitan area population is
illustrated in Figure 3, which plots the relationship between the logarithms of these two
variables in 2000. The relationship is statistically significant, but it is not economically
important. The R2 from the underlying regression is only 0.06, and the dispersion
depicted indicates that there are many other factors driving population differences across
cities besides differences in household size. In other words, relatively little growth or
decline of city populations has occurred in recent decades that can be attributed to
changes in household size. Because changes in the number of occupied housing units
also cannot explain differences in city growth rates, growth must have been
accommodated through changes in the total number of housing units.


Urban Decline and Durable Housing


Previous research by Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) contends that many features of
declining cities can be understood only as the result of the durable nature of housing.
Because housing is very slow to deteriorate, the elasticity of housing supply is very low
in response to a decline in housing demand. One of the key predictions of the model in
their paper is that cities grow more quickly than they decline.


3
 Household size is defined as the number of people living in households divided by the number of
occupied housing units. The actual decline in household size is likely to have been larger than reported
between 1970 and 1980 due to a change in the definition of the population living in group quarters
(Ruggles and Brower, 2003).


                                                                                                           7
In this paper, we provide additional evidence pertaining to the durability of housing from
the American Housing Survey (AHS) and decennial Census. One useful gauge of the
durability of homes is how rarely they disappear from the housing stock, which can be
assessed using the panel structure of the AHS. We calculated the permanent loss rates of
housing units using central city data from the national core files over the four two-year
periods between 1985 and 1993. Every two years, between 1.3 and 1.8 percent of
housing units either permanently exit the housing stock or suffer such severe damage as
to render the units uninhabitable. These values suggest that the housing stock of a city is
unlikely to decline by more than 1 percent per year or 10 percent per decade.


Low rates of housing destruction imply that the distribution of growth rates of the
housing stock will be skewed to the left. In Table 2, we report data on the fastest and
slowest growing cities during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. The sample includes all cities
with more than 100,000 residents at the beginning of each decade. We look at cities here
instead of metropolitan areas because only central cities have experienced declines in
demand during the past several decades. Even in metropolitan areas like Detroit, the
demand for housing in the suburbs has increased over time.


Some cities obviously have had the ability to expand their housing stock extremely
rapidly. Housing units in Las Vegas grew by approximately 50% in both the 1980s and
the 1990s. The stock of units in Colorado Springs grew by more than 60% during the
1970s. While there seems almost no upper bound on growth, declines rarely exceed 10%
of the beginning of decade stock. Over the entire 30-year period, in only five cases did a
city lose 11% or more of its housing stock in a single decade: St. Louis in the 1970s (-
16.5%), Detroit in both the 1970s and 1980s, (-11.5% and 14%, respectively), and Gary
and Newark in the 1980s (-14.5% and -16.9%, respectively). This lower bound on the
decline in housing units is consistent with the annual rate of housing loss of no more than
1% calculated just above using the AHS. In addition, the biggest population declines
have only been modestly more severe than the corresponding changes in the housing
stock (see Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)).



                                                                                            8
In summary, many of America’s declining cities have housing prices that are too low to
justify new construction. To understand the population and employment dynamics of this
group, it is particularly important to recognize the key role played by durability in
rendering housing supply very inelastic in these places. Because many of the
ramifications of this issue are explored in great detail in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005), the
remainder of this paper will focus on the impact of the housing supply in areas with high
or rising housing demand.


       III.           Housing Supply and Urban Dynamics: An Empirical Framework


To illustrate the role of the housing supply in urban housing and labor markets, we
consider an economy composed of many metropolitan areas, each denoted by “j”.
Following much of the urban growth literature, we assume that workers are
homogeneous. Indifference across metropolitan areas implies that all workers must
receive a real reservation utility equal to U in every location. Utility in each location
equals C j + W j − R j , where C j is a city-specific amenity flow consumed by residents,

W j is the city-specific wage paid to workers, and R j is the cost of housing in city j.

Because average transportation costs do not vary significantly across metropolitan areas,
we simplify the algebra by abstracting from that feature of the urban landscape.4
Together, our assumptions imply the familiar equilibrium relationship of
U + Rj =Wj +C j .


To capture labor demand, we assume that a distribution of tasks within the city can be
indexed by productivity. Specifically, productive tasks are characterized by an
exponential distribution, so that the number of tasks with productivity greater than W j is
    α ( A j −W j )
e                    . The parameter Aj reflects the level of productivity in each location, with a


4
 According to the 2000 Census, the average commuting time across all metropolitan areas (defined as
MSAs or CMSAs) was 23 minutes with a standard deviation of only 3 minutes. Furthermore, more than
85% of the areas had an average commuting time between 20 and 30 minutes.


                                                                                                      9
higher value implying that a larger number of tasks have productivity greater than Wj. At
a given wage, productive opportunities will be exploited to the point where the output of
the marginal activity equals the wage. Thus, total labor demand is determined by
Log ( N j ) = αA j − αW j , where N j denotes city employment.


We close the system by characterizing the housing market. There are several issues that
make housing complex. Because housing is durable, the supply of housing will be
perfectly inelastic in areas where rents are not high enough to justify new construction. If
the demand for housing is sufficiently high, then the price of housing will be determined
by the cost of new construction. This cost is composed of the physical cost of new
construction plus any costs related to regulatory barriers or other limits on housing
supply. We make the simplifying assumption that the cost of new construction is based
on a fixed, city-specific factor (Kj) and the density of housing units that already exist in
the area. This dependence on density is meant to capture the myriad ways that housing
supply regulations can increase the cost of construction, and will be discussed in more
detail in Section IV. Assuming that the number of housing units is equal to the size of
the population, the cost of construction in each city becomes K j + δLog ( N j / L j ) , where

L j reflects the land area in the city.5 A high value of means that a given increase in the

city’s population density is associated with a large increase in construction costs, which
implies that the housing supply is more inelastic. To convert housing prices into rent, we
assume that rent equals a fixed capitalization rate (denoted ρ ) times construction costs.
We let H j denote housing prices in the city, so that R j = ρ H j .


Combining the three separate markets shows that wages, rents and population in a non-
declining city are determined by the following equations:




5
 The assumption that the number of housing units equals the size of the labor force implies that there is no
commuting between locations. Because the unit of analysis in our empirical work is the metropolitan area
(which defines labor market areas in the United States), the degree of inter-area commuting is small. The
2000 Census reports that 90% of all employed residents of metropolitan areas worked in the same area in
which they lived.


                                                                                                          10
                         αA j + αC j + αρδLog ( L j ) − α U − αρK j
(1) Log ( N j ) =                                                                             ,
                                               1 + αρδ
             αρδA j + U + ρK j − C j − ρδLog ( L j )
(2) W j =                                            , and
                           1 + αρδ
              αδA j + αδC j + K j − δLog ( L j ) − αδ U
(3) H j =                                                                       .
                                      1 + αρδ


While our empirical analysis below focuses on productivity shocks, the comparative
statics associated with a change in productivity ( A j ) or a change in the attractiveness of

an area ( C j ) are summarized in Table 3. If an area becomes more productive, then

population, wages and housing prices all increase. If an area becomes more attractive,
then housing prices and population will rise, but wages will fall.


Next we derive implications for the dynamic behavior of these variables by considering
exogenous variation in the level of productivity or amenities. To be specific, we assume

that A j ,t +1 − A j ,t =        β Ak X kj ,t +ε Aj ,t and C j ,t +1 − C j ,t =                   β Ck X kj ,t +ε Cj ,t , where X kj ,t are
                             k                                                               k

city-specific characteristics at time t. One example of a component of X jA,t is the skill

composition of the city. An increase in the average education of the labor force will
cause productivity, and thus Aj,t to rise. Substituting these expressions into equations (1)-
(3) and assuming that all other factors remain constant over time, the expressions for
changes in population, wages and housing prices become:
               N j ,t +1                  α                                                 α
(1’) Log
                N j ,t
                           = IN +
                                       1 + αρδ
                                                          (β    k
                                                                A           )
                                                                     + β Ck X kj ,t +
                                                                                         1 + αρδ
                                                                                                 (ε jA,t + ε Cj ,t )
                                                      k


                                        αρδ                              β Ck              αρδ                 1
(2’) W j , t +1 − W j , t +1 = I W +                           β Ak −         X kj , t +         ε jA, t −         ε Cj , t
                                       1 + αρδ        k                 αρδ              1 + αρδ           1 + αρδ

                                        αδ                                                 αδ
(3’) H j ,t +1 − H j ,t = I H +
                                     1 + αρδ
                                                          (β   k
                                                               A    + β Ck )X kj ,t +
                                                                                        1 + αρδ
                                                                                                (ε jA,t + ε Cj ,t )
                                                  k




                                                                                                                                          11
where I i for i=N, W, Q are city-specific intercept terms that are constant over time. By
assumption, the error terms ε j,At and ε Cj,t are mean zero and orthogonal to the X kj ,t terms.


Equations (1’), (2’) and (3’) describe the evolution of employment, wages and housing
prices over time as a function of changes in productivity and consumer amenities. Given
any X kj ,t variable that is uncorrelated with the error terms, we can estimate its effect on

each of three dependent variables.6 The regression coefficients from that estimation then
can be used to determine the values of δ and ρ. More specifically, any variable X kj ,t that

leads to higher productivity will have an effect equal to those reported in the first column
of Table 3 multiplied by β Ak . Similarly, a X kj ,t that leads to an increase in consumption

amenities will have an effect equal to those shown in the second column of Table 3
multiplied by a factor of β Ck .


Closer examination of Table 3 reveals that and can be determined by calculating the
ratio of the effects of productivity or amenity shocks on each of the outcome variables.
For example, the effect of an increase in productivity on changes in housing prices is
          αδ                                                          α
β Ak           , while the effect on changes in employment is β Ak         . The ratio of
       1 + αρδ                                                     1 + αρδ
these two coefficients is . In the empirical analysis in Section IV, we will take
advantage of this relationship to estimate variation in the value of across metropolitan
areas. This method of estimating the elasticity of housing supply is particularly useful
because the parameter α cancels out of the ratio. In principle, we can obtain unbiased
estimates of even if there are systematic differences in productivity (or ) across areas.


Our primary interest is in differences in across areas because they reflect variation in
the elasticity of housing supply. Since the impact of productivity on population is
decreasing in (see row 1, column 1 of Table 3), we expect variables that raise

6
  In contrast with a dynamic growth model, predicted changes in housing prices, wages and population are
not derived from adjustment to a long-run equilibrium. Rather, growth in these endogenous variables
results from the assumption of exogenous changes in productivity and the value of amenities.


                                                                                                      12
productivity to be associated with larger increases in population in places where the
housing supply is more elastic (i.e., where δ is low). Conversely, the effect of a
productivity shock on wages and housing prices will be smaller in these areas. In places
where housing supply is inelastic, we expect variables that raise productivity to be
associated with relatively small increases in population, while the effects on wages and
housing prices should be larger. The next section evaluates these predictions using data
on metropolitan areas in the United States during the past twenty years.


    IV.      Estimation


The unit of analysis in this section is a metropolitan area, as determined by 1999 Census
Bureau definitions.7 These areas are defined expressly to encompass the entire labor
market in each geographic location. If we were to focus instead on a smaller geographic
unit, there would be several margins of adjustment that could alleviate the effect of
housing supply constraints on any particular municipal jurisdiction. For example, both
inter-area commuting and the expansion of the suburbs will cause housing supply
constraints to be less binding in primary central cities. By considering the entire
metropolitan area, we are able to observe the effect of the housing supply on the entire
local housing and labor market.


The density of housing units is one obvious proxy for the elasticity of housing supply in a
metropolitan area. There is little argument that the less available is land, the more
difficult it is to build. The cost per square foot in multi-floor apartments is considerably
higher than the cost per square foot to build a single-family detached homes,8 and
congestion in a city can increase the difficulty of building in many other ways. However,
places that are densely built generally also are locations where housing demand is
relatively high. Thus, empirically it is difficult to separate out the effect of a limited
housing supply in dense locations from higher housing demand.

7
  By aggregating all quantities from county-level data, we keep the geographic area encompassed by each
metropolitan area constant over time.
8
  A primary reason that costs are lower in single-family buildings is that they require neither elevators nor
interior/exterior stairwells for exit routes. Taller structures are more complex and require more expensive
components and materials.


                                                                                                            13
Consequently, we use a measure of constraints on the housing supply that is constructed
from data on state and local government land use policies. New construction should
respond readily to increases in demand in areas where housing markets are largely
unfettered. In contrast, new supply should be more inelastic in housing markets with
binding development restrictions. Thus, differences in these regulations across locations
reflect variation in the elasticity of housing supply.9 While some regulations may be
implemented as a reaction to high housing demand, these policies almost certainly are
more exogenous than reduced-form measures like urban density. In addition, we exclude
from our analysis any policies such as growth controls that are likely to have been
adopted directly in response to high growth.


One disadvantage to relying on land use regulations is that the regulatory environment
has become exceedingly complex, thus making the severity of regulatory constraints
difficult to measure. There are many possible avenues by which land use regulations can
delay a construction project or halt it entirely. A few examples include zoning boards,
city councils, the court system, public health officials, and wetlands conservation
reviews. The very richness of the regulatory environment means that there is no one law
or regulatory structure that would allow us to identify some metropolitan areas as being
more onerously regulated compared with others. Moreover, it is not obvious that the
rules on the books necessarily reflect the full extent of the zoning environment.10 While
it is possible to use comparisons within a narrow geographic area to assess the impact of
particular types of regulations (e.g., as in Katz and Rosen (1987)), such comparisons
across metropolitan areas are much more difficult. However, measurement error of this
type will have its standard effect of biasing our estimates of the effect of regulation
towards zero. Hence, this empirical strategy only makes it more difficult to show that the
nature of housing supply helps determines whether urban success is reflected more in
higher quantitities (of people or homes) or in higher prices (of house values or incomes).


9
  A growing literature has documented a significant impact of these types of regulations on new
construction and housing prices. For example, see Glaeser and Gyourko (2003), Glaeser, Gyourko, and
Saks (2005), Malpezzi (1996), and Mayer and Somerville (2000).
10
   See Warner and Molotch (2000) for some convincing examples.


                                                                                                      14
We assess the strength of the regulatory environment in each metropolitan area using
evidence from two surveys of land use regulation. The first is the Wharton land use
control survey conducted by Linneman, et. al. (1990) that documents various constraints
on residential development for 60 metropolitan areas. Because the laws themselves may
not be all that informative, we use information on the length of time needed for permits to
be processed and other broad measures of the severity of the regulatory environment.11
The second survey we use is a study of statewide regulations carried out by the American
Institute of Planners (1976). Although local governments control most zoning and land
use policies, states can influence residential development in a variety of ways. For
example, they can restrict development in certain areas, require municipalities to
implement comprehensive land-use planning strategies, and require developers to file
environmental impact statements. An additional benefit to considering statewide
regulations is that they are more likely to be unrelated to local idiosyncratic factors that
influence housing demand in individual metropolitan areas.12


For each survey, we create an index of housing supply regulation that is normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The final regulatory index is a
simple average of these two component indexes. It is scaled to have a mean of zero, a
standard deviation of one, and is increasing in the amount of regulation. Despite the
breadth of the regulations used to compile this index, it does not describe all aspects of
the elasticity of housing supply. Other factors such as congestion costs and the
availability of vacant land also contribute to differences in the supply of housing. To the
extent that these factors are correlated with the severity of housing supply regulation, our



11
   To be specific, the six survey questions we use are: the average length of time for re-zoning permits to
be approved, the average length of time for subdivision permits to be approved, the fraction of zoning
applications approved, a rating of the adequacy of the provision of infrastructure for growth needs, a rating
of the importance of regulation in the development process, and the amount of impact fees per housing unit.
12
   The specific regulations that make up this index are: comprehensive land use planning, coastal zone
management plans, wetlands management regulations, floodplain management, designation of some
locations as “critical” for land use regulation, enabling legislation for “new towns,” requirement for
environmental impact statements, and regulations preempting local regulations for “developments of
greater than local impact.”


                                                                                                          15
estimates will reflect the effect of having an inelastic housing supply in general, rather
than the impact of regulation alone.


We begin by estimating equations suggested by the expressions (1’), (2’) and (3’), where
changes in the logarithm of population, per capita income and housing prices are
regressed on metropolitan-level characteristics that predict economic growth (i.e.,
variables that belong in the set of X kj ,t ). The first predictor of growth considered is based

on the industrial composition of each metropolitan area. Following Bartik (1991), we
compute the employment share of each industry multiplied by the growth in the industry
over the subsequent decade using county-level employment data at the two-digit SIC
level from County Business Patterns. This measure predicts the extent to which
employment in the area would have grown if the distribution of industries had stayed at
its initial level and all firms in the industry had grown at exactly the same rate as the
national average. The second predictor of local economic growth used is the initial share
of adults with at least a bachelor’s degree. A host of research documents a strong
positive correlation between the skill level of a city’s population and city growth in recent
decades. We take this relationship as evidence that a larger amount of human capital in a
city increases productivity (Glaeser and Saiz 2003, Moretti 2004a,b).13


The model in Section III predicts that positive shocks to the demand for housing will
have a greater impact on population in areas with a more elastic housing supply, while
wages and housing prices should be more heavily affected in more inelastic places.
Therefore, our key empirical test will be to estimate the effect of these measures of
productivity in heavily versus lightly regulated areas. Due to concerns about
measurement error in the regulation index, we consider a dichotomous division rather
than treating regulation as a continuous variable. We define metropolitan areas with a
value of the regulation index greater than .45 to be locations with high regulation, which


13
   The level of educational achievement could be correlated with the severity of housing supply restrictions
if more highly educated homeowners are more adept at controlling local politics to such ends. However,
this will not bias us to find larger productivity effects. Rather, such a connection will make the impact of
an increase in productivity smaller than it would have been otherwise, thereby biasing our estimated
coefficient towards zero.


                                                                                                         16
comprises the highest third of the areas in our sample. Because there are a large number
of areas clustered around the median, we believe this break point creates a more
reasonable distinction between the more and less regulated areas. Dividing the areas
around the median would arbitrarily categorize many similar communities into different
groups.14


All regressions are estimated using decadal changes in population, wages and housing
prices from 1980-1990 and 1990-2000. Observations from both decades are pooled
together with a time dummy included to allow the intercept to differ across decades.
Using 10-year changes means that our estimates are derived from the relatively long-run
behavior of population, wages and housing prices.15 Housing prices are measured using
the median housing price from the 1990 Census as a base and extrapolating this level to
the years 1980 and 2000 with constant-quality price indexes published by the Office of
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.16 We proxy for wages using income per capita in
each metropolitan area as published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.


The top panel of Table 4 reports estimates from specifications in which industrial labor
demand is used as a proxy for productivity. The coefficients in the first row reflect the
impact of the labor demand variable in the typical low-regulation metropolitan area,
while those in the second row report the differential effect of this variable in an area with
a highly-regulated housing supply. Stronger labor demand is associated with higher

14
   The results presented below do not change qualitatively if we choose alternate cutoffs to define highly-
regulated areas or if we use this index as a continuous variable. However, the coefficient estimates are less
precisely estimated, especially if a continuous measure of regulatory constraint is used. The data just are
too noisy for us to be able to say anything meaningful about marginal changes in the constraint index.
15
   Due to time lags in the construction process, the short-run dynamics of these variables could be different.
See Saks (2004) for a dynamic model of metropolitan area housing and labor markets.
16
   There are two advantages to using the OFHEO price indexes instead of Census data on median housing
values or rents. Because the definition of metropolitan areas changed over time, median housing values in
growing places will reflect a larger geographic area in 2000 than in prior decades. If the average housing
price is lower in the outlying regions of a metropolitan area, the overall change in the median housing value
will be biased downward. Another problem with using the Census data is that a portion of the change in
housing values will reflect changes in the quality of housing, which could differ systematically across
metropolitan areas. Using the OFHEO price indexes solves both of these problems because these indexes
maintain constant definitions of metropolitan areas over time. Also, housing price changes are calculated
from repeated sales of the same house, which avoids the bulk of the concern over changes in quality.
Nevertheless, the results we present below are not materially different from those obtained when using
median housing values instead of the OFHEO price indexes.


                                                                                                           17
population and income growth (significant at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively), but
not higher house price appreciation. The coefficient of 1.28 indicates that this labor
demand proxy strongly predicts population growth in low-regulation metropolitan areas.
We cannot reject the null that population rises proportionately with predicted labor
demand. A 1% increase in labor demand is also associated with $92 higher real wage
growth. This effect is equivalent to about 1/3 of a standard deviation of changes in
income, so the size of this effect is not large economically. Finally, stronger labor
demand is not associated with higher house price appreciation in the typical market. The
point estimate is negative, but it is both small in economic magnitude and not close to
being statistically significant.


The impacts of the coefficients on the interaction between this labor demand variable and
the degree of housing supply regulation are reported in the second row. These results
indicate that more inelastically supplied markets have weaker population growth (column
1) and stronger house price appreciation (column 3) in response to an increase in labor
demand (with both coefficients being significant at the 10% level), but there is no
differential impact found for income. The magnitudes of the population growth and
house price appreciation effects are economically important. The effect of labor demand
on population growth is 50% lower in areas with highly regulated housing markets. An
increase in labor demand had no substantial effect on housing prices in less regulated
areas, but a 1% increase in labor demand in areas with strongly regulated housing
supplies is associated with an increase in housing prices of $19,000 per year. Compared
with the standard deviation of changes in housing prices of $3,467 in this sample, the
magnitude of this effect is quite large.


The second panel of Table 4 reports results using the initial share of the adult population
with a college degree to reflect productivity differences. The findings in the first row are
qualitatively similar to those in the top panel, and show that stronger labor demand is
associated with significantly higher population growth and real income growth, but not
higher real house price appreciation. These estimates imply that metropolitan areas with
1% more college-educated workers experienced .09% greater population growth in less



                                                                                          18
regulated areas, an effect that is one tenth the size of the effect of predicted labor demand.
The effect of education on wages is also somewhat smaller.


The interaction terms in the second row of this panel are all qualitatively consistent with
the predictions of our model. In areas of high housing supply regulation, an increase in
the share of college educated workers has an effect on wages that is 1.4 times as large as
the effect in less regulated areas. The effect on changes in housing prices is also
significantly greater than zero; a 1% increase in the share of college educated workers is
associated with $237 higher housing price growth per year, which is about equivalent to
the standard deviation of changes in housing prices. Finally, the effect of education on
population growth is 2/3 smaller in highly regulated areas, although it is not statistically
significant.


Even though noise in the measurement of severity of housing supply regulations and
unobservable heterogeneity across locations make it difficult to estimate effects precisely
from a cross-sectional comparison of metropolitan areas, these results are quite consistent
with the implications of the model. Increases in productivity have a stronger impact on
income and housing prices and a weaker impact on population growth in areas with more
housing supply regulation.


To improve the precision of our estimates, we next combine both measures of
productivity in a single regression and constrain the coefficients to be the same for both
variables. In order to impose this restriction, both productivity variables are first
normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The results from this
specification are reported in the bottom panel of Table 4. As before, stronger demand is
associated with higher population and income growth in the typical market with less
housing supply regulation, but increases in productivity have no statistically or
economically significant effect on housing prices. The interaction terms show that
highly-regulated areas have significantly less population growth in response to an
increase in labor demand, while housing prices are significantly higher. Real incomes
also are higher, but that effect is significant only at the 18% level. Again, these results



                                                                                              19
are all qualitatively consistent with the predictions of the model and the magnitudes are
considerable: an increase in productivity has triple the effect on population growth in
less regulated areas, while its effect on housing prices is 40% smaller.


Next, we use these coefficient estimates from the bottom two rows of Table 4 to infer
values of the parameters of the model. If we assume that our labor demand and human
capital variables operate solely by increasing productivity and not by increasing
amenities, then comparing the coefficients across equations provides back-of-the-
envelope estimates of δ and ρ . As can readily be determined by forming the ratio of
the formulae in the 2nd and 3rd rows of column one in Table 3, the ratio of the coefficients
in the income and housing regressions gives us an estimate of ρ , the extent to which
higher housing prices translate into higher user costs of housing. When using both
productivity variables combined, the estimates of               are 0.22 in low-regulation areas and
                                   17
.11 in high-regulation areas.


The value of δ can be inferred by the ratio of the coefficient on productivity in the house
price growth regression to that in the population growth regression (i.e., compute the ratio
of the term in the third row of column one of Table 3 to that in the first row of the first
column). The implied values of are 50,781 in low-regulation areas and 625,079 in
high-regulation locations. The economic interpretation of these numbers is that they
reflect the amount that housing prices rise with a one log point (approximately 100
percent) increase in the population density of the metropolitan area. Thus, an estimated
value of δ equal to 600,000 means that if the density of the area rises by 10 percent,
housing prices will rise by about $60,000. From our perspective, the important point is
the vast difference between the high and low regulation areas. In the typical low-
regulation metropolitan area, a 10 percent increase in population appears to raise housing
costs by only about $5,000. In high regulation areas, the same percentage change in
population raises housing costs by $60,000, or more than ten times as much. Thus, the


17
  In terms of gauging the sensibility of these results, the estimate for high-regulation locations are in line
with user cost estimates reported by Poterba (1992). User costs do change over time for a variety of
reasons, but the 0.22 estimate is high compared to all calculations of which we are aware.


                                                                                                             20
impact of an increase in productivity in highly-regulated metropolitan areas appears to be
substantially stronger.


A more statistically precise way to estimate δ is to combine the equations in a joint
system and restrict ρ to some reasonable value. We set =0.15 and estimate the system
of equations constraining the effects of both productivity shocks to be the same.18 In
low-regulation areas, δ =61,519 (s.e.=62,306), while it equals 525,891 (s.e.=328,017) in
high-regulation areas. While we again find large differences between low and high-
regulation areas, the estimates are imprecise enough that we cannot reject the hypothesis
that the housing supply elasticities are equal in the two areas. In future work, we hope to
explore other methods that will allow us to estimate these coefficients more precisely.19


     V.      Conclusion


Metropolitan areas are not just made up of people and firms, but of bricks and mortar as
well. The growth and decline of a region’s economy is mediated by the physical
structure of the place. In declining areas, housing prices and incomes fall long before
houses collapse. Until those houses collapse, population levels in cities remain high.
Thus, urban populations decline slowly because housing and other infrastructure is
durable.



18
   To be specific, a joint system of three equations with changes in population, real income per capita, and
real housing prices as the dependent variables is estimated. The independent variables in each equation are
the productivity shock (either predicted changes in labor demand or the share of college educated), an
indicator for highly regulated areas, and the interaction between the two. Then, is calculated after
imposing the nonlinear restriction that the ratio of the coefficient on the productivity shock in the housing
price equation to the same coefficient in the wage equation must equal 0.15.
19
   We also experimented with using amenities rather than productivity differences to identify the
parameters of the model. Specifically, we used mean January temperature to reflect amenity differences
across locations. Because the climate has not changed much over the past decade, this variable is more
naturally a determinant of the level of an amenity, rather than a change in the amenity. As long as mean
January temperature is exogenous (i.e., not correlated with omitted variables), the coefficients based on
estimating the model in levels of log population, house prices and incomes (i.e., equations (1)-(3)) should
be the same as those from (1’)-(3’). The results from estimating these equations are not very precise, but
they tend to match the predictions of the model qualitatively. While better amenity data and a clearer
understanding of the channels through which the amenity variable impacts urban development might help
improve these estimates, unobservable heterogeneity across metropolitan areas is likely to present a
substantially larger problem in estimating these equations in levels.


                                                                                                          21
Not only is the pace of urban decline determined by the durability of residential
structures, but urban expansion is determined by the elasticity of the supply of housing as
well. In places where limited regulation and low density facilitate the construction of
new homes, urban success is more likely to take the form of higher population levels. In
contrast, in places with high density and high levels of regulation, urban success is more
likely to leave population levels relatively unchanged while leading to higher levels of
housing prices and income. Thus, it is impossible to understand that both Cambridge,
MA, and Las Vegas, NV, were successful cities in the 1990s without recognizing that
Cambridge faces an enormously restrictive building environment and Las Vegas does
not.


In addition, this framework helps us better comprehend a variety of existing results in
urban economics. For example, elastic housing supply in many markets is the natural
explanation for why ‘quality of life’ studies report greater compensating differentials via
wages in the labor market than via house prices in the land market (e.g., Blomquist,
Berger, and Hoehn (1988); Gyourko and Tracy (1991)). In a related vein, this view of
urban development also suggests that any other research that considers how differences in
policy are capitalized in housing values should take heterogeneity in housing supply
conditions into account. Because there can be no capitalization in places with a perfectly
elastic supply of housing, the absence of capitalization does not necessarily imply
anything about the effects of a policy. Another area of research that can be better
understood by recognizing the role of the housing supply is the mean reversion of urban
density and population documented by Eaton and Eckstein (1994). In particular, the
neutral impact of density may reflect a positive influence of demand for the city that is
offset by increasingly binding housing constraints. Other recent research investigating
the impact of education on urban growth that finds differential effects for California areas
(e.g., Glaeser and Shapiro (2003)) is best understood as reflecting inelastic supply in the
housing market.


Overall, our results strongly suggests that scholars and policy makers must recognize that
housing and real estate cannot be seen as research areas apart from the mainstream of



                                                                                            22
urban economics. Those interested in urban and regional growth must think about
housing markets, and in particular the nature of the housing supply. After all, firms in a
region cannot expand employment without new homes to house new workers. Those
who care most about real estate and housing markets are likewise dependent on
understanding the urban markets that determine prices. Moreover, it is important for
researchers from both disciplines to recognize the crucial role that the housing supply
plays in creating differences in housing and labor markets across metropolitan areas.
While our analysis focuses on the United States, its implications apply anywhere in the
world where meaningful differences in the supply of housing markets exist.




                                                                                          23
                                Selected References

American Institute of Planners (1976). Survey of State Land Use Planning Activity.
  Washington, DC: Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Alonso, William (1964). Location and Land Use. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
      Press.

Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development
        Policies?, Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Blomquist, Berger, and Hoehn (1988). “New Estimates of the Quality of Life in Urban
      Areas”, American Economic Review, Vol. 78 (March): 89-107.

Case, Karl and Christopher Mayer, “Housing Price Dynamics Within a Metropolitan
       Area,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 26.

Eaton, Jonathon and Zvi Eckstein (1994). “Cities and Growth: Theory and Evidence
       from France and Japan”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 27, no. 4:
       443-474.

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko (2005). “Urban Decline and Durable Housing”,
       Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

______________________________ (2003). “The Impact of Zoning on Housing
      Affordability”, Economic Policy Review, Vol. 9, no 2 (June 2003): 21-39,
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko and Raven Saks (2005). “Why Is Manhattan So
       Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in House Prices”, Journal of Law and
       Economics, forthcoming.

Glaeser, Edward and Albert Saiz (2003). “The Rise of the Skilled City”, NBER Working
       Paper 10191.

Glaeser, Edward and Jesse Shapiro (2003). “Urban Growth in the 1990s: Is City Living
       Back?”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 43, no. 1: 139-165.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1991). “The Structure of Local Public Finance and
      the Quality of Life”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, no. 4: 774-806.

Hwang, Min and John Quigley (2004). “Economic Fundamentals in Local Housing
     Markets: Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Regions,” Unpublished Working
     Paper, February 2004.

Kain, John (1962). “The Journey to Work as a Determinant of Residential Location”,


                                                                                     24
       Papers of the Regional Science Association, IX: 137-160.

_________ (1968a). “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan
      Decentralization”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 82, no. 2: 175-197.

_________ (1968b). “The Distribution and Movement of Jobs and Industry” in James Q.
      Wilson (ed) The Metropolitan Enigma. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
      Press.

__________(2000). “Racial and economic segregation in US metropolitan areas,” in
      Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, Gordon L. Clark, Maryann P.
      Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler eds. New York : Oxford University Press, 2000.

Kain, John and John Quigley. Housing Markets and Racial Discrimination: A Micro
       Economic Analysis. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.

Katz, Lawrence and Kenneth Rosen. “The Interjurisdictional Effects of Growth Controls
   on Housing Prices”, Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 30, no. 1 (1987): 149-160.

Linneman, Peter, Anita Summers, Nancy Brooks, and Henry Buist (1990). “The State of
      Local Growth Management”, Wharton Real Estate Center Working Paper No. 81,
      The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Malpezzi, Stephen (1996). “Housing Prices, Externalities and Regulation in the U.S.
      Metropolitan Areas,” Journal of Housing Research, 7(2): 209-241.

Mayer, Christopher J. and C. Tsuriel Somerville (2000). “Land Use Regulation and New
       Construction,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 30, .

Mills, Edwin (1967). “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan
        Area”, American Economic Review, LVII(2): 197-210.

Moretti, Enrico (2004a). “Human Capital Externalities in Cities” in J.V. Henderson and
       J-F. Thisse (eds) Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 4.
       Amsterdam: North-Holland.

____________ (2004b). “Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence
      from Plant-Level Production Functions”, American Economic Review, Vol. 94,
      no. 3: 656-690.

Muth, Richard (1969). Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Peiser, Richard and Lawrence Smith (1985). “Homeownership Returns, Tenure Choice
    and Inflation”, American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association Journal,
    Vol. 13 (Winter): 343-60.




                                                                                     25
Poterba, James (1992). “Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers,”
       American Economic Review, Vol. 82, no. 2: 237-242.

R. S. Means (2000a). Residential Cost Data, 19th Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company.

_________ (2000b). Square Foot Costs, 21st Annual Edition, R.S. Means Company.

Ruggles, Steven and Susan Brower (2003). “Measurement of Household and Family
      Composition in the United States, 1850-2000.” Population and Development
      Review 29(1): 73-101.

Saks, Raven E. (2004). “Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on
       Metropolitan Area Employment Growth”. Working Paper.

Warner, Keen and Harvey Molotch. (2000). Building Rules. How Local Controls Shape
      Community Environments and Economies. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.




                                                                                  26
                              Table 1:
        Metropolitan Area Housing and Population Since 1970:
                         Levels and Changes
         Levels: Log Housing Unitst = t + Log Populationt + t
       Year (t)                                     R2
                      (standard error)
                           0.995
      1970                                         0.99
                          (0.005)
                           0.997
      1980                                         0.99
                          (0.005)
                           0.995
      1990                                         0.99
                          (0.005)
                           0.981
      2000                                         0.99
                          (0.005)
Changes: Log Change Housing Unitst = t + Log Change Populationt +           t

      Decade (t)                                             R2
                           (standard error)
                                1.041
     1970-1980                                              0.95
                               (0.014)
                                0.861
     1980-1990                                              0.88
                               (0.018)
                                0.765
     1990-2000                                              0.81
                               (0.021)

Note: Sample includes 316 metropolitan areas within the continental United States.
Metropolitan area boundaries are based on their 1999 definitions, as issued by the Office
of Management and Budget.




                                                                                       27
                              Table 2:
                        Housing Unit Growth
                  Cities With 100,000+ Residents
                             1970-1980
           Bottom Five                        Top Five
St. Louis              -16.5%     Colorado Springs          64.1%
Detroit                -11.5%     Austin                    53.7%
Cleveland              -9.8%      Albuquerque               52.2%
Buffalo                -6.0%      Stockton                  48.4%
Pittsburgh             -5.8%      San Jose                  46.4%
                             1980-1990
           Bottom Five                        Top Five
Newark                 -16.9%     Las Vegas                 49.1%
Gary                   -14.5%     Raleigh                   47.1%
Detroit                -14.0%     Virginia Beach            46.9%
Youngstown             -10.0%     Austin                    39.3%
Dayton                 -7.7%      Fresno                    37.7%
                             1990-2000
           Bottom Five                        Top Five
Gary                   -10.5%     Las Vegas                 53.5%
Hartford               -10.3%     Charlotte                 28.8%
St. Louis              -10.2%     Raleigh                   25.0%
Youngstown             -9.6%      Austin                    22.3%
Detroit                -9.3%      Winston-Salem             21.3%

Data source: Decennial censuses for 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. Housing units defined to
include owner-occupied and rental units.




                                                                                   28
                   Table 3: Comparative Statics Results for the Effects of
                      Productivity and Amenities on Urban Growth

                                     Productivity (Aj)                     Amenities (Cj)
Ln(Population)                           α                                    α
                                      1 + αρδ                              1 + αρδ
Wages                                      1             αρδ                       1
                                                   =                       −
                                               1       1 + αρδ                  1 + αρδ
                                      1+
                                           αρδ
Housing prices                        1        1              αδ            1       1            αδ
                                                       =                                  =
                                      ρ 1+ 1               1 + αρδ          ρ 1+ 1            1 + αρδ
                                          αρδ                                   αρδ
Note. Each cell shows the effect of a 1-unit increase in either productivity or amenities on each of the
variables in the left-hand column. See the text and equations (1)-(3) for details.




                                                                                                           29
              Table 4: Effects of Productivity Shocks on Changes in Income/Capita,
                           Housing Prices and Population, 1980-2000

                                                  Ln(Population)          Income/capita        Housing
                                                                                             prices
Labor Demand
  Labor demand                                         1.28**                9240*                -19294
                                                        (.40)                (5148)              (74217)
  Labor demand*High Regulation                          -.63*                 -244               190597*
                                                        (.37)                (6903)              (97074)
Share of Population with Bachelors Degree1
  Pop. Share                                           .091**                2223**               17286
                                                        (.035)                (425)              (11271)
  Pop. Share*High Regulation                            -.063                3161**              23764**
                                                        (.043)               (1434)               (8167)
Both productivity shocks
  Both shocks (normalized)                            .0040**                 45**                  195
                                                       (.0012)                (12)                 (197)
  Productivity*High Regulation                        -.0023*                  66                  851**
                                                       (.0013)                (48)                 (293)
      Note. Each cell shows results from a separate regression with 118 observations. All regressions include a
      dummy variable for high regulation and a dummy variable for the 1990-2000 period. Standard errors are in
      parentheses and are clustered by state.
      1. Share of population with a BA degree in initial year (1980 for 1980-1990 changes and
      1990 for 1990-2000 changes).




                                                                                                            30
Figure 1: The Nature of Housing Supply and the Impacts of Demand Shocks




                                     MA
                                                   Inelastic
                                     Supply        Supply


                                          B
  Housing Price and Wages




                                                                 Texas
                                                                 Supply
                                                               Elastic
                                                               Supply


                                  Rise in Demand
                                             A


                                                               New Demand
                             Old Demand
                            Number of Homes
                              Number of Homes and Population




                                                                            31
Figure 2: Changes in Population and Vacancy Rates, 1990-2000


                                     .06
                                                                                 Rocky Mo
                                                                                                                                                                             Yu ma , AZ
                                                                                          Tusca loo                                   Gre envi l
                                                     Ann iston
Change in Vac ancy Rate, 1990-2000




                                                                                     Gol dsbor
                                                                Danvi
                                                                Sumter,    lle
                                     .03        U tica-Ro                  Dothan,     Florence
                                                                                              Corvalli
                                                                                            Faye       ttev
                                                            Cumbe
                                                        Buffalo-
                                                       Scranton Fli Gadsd
                                                                    nt,  rla
                                                                           M       en,    Flore
                                                                                             Ma       nce
                                                                                                   con,       Green
                                                                                                                G             vil Sale m, O
                                                 BiElngha mt
                                                      mira,                                    Decatur           , Knoxvill
                                                       Jamestow
                                                           Dayton-S            Sprin         BloomiEl
                                                                                            gfi             ngPa   Hun   so,tsviBaker
                                                                                                                                   ld, sfi Brown svi
                                                        Youn
                                                        BaBenton
                                                        Pin      gsto
                                                              ngor,
                                                              eHu Duubuq
                                                                BlPeoria
                                                              Saginaw-    Colu     Alba
                                                                                    mbus
                                                                           Ht ue, Janesvil John
                                                                                             ny,      so
                                                                                               C hico-Pa
                                                                                                     Sa   nlin   as,  Merce
                                                        Syracuse
                                                               Williams
                                                                 urnting                             YuEuge baPA     ne-S
                                                                                                                     Cit  LakeWal   land
                                            Ste uben  v Pittsb
                                                   Wheel
                                                               Ma
                                                            ingAlba
                                                                    nsfiel
                                                                   Ro   ny-S
                                                                         Milw
                                                                               -P
                                                                          cheste
                                                                             Vine All
                                                                                  Ba
                                                                                   aukeentow
                                                                                       land
                                                                                        lti mor
                                                                                              Re
                                                                                               La
                                                                                                  Yo
                                                                                                    adi
                                                                                                        rk,
                                                                                                  Rockford
                                                                                                    ncaste  Spokane
                                                                                                          ng,
                                                                                                        Dove Io wa     Visal
                                                                                                                       Fort
                                                                                                                      r,  D
                                                                                                                                 ia-
                                                                                                                           Cit ,Fresno     Po , rtl and                  Lared o,
                                                                 C
                                                                Erie
                                                            Lima,
                                                               Parkersb
                                                                      OHOwe
                                                                   Canton
                                                                    levelan
                                                                        Kokomo,
                                                                         , PA      nsbor
                                                                                   Ci
                                                                                   -MRa
                                                                                      H
                                                                                  HarriLa
                                                                                       Lncinna
                                                                                          Birmin
                                                                                             ke
                                                                                          agersto
                                                                                          acine
                                                                                            Lynchbu
                                                                                            sbu    Cha
                                                                                               Cross,Montgom
                                                                                                     Ced
                                                                                                      Apgh    Blo
                                                                                                             Ma ar
                                                                                                             pleton
                                                                                                                rJopl
                                                                                                               Indi    Ra
                                                                                                                       oming
                                                                                                                         Jon
                                                                                                                       diso e
                                                                                                                        Greensbo
                                                                                                                          ana
                                                                                                                            in,  esbor
                                                                                                                                n,
                                                                                                                                 p   MeSanta
                                                                                                                                 Bremerto  dfo rd- Fe            Prov o-Or
                                                      PiLe
                                                          Munci
                                                        ttsfie
                                                          Shwiston
                                                               aron
                                                                    e,Lansi
                                                                       ,
                                                                        Gary,
                                                                        De
                                                                           Akron,
                                                                          Ka Ho   ng-
                                                                             Jackson,
                                                                              tro  SheIN
                                                                                  South
                                                                                   TrenWausau
                                                                                     uma,
                                                                                     it,
                                                                                lamazo
                                                                                            O Re
                                                                                              ton
                                                                                                LBe ddi
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                             boygaHamLaMobi
                                                                                                       Co,ng, lumbu
                                                                                                           fayett
                                                                                                          Pueb  Gre
                                                                                                                   le,
                                                                                                                     Li  ncoln,
                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                       Jackson,
                                                                                                                  Hiilton
                                                                                                                      Ccko
                                                                                                                         lo,
                                                                                                                          enCol
                                                                                                                          olumbi
                                                                                                                               ry-
                                                                                                                                Ba     a a La sBellin
                                                                                                                                    umbi
                                                                                                                                   Clarksvi           Cruc       Ralei gh -Boi se Ci
                                       0           Johnstow
                                               Grand    Fo Ch  Spri
                                                               Toledo,Phi
                                                                      ngfi
                                                                  Hartfo
                                                                    Champai  lad
                                                                         Roanord      Louisvi
                                                                                     el
                                                                                     Si
                                                                                      N
                                                                                      Cha
                                                                                        gke
                                                                                         oux
                                                                                           For,
                                                                                          State
                                                                                          ew    Jackson
                                                                                                 Ci
                                                                                                 Wich
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                               rlest
                                                                                                 York lCo
                                                                                                     WayWil
                                                                                                         Augu
                                                                                                     Fargo   Des mi
                                                                                                               ita,
                                                                                                             Grand  ,-Mo
                                                                                                                      Ashevill
                                                                                                                       ngt
                                                                                                                      Ya  Moi
                                                                                                                          Yo
                                                                                                                        staTa
                                                                                                                           kima,
                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                              -  n C Aer Charlo ttgh
                                                                                                                                lo,
                                                                                                                                coma,
                                                                                                                              Albuqu
                                                                  arlest KanCha             kakee ttano         REl  ocheste
                                                                                                                        khart-
                                                                                                                           Pensa                     Au burn-O
                                                       DeAlcatur,
                                                   Alexandr  Jacksonv
                                                             too
                                                               New
                                                                Dav
                                                                 na,   NewSt.Evansvil
                                                                        Lond
                                                                         enpo
                                                                          St.     Jo   se Memphi
                                                                                    rTexarkan
                                                                                  Loui
                                                                                  H   ave
                                                                                                    Bi  smarck
                                                                                                     Hattie           s,
                                                                                                                     sb
                                                                                                                      Le         Tall
                                                                                                                                 Cha Sicol
                                                                                                                                 Lawre
                                                                                                                            xingto      ahas
                                                                                                                                     Sprirlott
                                                                                                                                         ouxnce
                                                                                                                                            ngfiFa R eno,
                                                                                                                                               Olympia     , NV              McAllen -
                                                                                                                                                                            Fayettev
                                                               Te rre
                                                                    Grea  HaTo
                                                                          Nassa
                                                                             Ne
                                                                             Beau
                                                                               tLopeka
                                                                                  Fa Eau
                                                                                     wark,
                                                                                       su-S
                                                                                         mont,C
                                                                                          Ange  Omaha
                                                                                               Cl
                                                                                                Chica   R
                                                                                                   aiSavann
                                                                                               Santa
                                                                                                 heyenn  Little
                                                                                                      Victorigo,
                                                                                                             Cr  ,Stockton
                                                                                                             ichmondeNaR
                                                                                                                     Ann
                                                                                                                          Seattl
                                                                                                                        ahMo
                                                                                                                                Mie-
                                                                                                                               Arb
                                                                                                                                     sso   ulaRich land
                                                                                                                                      oSal t Lak
                                                                                                                                    desto,
                                                                   La
                                                                    Wate wton,
                                                                         Glen      Long
                                                                                rlBerg
                                                                                   oo
                                                                                   Sa
                                                                                    sSanta
                                                                                       Fa nge  view
                                                                                             FranSan
                                                                                                  Ven
                                                                                                  Ba       Jo
                                                                                                            tu
                                                                                                           VallMiamse
                                                                                                                 ra, Fort
                                                                                                                Washinejo-
                                                                                                                     Santa   i, F
                                                                                                                                Sm
                                                                                                                                 gt Roi                    Fort  Co  l
                                                                          Provi
                                                                          San        An
                                                                                      den   en-P
                                                                                        Norfolk- San  SanMid    Ken
                                                                                                                 Lu     is
                                                                                                                    dlese osha,Jacksonv
                                                                     Monro
                                                                        Ode ssa-M  e,Dutchess
                                                                                        Po rtlLa Kaand faOakl
                                                                                                       nsas DPa
                                                                                                           yett  ieg Cnama
                                                                                                                       and,
                                                                                                                     Orang Gain
                                                                                                                              SaAthen
                                                                                                                          MelbourneCcra
                                                                                                                                     esvi
                                                                                                                                      CGrans,
                                                                                                                                         men    dBoJuulde r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Las Vega
                                                                                       Rapid CiPocate                      llSarasota
                                                                                                                Min neapo Na
                                                                              Boston-WCorpu        s
                                                                                                Atla   Cntic
                                                                                                         Galve            sto        Dayton  shvill
                                                                                                                                           Riversid
                                                                                                                                           Tucsona    , rtOrlan
                                                                                                                                                     Fo    Mye Gre
                                                                                                                                                                do,eley,
                                                                                                                                                             Wilmi ngt
                                                                                     Wichita
                                     -.03                              ShreveLpoubb ock,          St.
                                                                                                        Baton
                                                                                                      Mon  Tampa
                                                                                                          Cl     mouth
                                                                                                              Tyle
                                                                                                                ou
                                                                                                                        Ro -G
                                                                                                                  Bi loxir, T-St Kill een-
                                                                                                      Tulsa,
                                                                                                   Burli     ngt       O
                                                                      Ne w        Orle                   Bi    lli ngs                  Br ya n-Co
                                                                Enidth
                                                                Dulu     , OKAbil
                                                                            -S        ene, Wa coAmari           , TX Sa n Anto
                                                                                                                                                 Fort Lau
                                                                                                  Okla homa llo                            Brazori aOcala, FAtl anta,
                                                                                           Jersey New      C burgh                      FortPunta
                                                                                                                                                Wor Go Myrtle B
                                                                                                              Sher ma n- Hou                 FortstonPie
                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                      Dallas,            Ph oen ix-
                                                                                                                                                   Denve    r,                            Nap les,
                                     -.06                                                                                    Fl agstaf             Colorado
                                                                                                                                                    West Pal

                                                                                                             Barnstab                                                Au sti n-S
                                                                                     Ca sper,


                                     -.09
                                            -.1                      0                       .1         .2         .3         .4                                                            .5        .6
                                                                                             Change in Ln(Population), 1990-2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                           32
Figure 3: Metropolitan Area Population and Household Size, 2000

                                                                                N ew York                                                       Lo s An ge
                 16                                                New York ChiNew                                 cagoYork        ,
                                                                                                Lo s AngChi             e cago,
                                                                                                                        Lo       s Ange                              Chi cago,
                                                                 Bo ston -W
                                                                               Phil
                                                                                 Wash                    Boston
                                                                                          adelingt Ph ilad el                   -W                                   BoPhil  sto n-W  adel
                                                                                Detro            it,                            Detroi t,                                                  Detroit,
                                                                                                 Atlan taH             , ouston ,
                                                                                                    Washi
                                                                                                     Dall
                                                                                               Phoenix-           as,   ngt                                  RiWa   versid   shin gt
                 15                                                Mi nne apo
                                                                                                        San       Hou Di eg   ston ,Nassau-       Orang S         ePittsb
                                                                                                                                                                        C
                                       Ta mp    a-StSeattle-      St.BaLou       ltimor   i Pi             ttsbur
                                                                                                    Oakland,     St.      Loui                                          NCle
                                                                                                                                                                           St.     Luroui
                                                                                                                                                                              assau-S
                                                                                                                                                                                   velan                                 Nassau- S
                                            Pittsbur    C levela  Dennver, Min                          C level    Atl
                                                                                                                neapo     Mi
                                                                                                                          anta,
                                                                                                                            anami, F
                                                                                                                      Baltimor
                                                                    Po         rtla      nd          Dalla
                                                                                                        Newar   Ora  s,     k,Newar
                                                                                                                          nge            C       k,                  Ne H      MiBalti
                                                                                                                                                                              wark,  nn eapo
                                                                                                                                                                                   ouston,  mor
                                                Tampa   San
                                                      Fort    Kansas
                                                              Cinci
                                                             In -StFran
                                                                  Lau
                                                                  dianap  New Oakla
                                                                              Orlan
                                                                       Seattle-
                                                                              nna  San C
                                                                                       SaHav
                                                                                       Miam     nd,
                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                Fort
                                                                                                do,
                                                                                                cramenieg
                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                      i, F   Wor nix- San
                                                                                                            Phoe                                     Jose                        Atlan       ta,
                                           San Fr    Columbus
                                                         anMilwCharl      auke     Las
                                                                                   Norfol
                                                                                     San  ott
                                                                                           Ka   Vegak-
                                                                                                  Fran        New
                                                                                                                Rive
                                                                                                                SaCn Ha      rsid
                                                                                                                              Anto     veOa          klandDal      , New   las, Ha ve
                                                   Green           sbo
                                                               Nashvi         N Denve
                                                                            Portlan
                                                                           Austin-Sew
                                                                                    llMemphi   Orl dnsas
                                                                                                     r,
                                                                                                     Mi
                                                                                                      Berg
                                                                                                      e Indi
                                                                                                              Cincinna
                                                                                                              lwau
                                                                                                             San
                                                                                                         Buffalo-   anen-P
                                                                                                                      Be    ke
                                                                                                                        NJose
                                                                                                                            ap rgen
                                                                                                                               ewMiami    OrlSeattl
                                                                                                                                            -P
                                                                                                                                           Sa    enKa       e-
                                                                                                                                                            nsas
                                                                                                                                                         FSalt
                                                                                                                                                      ,Die      g In
                                                                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                                                                                       Lak   inci
                                                                                                                                                                        Bergen  Ora
                                                                                                                                                                           Milwauke
                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                            Buffa
                                                                                                                                                                            dian ap
                                                                                                                                                                                      nna nge
                                                                                                                                                                                           -P C
                                                                                                                                                                                         lo-
                 14                      West Buffalo-
                                                  Pa     l  Ralei
                                                           Hartford
                                                      OklahomaR           gh
                                                                   Jacksonv
                                                                   ocheste     Mon -       Ta  Columb
                                                                                              mouth
                                                                                           Grand      Midd
                                                                                                   mpa-St    s,  R   us
                                                                                                                      lese
                                                                                                                       a      Norfolk-Portlan  San       d  Riversi
                                                                                                                                                          Denver,
                                                                                                                                                           Anto   Columb       d       us New Orle
                                                  Fo L  rt
                                                        oui
                                                         RichLa svil
                                                                   umond  Sacra   nl me                  Hartford
                                                                                                           R     ocheste                                                H Phoe
                                                                                                                                                                           R      San
                                                                                                                                                                              artfo
                                                                                                                                                                                ocheste nix-
                                                                                                                                                                                         rd Josek-
                                                AlDbany-SPro
                                                      ayto   Gre
                                                            Birmi
                                                                n-Svideenvingh                    Dnayto
                                                                                                 Gre     For ensbo
                                                                                                              LCoui tn-SWor
                                                                                                                        harlott
                                                                                                                            svil Me mphi              s, seFresn   Salt Dayton-S
                                                                                                                                                                               Lo, ak   Norfol
Ln(Population)




                                                         TuTu   cson,           Okla           homa
                                                                                                 Provi   N    ashvi
                                                                                                                  den
                                                                                                                   Monmou Grandll Mi         thRa ddle      Provi      Gre den Loensbo
                                                                                                                                                                                 Charluisviott  l Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                               Memphis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mi    n Anto
                                                             Syra
                                                         Akron, O
                                                                    lsa,
                                                                   Oma
                                                                    Albuq cuse     O
                                                                                   ha,
                                                                                Tacom   uer
                                                                                                Alb
                                                                                            Orlando,
                                                                                                N   Rich
                                                                                                         any-S
                                                                                                     Jackso
                                                                                                            Birmi
                                                                                                     a,Oanton      mond
                                                                                                                Syracuse
                                                                                                                            ngh
                                                                                                                     Greenvil
                                                                                                                            nv           Oklah
                                                                                                                                                       Alba
                                                                                                                                                       oma
                                                                                                                                                                 Fort
                                                                                                                                                          Sacramen
                                                                                                                                                         Ve         ny-S
                                                                                                                                                                 ntura,
                                                                                                                                                                      Bi       Wo
                                                                                                                                                                             rmingh
                                                                                                                                                                               Syra
                                                                                                                                                                                        r Gra
                                                                                                                                                                                          cuse        nddd   Ra  lese
                                            Knoxvill         Alle      ntow          Tulsa,
                                                                                        Ga Ra     Scr
                                                                                                 ry,lei   IN  Akr
                                                                                                             gh-      You
                                                                                                                        on,         ngsto
                                                                                                                                     O         Gar       y,
                                                                                                                                                     Scranton
                                                                                                                                                       Ba kersfiINN R   ashviEl
                                                                                                                                                                          ichmon
                                                                                                                                                                             MonAkroPaso,
                                                                                                                                                                                      ll
                                                                                                                                                                                     Young  n,
                                                                                                                                                                                         mouth
                                                                                                                                                                                            d    lOstoGary,Salt IN    Lak
                             Sarasota Scranton  WeHarri  Tole
                                                        Yo
                                                         st
                                                         L     sbu
                                                               ungsto
                                                             ittle
                                                             Spring
                                                               Pal   do,
                                                                   Ann   R WilmiJersey
                                                                                  fi
                                                                                   ArbBaton
                                                                                       AuJerseyngt
                                                                                               o
                                                                                                      C  To
                                                                                                         Ro
                                                                                                        OmahaFortledoLau     ,Fresn
                                                                                                                                ,  Jersey
                                                                                                                                    N         o,      C            Toled
                                                                                                                                                                       JacksonGre  o,   enviv                            McAll en-
                                      D  aytona
                                         Johnson          Cattano   Wi
                                                                     CFor
                                                               olumbia
                                                                La     kelan
                                                                            harle
                                                                              Mob
                                                                               chita, tLa
                                                                                   Color   ile,
                                                                                           st
                                                                                         Way
                                                                                         d     ssti
                                                                                                  adon-S
                                                                                                     Spring
                                                                                                Knoxvi
                                                                                                Alle
                                                                                                Harrisb
                                                                                           Tucson,Ve        gaClluAlbuque
                                                                                                          ntow            fiVa llej o-         r Stockton
                                                                                                                                             Tulsa,
                                                                                                                                          Baton      Ven
                                                                                                                                                      Alle
                                                                                                                                                       Orlando,
                                                                                                                                                       H Ro    O
                                                                                                                                                               tuSprin
                                                                                                                                                                ntow
                                                                                                                                                            arrisbu ra,Ral Omaha,
                                                                                                                                                                                gfi
                                                                                                                                                                                eigh - ElNPa so,
                                         Me  Le
                                              lbou
                                      Fort Madi
                                            Mye son,  Ch
                                                   xingto
                                                       rnDes
                                                        Kala
                                                           Lan       Moi
                                                                    Flin
                                                                    mazo
                                                                    sing           Au
                                                                               Santa
                                                                                   n
                                                                                  t,
                                                                                   -    L gusta-
                                                                                          Tacoma,
                                                                                       Wich
                                                                                        M   anca   Roita,  ste
                                                                                                          Little
                                                                                                             Jo  Ann  For
                                                                                                                     hnso R
                                                                                                                        Wilmi    t
                                                                                                                               Arbo Way
                                                                                                                                    nFlint,
                                                                                                                                          ngt
                                                                                                                                         Mo         M
                                                                                                                                                 bile  Mo ,   Kndesto,oxvill     Fre      sn   o,     Flin      t,   M
                 13                                   Spokane
                                                          CPensa
                                                               anton-M
                                                                Sa       gina    ,colw- Jackson,
                                                                                               Boise
                                                                                                 Kala           C
                                                                                                             Chattan
                                                                                                                mazo  i               oBa Sagi
                                                                                                                                          - CtaCharl  naw-Wich  estKala   ita,For      Wilmi
                                                                                                                                                                                       t s,          ngt
                                                                                                                                                                                          Way Sa gina w-
                                     Sa rasota Dav       H
                                                         Peori
                                                                  Shreve
                                                                 York,
                                                               enpo
                                                              HiRen       RBeau
                                                                      Reading,
                                                                   Atlantic
                                                                   Ap
                                                                   ckory-
                                                              untsvil  a-P    ro,ockford
                                                                                   PA
                                                                                   Bilo
                                                                                   Des
                                                                              pleton  N
                                                                                         po
                                                                                         Lafayett
                                                                                           Vmont
                                                                                               xi-G
                                                                                               L Moi
                                                                                                SaexinDaven
                                                                                                         Pe
                                                                                                       ,lem,
                                                                                                    Stockton nC  Lan
                                                                                                               gto Saanton-M
                                                                                                                 Shrevepo
                                                                                                                   Be
                                                                                                                  oria
                                                                                                               West   New
                                                                                                                      Co Ba
                                                                                                                        Col si-P
                                                                                                                          por
                                                                                                                            nta
                                                                                                                            aumon
                                                                                                                         Lancaste
                                                                                                                                   ng
                                                                                                                                   kersfi
                                                                                                                                   umbi
                                                                                                                                 rpus
                                                                                                                                   Auburgh
                                                                                                                                         Jackson,
                                                                                                                                          lgusta-    Tacoma,
                                                                                                                                                          Austin-S
                                                                                                                                                              Little
                                                                                                                                                              D          Sa
                                                                                                                                                                   Chattan
                                                                                                                                                                    avenAnn Canton
                                                                                                                                                                                lina
                                                                                                                                                                            Johnso
                                                                                                                                                                              R La mazo
                                                                                                                                                                                 por     oVi-M
                                                                                                                                                                                       nsin
                                                                                                                                                                                     Arbo    nsalia
                                                                                                                                                                                                 g-Albu
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tMo Ven
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                           - biquer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                tole,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tura
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n Ro ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       svProvo-   Or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          istEl Paso,
                                           Fort Eu
                                                 Spri
                                                Hun  Pi
                                                      gen engfi
                                                         tingt
                                                   Evansvil     Montgo
                                                               e-S  Sa Fayette
                                                                        Ma
                                                                        Sa
                                                                              Sp
                                                                          Macon,   Hamil
                                                                                      Tr
                                                                                      okane
                                                                                   diso
                                                                                  nta
                                                                                vanna   me
                                                                                     Santa
                                                                                           enton,
                                                                                           Rea
                                                                                             Ro n,  ton
                                                                                                  hG-S
                                                                                                vLake
                                                                                           Fayettev     dingVa
                                                                                                        Color
                                                                                                       Ba
                                                                                                      Ki        RH
                                                                                                             York,   ,O
                                                                                                                  land untingt
                                                                                                                    llej
                                                                                                                      ockfo
                                                                                                                Utica-Ro
                                                                                                              lleen-
                                                                                                                Tren    ado o- PA
                                                                                                                              to
                                                                                                                                 Pa
                                                                                                                               Apn,   rd
                                                                                                                                       pleto Rea
                                                                                                                                              Bilo
                                                                                                                                                     Des    Tucson
                                                                                                                                                          Las
                                                                                                                                                     nStockton
                                                                                                                                                       ding
                                                                                                                                                       xi-GLexi
                                                                                                                                                               Peori
                                                                                                                                                         Lafayett
                                                                                                                                                              Corpu
                                                                                                                                                                 Moi    Utica
                                                                                                                                                                      Veg
                                                                                                                                                                   ,Hunti
                                                                                                                                                                   Trenton,
                                                                                                                                                                       ngto
                                                                                                                                                                             Be
                                                                                                                                                                              a-P
                                                                                                                                                                               sBa,C
                                                                                                                                                                           nLRockford
                                                                                                                                                                             Shreve
                                                                                                                                                                                anca aumon
                                                                                                                                                                                      -Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                      kersfi
                                                                                                                                                                                 angt Colu  stepo
                                                                                                                                                                                            Augusta-
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Brown
                                                                                                                                                                                                      mbia   Charle
                                             Ta
                                             DL
                                           Ocal
                                            PortlanUtica
                                                   llaha
                                                 ayto
                                                   a,   Boulder-
                                                        F na d s -R
                                                               Erie
                                                              South    o
                                                                       Colu Eug
                                                                           , PA    Atlantic
                                                                                  Be      ene
                                                                                         Melbo
                                                                                       mbus
                                                                                       DutchessEvan
                                                                                        Duluth-S CSanta
                                                                                                      harle
                                                                                                         Biurn
                                                                                                             svil
                                                                                                           BoiseMost
                                                                                                                ngha   Pensa
                                                                                                                       Erie
                                                                                                                      Hickory-Sali
                                                                                                                         desto,
                                                                                                                           Montgome
                                                                                                                      JohnstowCmtMa ,
                                                                                                                                    i   PA col
                                                                                                                                          nas,
                                                                                                                                          Spoka
                                                                                                                                      Newburgh
                                                                                                                                           con,   Santa   Yo
                                                                                                                                                          ne,  Madi
                                                                                                                                                       GDuluth-S   rk,
                                                                                                                                                               Charl
                                                                                                                                                                   Ba   BingPA
                                                                                                                                                                             son,
                                                                                                                                                                           Johnstow
                                                                                                                                                                              est    hamt
                                                                                                                                                                                     Erie     ,   PAJackso
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Appl         Con, rpus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eton LafayettCMcAll en-
                                        Charlest
                                       Wilmi
                                       Roanoke,Naple
                                        Duluth-SBi
                                               ngtinco N
                                                     ngha   ew
                                                            s,
                                                            ln,
                                                            San  Fort
                                                                 mt Lond
                                                                L ubbock,L      Galvesto
                                                                               Co
                                                                               uis       l
                                                                                        Sa      lem,
                                                                                                South
                                                                                                 Odessa-       O   Be Hami
                                                                                                                     AtlCr
                                                                                                                        Col
                                                                                                                      Bra Dutche
                                                                                                                          Mantic       lton
                                                                                                                                   umbus
                                                                                                                                    Huntsvil
                                                                                                                                   zoria       ss    Visal  Ev   ia-ansvi          l      Macon,             G
                                   Barnstab
                                        Ashevill
                                         Gaine  Johnstow
                                                  Lynch
                                                   svi  Sara  Gre   sota
                                                                     Ama en     Bremerto
                                                                                  Sprin
                                                                                   Ba
                                                                                   Ro     Portlan
                                                                                           ano
                                                                                    tririllo     gfi  ke,     New    Savannah
                                                                                                                dGalve        Lon         d Yakima,
                                                                                                                                                 Fayettev LaVa      So
                                                                                                                                                                 kelan
                                                                                                                                                                  Sal llej
                                                                                                                                                                       New    o-dburg
                                                                                                                                                                            uth
                                                                                                                                                                           Cinas,
                                                                                                                                                                          New
                                                                                                                                                                                      Be
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pensa
                                                                                                                                                                                      Hi
                                                                                                                                                                                   Hamil
                                                                                                                                                                                olora
                                                                                                                                                                                         Colu
                                                                                                                                                                                          Melb
                                                                                                                                                                                           ckory-
                                                                                                                                                                                        Montgome
                                                                                                                                                                                       Lon  doh  ton
                                                                                                                                                                                               dess
                                                                                                                                                                                                    mbus
                                                                                                                                                                                                      col
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ourn
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bilo Huxi-G  ntsvilPr ovo-Or
                                            Springfi
                                            Myrtl     eFo BOlympia,
                                                         Chi
                                                      Reno,
                                                  Cedar       rtbur
                                                                  Mye
                                                                  co-Pa
                                                                Burl
                                                                   Ra
                                                                  Li
                                                                   Sa
                                                                        For
                                                                         LSp
                                                                        NV  Waco,
                                                                               ong
                                                                              ing      tSmi
                                                                                          view
                                                                                        ngfi       TX
                                                                                                 Cla        rksvi
                                                                                                             Lub   Odessa
                                                                                                                      Hou
                                                                                                                     Ri  bock,
                                                                                                                            chla   ma, Sa
                                                                                                                                     sto
                                                                                                                               Killeen-    -M
                                                                                                                                          nd   nta Eugene-S
                                                                                                                                              Lngfi    R    oPortlan
                                                                                                                                                       Roanoke, Mo           Sava
                                                                                                                                                                        desto,   DutchMe
                                                                                                                                                                                   duma,  nnahrced,                     Brownsvi  L aredo,
                                       ChaFargo
                                            mpai
                                             Topeka,     Me
                                                       gMa
                                                       -Mo
                                                 TuscaloLa   Fornsfi
                                                             Siou
                                                          Bentofaye  tncoln,
                                                                  dford-
                                                                Bellingh
                                                                 Red
                                                               Joplin,
                                                                    o     xel
                                                                          Wal  Raci
                                                                           ttnnta
                                                                               FaLa
                                                                                Tyle
                                                                               ding
                                                                                 H    Ashke
                                                                                       Bou
                                                                                         Cr
                                                                                       Daytona
                                                                                         Waco,
                                                                                        St.,
                                                                                              ne,
                                                                                         Amaril
                                                                                           Fa
                                                                                            r,   C Taha
                                                                                                Wheel
                                                                                                   lder-
                                                                                                 evill
                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                   ye
                                                                                                Ceda
                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                      Elkh
                                                                                                     lou
                                                                                                    Yol
                                                                                                           llah
                                                                                                            LMansfi
                                                                                                          ttev
                                                                                                         Fortlo
                                                                                                              TXGree
                                                                                                                 ong
                                                                                                                Yaki
                                                                                                               ro,
                                                                                                             Parke Ring
                                                                                                                    Be
                                                                                                                  Ste
                                                                                                                      art-
                                                                                                                      as
                                                                                                                    Lynchb
                                                                                                                      CSmi
                                                                                                                            view
                                                                                                                            ma,
                                                                                                                        anton
                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                            ube
                                                                                                                            Yuma
                                                                                                                                  ley,
                                                                                                                              Green
                                                                                                                                Rasel
                                                                                                                                   Spri
                                                                                                                                 rsb acin
                                                                                                                                      Li
                                                                                                                                          ur
                                                                                                                                          Sp
                                                                                                                                          Cruc
                                                                                                                                        LnvHake
                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                Sa
                                                                                                                                                e,
                                                                                                                                            ncoln riWheel
                                                                                                                                                 Ba
                                                                                                                                                 AZ
                                                                                                                                                       lem,
                                                                                                                                                     ngfi
                                                                                                                                                       Cha
                                                                                                                                                     Brazori
                                                                                                                                                      Ash,  Bo evil
                                                                                                                                                                   ing
                                                                                                                                                                    Oise    Man
                                                                                                                                                                        Galve
                                                                                                                                                                    Cedar
                                                                                                                                                                        al
                                                                                                                                                                              Ho
                                                                                                                                                                              Lu
                                                                                                                                                                               Ci
                                                                                                                                                                               Steub
                                                                                                                                                                               Be
                                                                                                                                                                                       Visa
                                                                                                                                                                                        sfi
                                                                                                                                                                                     bbock,
                                                                                                                                                                                         sto
                                                                                                                                                                                      nton
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                                                                                                                             env
                                                                                                                                                                                         Odessa-M
                                                                                                                                                                                                  lia-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lacine   Fayettev
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,Gre en Ba                      McAl len-
                 12                      WhBa
                           Pun ta Go Pittsfi       Ch
                                                 Parkersb
                                                 Santa
                                               eeli
                                                 Pana
                                                  ngorng
                                               Florence
                                                 Terre Chi
                                                     Blo
                                                   Jam  D
                                                           arlott
                                                         Ath  San
                                                              C
                                                            Eau D
                                                                Fe
                                                         Barnstab
                                                              maHa
                                                                co-Pa
                                                                Brya
                                                             omin
                                                             ,  Pueb
                                                              esto
                                                             oth
                                                                     Janesv
                                                                     Fort
                                                                      Jackson,
                                                                      Tope
                                                                   hampa
                                                                   Li
                                                                    ecatur,
                                                                  ens,
                                                                    an,CClma,
                                                                          RL
                                                                           g
                                                                          wita Keno
                                                                               Terre
                                                                           Monrouis
                                                                                Gaine
                                                                                ocky
                                                                                ai
                                                                               n-Co
                                                                                  lo, Pika,
                                                                                         ig
                                                                                         OH
                                                                                       Fort
                                                                                      La   eilfayett
                                                                                                sha,
                                                                                                e,
                                                                                                Mo
                                                                                                BrHa
                                                                                                  svi
                                                                                                 Jamestow
                                                                                                    C emerto
                                                                                                Pittsfi    ol
                                                                                                        Wilmi
                                                                                                    Jackso
                                                                                                     Waterloo
                                                                                                        Vine
                                                                                                         Al     e  Jan
                                                                                                                toona,
                                                                                                                        Lima
                                                                                                                        Ri  Bu
                                                                                                                            Terre
                                                                                                                      Jackson  chlan
                                                                                                                        Elkhart-
                                                                                                                         ngt
                                                                                                                      landnv
                                                                                                                     Florence esvil
                                                                                                                                Yuba
                                                                                                                            Monroe    rl ,Waco,
                                                                                                                                       Cla  OH
                                                                                                                                          ing d
                                                                                                                                            ChaH
                                                                                                                                               ,Top
                                                                                                                                                  t a
                                                                                                                                                rksvi
                                                                                                                                                 Cit Jam
                                                                                                                                                     Amar
                                                                                                                                                Merced mpai
                                                                                                                                                   ,Land
                                                                                                                                                           eka,
                                                                                                                                                          TXYaki
                                                                                                                                                          Long
                                                                                                                                                          Altoo
                                                                                                                                                            Kirt estow
                                                                                                                                                                   Pittsfie
                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                    illo
                                                                                                                                                                    g
                                                                                                                                                                  llee
                                                                                                                                                                    ,Smi  ma,
                                                                                                                                                                        view
                                                                                                                                                                          na,
                                                                                                                                                                              Lynch
                                                                                                                                                                              rke
                                                                                                                                                                             n-  LJa ima,
                                                                                                                                                                                      rsb   bur
                                                                                                                                                                                         ckson, OH     Lake          Ch   a          Ho uma,  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Brownsv  i
                                          Ste  eube
                                            ColumbGre
                                                  Altoon
                                                   Bill nv
                                                    Waterl
                                                      StateingWich
                                                            envi
                                                              ia
                                                       Hagersto
                                                       La    Te   a,
                                                                  s
                                                                  Ro
                                                               Cross   l
                                                                   xarkan
                                                                    Ab
                                                                    Cooo        Jopl
                                                                           cheste    Me
                                                                                Wausau
                                                                              Florence
                                                                         Alexanilen    Far
                                                                                   Dover,   D
                                                                                            in,
                                                                                     SiOlympia
                                                                                         Wichita
                                                                                           oux
                                                                                         Ocala,
                                                                                          e,    dfo
                                                                                                 go-Mo
                                                                                                drecatur,
                                                                                                 Santa
                                                                                                 Mun   rd-
                                                                                                       CiTu
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                         Tyler,
                                                                                                        Dy,Pu F   scaloo
                                                                                                                Sha   Bangor,
                                                                                                                     Eau
                                                                                                               ci,xeblo
                                                                                                                    e,
                                                                                                                     Cr
                                                                                                                   Keno     ron,
                                                                                                                             T   ,o,Al
                                                                                                                                   Cl
                                                                                                                                    shVi  exand
                                                                                                                                          ai
                                                                                                                                      Rocky nela
                                                                                                                                          Fayette
                                                                                                                                           a,an,         Fo
                                                                                                                                                         rfayett
                                                                                                                                                          Boul   St.   der-Clo  Ta
                                                                                                                                                                              Elkha
                                                                                                                                                                              Waterloo
                                                                                                                                                                                   u   llaha
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan rt- esvil
                                                                                                                                                                                                 s  Burlin        gt         Provo  -Or
                                  Bl oomi   Munci
                                            De
                                           ng
                                        Iowa Da  C Sha
                                                AubuWilli
                                                    nvill
                                                     it
                                                         Glen
                                                        Gra
                                                  Anniston
                                                   catur,
                                                        e,   eron,
                                                            Sheams
                                                             rn-O nd
                                                              Sherman-
                                                             Jackson,
                                                                      sboyga
                                                                      Hatti
                                                                      Gol
                                                                           Fa
                                                                           Ju  Blo
                                                                                Yodsbor
                                                                                 Bell  esb
                                                                                        lo,
                                                                                       La
                                                                                           Sioux
                                                                                         Alban
                                                                                           R
                                                                                         oming Bi
                                                                                            ingh edding,
                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                Cha
                                                                                               Cumbe
                                                                                                wto
                                                                                                 Ab Siou
                                                                                                     Te
                                                                                                    llings
                                                                                                    Hage
                                                                                                     La  n,
                                                                                                              Fa
                                                                                                           Willi
                                                                                                           rlott
                                                                                                          ilen C
                                                                                                              Fort
                                                                                                                   Gre
                                                                                                              xarkanFlagstaf
                                                                                                                     Ren
                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                   Danvi
                                                                                                                    rsto
                                                                                                                    rla
                                                                                                                     e, ams
                                                                                                                     ross
                                                                                                                Kokomo    Fort
                                                                                                                            Mye
                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                            iGle
                                                                                                                        Anniston
                                                                                                                         Jopli  eley,oth
                                                                                                                                     De
                                                                                                                                     llen,N
                                                                                                                                         Wa
                                                                                                                                          ns
                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                             catur,
                                                                                                                                           Wal
                                                                                                                                              VWichi
                                                                                                                                                Fa
                                                                                                                                                 CumAlDbany,
                                                                                                                                                 usau   Moecatur,
                                                                                                                                                            Mu
                                                                                                                                                            vSi
                                                                                                                                                             ,ta
                                                                                                                                                          Floren
                                                                                                                                                              berla
                                                                                                                                                                     ncie
                                                                                                                                                                    oux
                                                                                                                                                                 Will     Wi
                                                                                                                                                                     Tuscalo ce
                                                                                                                                                                          Siou
                                                                                                                                                                                ,Sharon
                                                                                                                                                                             Vine
                                                                                                                                                                           Fargo-Mo
                                                                                                                                                                            iamsCi   Ban
                                                                                                                                                                                      Florence
                                                                                                                                                                                      Pu
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mo
                                                                                                                                                                                  lming
                                                                                                                                                                                    Eau
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ke
                                                                                                                                                                                        land
                                                                                                                                                                                      Cla
                                                                                                                                                                                      Danvi
                                                                                                                                                                                      x   o
                                                                                                                                                                                          Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                              gor,
                                                                                                                                                                                             nosh
                                                                                                                                                                                           eblo
                                                                                                                                                                                             nroe
                                                                                                                                                                                              Cla
                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                              rksv
                                                                                                                                                                                             De
                                                                                                                                                                                                   , , ,a,
                                                                                                                                                                                             Alexandr i
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Merced
                                                                                                                                                                                                    lleBra
                                                                                                                                                                                                        i Rocky
                                                                                                                                                                                                     catur,       zoria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,   Mo       St. C lou
                                            Lewi Kokom
                                                   Ga ston
                                                      St.      Sa
                                                          dsden,
                                                             aJose o,   n      AKa  nge
                                                                                   AthSt.nkakee Su      mte Yu
                                                                                                             Gadsde r,
                                                                                                                     ba        Cit
                                                                                                                                 Lawton,
                                                                                                                                   Myrtl
                                                                                                                                     n,        e     BTexar Hag         ersto
                                                                                                                                                                         Kokom
                                                                                                                                                                       kan           D
                                                                                                                                                                                     Glen  o,
                                                                                                                                                                                         oth    an,
                                                                                                                                                                                                s   Fa
                                           C umberl
                                          Lawren   Gra
                                                    Bi
                                             Mi ssoula   smarck
                                                         ce
                                                      Owensb
                                                     El   mi nd
                                                             Co
                                                           Rapid
                                                        Bloomi  ra,Fo
                                                              Dubuqu
                                                             Naples, lumbiSh
                                                                           ng  or
                                                                               Ci      a ens,
                                                                                   erman
                                                                               Bryan-C e,
                                                                                                Jo
                                                                                                 Sta   se
                                                                                                      Grand
                                                                                                     -at
                                                                                                    Ja
                                                                                                        Lewi
                                                                                                        oRo
                                                                                                            teSh
                                                                                                         Elmi
                                                                                                          Pa    Sa C  CKankake
                                                                                                                        eboyga
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                      ston
                                                                                                                      Sa
                                                                                                                   namara,
                                                                                                                   cheste
                                                                                                              Hattie
                                                                                                             Victori
                                                                                                             ckson,
                                                                                                              Gre
                                                                                                                Owensbor
                                                                                                                          hico
                                                                                                                        nta Fo
                                                                                                                         envi
                                                                                                                               nSt.
                                                                                                                            Barnstab
                                                                                                                                   GoLui
                                                                                                                                   Dover,
                                                                                                                                   Pine
                                                                                                                                 asb
                                                                                                                                         -Pa
                                                                                                                                     CMedfo
                                                                                                                                     Fe     Bremer
                                                                                                                                            Jose
                                                                                                                                        l Yuma,
                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                             sJacksonv
                                                                                                                                             Bloomi
                                                                                                                                           ldsboBl uD
                                                                                                                                               Dubuqu
                                                                                                                                             Fort           Yolo
                                                                                                                                                            Cha
                                                                                                                                                            AZ
                                                                                                                                                                to
                                                                                                                                                            Gainesvi
                                                                                                                                                         CLas
                                                                                                                                                      Abilene,
                                                                                                                                                        rrd-  Gadsde
                                                                                                                                                               Tyler,
                                                                                                                                                               ngLewi
                                                                                                                                                                  Bie,
                                                                                                                                                              olState
                                                                                                                                                                         ElLawton,
                                                                                                                                                                             Anni
                                                                                                                                                                       Sheboyg
                                                                                                                                                                       Cruc La
                                                                                                                                                                        ,llin
                                                                                                                                                                     Sumter,
                                                                                                                                                                        rlottCA
                                                                                                                                                                               mira,
                                                                                                                                                                                 TCro
                                                                                                                                                                               ston
                                                                                                                                                                                Kanka
                                                                                                                                                                                Gra
                                                                                                                                                                               Gre
                                                                                                                                                                                gs
                                                                                                                                                                                CoPi
                                                                                                                                                                                  Yub
                                                                                                                                                                                     n,Riston
                                                                                                                                                                                          ndch
                                                                                                                                                                                            ss
                                                                                                                                                                                         eley,
                                                                                                                                                                                        ne  a
                                                                                                                                                                                              akee
                                                                                                                                                                                              Blu
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Wau
                                                                                                                                                                                                  land
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cit Fort  Alba sau,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wal     ny,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Flore   nce , La re do,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dubuque
                                                   C
                                                Great
                                                   Co   heyenn
                                                      Jon
                                                       Iowa    Fa
                                                               esbor
                                                          rvalli     CitePin       MissoueSaGre Grand
                                                                                                Blu n
                                                                                                  Poca    Ange
                                                                                                         la    Fa  teJullsma
                                                                                                                  Bi                Shrck
                                                                                                                                      Fort  erman-
                                                                                                                                           Be      PiAthen
                                                                                                                                                  llin egh
                                                                                                                                                     Olympia
                                                                                                                                                         R eddi      s,
                                                                                                                                                                     Gre
                                                                                                                                                                   Jackson, , at
                                                                                                                                                                          ng,
                                                                                                                                                                         Flag
                                                                                                                                                                          Pan    R    ocheste
                                                                                                                                                                                 Owensb
                                                                                                                                                                                      Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                     ama
                                                                                                                                                                                      staf Dove C  Goor r,ldsbo
                                                                                                                                                                                                      JacksonD l r vBSumter,
                                                 C asper,                               Aubu
                                                                                          Che           rn-O
                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                      yenne Capid asper,    Ci   BlColoomi
                                                                                                                                    Iowa    umbia
                                                                                                                                                Vi  ng
                                                                                                                                                    San
                                                                                                                                                   Cit   Ocala,
                                                                                                                                                     ctoria   An       Hatti
                                                                                                                                                                       ge    F     esb          GreeSanta   Myrtle
                                                                                                                                                                                                            nvi    Fe      Las  Cru c         Lare do,
                                Pu nta Go Enid        L awren       Eni
                                                                     Co         d, OKJonesbo rPocatell
                                                                           cervalli                                                                                           R    apid
                                                                                                                                                                                      Yuma, BiCsmarck
                                                                                                                                                                                                   i AZVictoria
                 11                                         , OK                                               EniLd,            OK
                                                                                                                          awren ce             Gran        Che
                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                    Jon esbor
                                                                                                                                                               Missoula
                                                                                                                                                              Bryan
                                                                                                                                                                  Ju   yenn
                                                                                                                                                                      Caspe r,
                                                                                                                                                                                Aubu
                                                                                                                                                                               -Co   e       rn-O
                                                                                                                                                                                        Pocatell
                                                                                                                                              Corvalli                                                                   Flagsta f
                                                                                                                                   Na ples,
                                                   Punta Go
                 10
                      .7                .8                               .9               1          1.1        1.2                                                                                    1.3                             1.4
                                                                                    Ln(Population Per H ousehold)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       33
