                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HEALTH INSURANCE, TREATMENT AND OUTCOMES:
                     USING AUTO ACCIDENTS AS HEALTH SHOCKS

                                            Joseph J. Doyle Jr.

                                          Working Paper 11099
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11099


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Joseph J. Doyle Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Insurance, Treatment and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as Health Shocks
Joseph J. Doyle Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 11099
February 2005
JEL No. I11

                                           ABSTRACT

Previous studies find that the uninsured receive less health care than the insured, yet differences in

health outcomes have rarely been studied. In addition, selection bias may partly explain the

difference in care received. This paper focuses on an unexpected health shock – severe automobile

accidents where victims have little choice but to visit a hospital. Another innovation is the use of a

comparison group that is similar to the uninsured: those who have private health insurance but do

not have automobile insurance. The medically uninsured are found to receive twenty percent less

care and have a substantially higher mortality rate.

Joseph J. Doyle Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
1. Introduction

       Efforts to reform the $1.3 trillion U.S. healthcare industry are often motivated by a

concern that the uninsured are denied access to health care (NCHS, 2002). Indeed, theory

suggests that health care providers would offer less treatment to the uninsured if they are less

likely to pay for care. Previous empirical work supports this conclusion and finds that the

uninsured receive approximately forty percent less health care than the insured.1

       While treatment differences have been labeled the ‘access gap’, they can be difficult to

interpret. First, health outcomes are rarely compared. Without knowing the effect on health,

treatment differences may imply that the insured receive too much care, as opposed to the

uninsured receiving too little. For example, moral hazard problems may allow physicians to

practice what has been labeled ‘flat-of-the-curve medicine’, where diminishing returns to health

care imply that additional treatment may yield small gains in terms of health outcomes

(Enthoven, 1980). While the insured may receive more treatment, this may not translate into

health differences.

       Further, there may be selection problems. Individuals decide to purchase insurance and

they decide to seek medical care. If those with a low risk of using medical care are also less

likely to purchase insurance, then treatment differences may have little to do with access to care.

This positive correlation between risk level and insurance coverage is a standard result in

contract theory and suggests that information problems in insurance markets may lead to

treatment differences. The empirical work is further complicated by the lack of an adequate

comparison group to test whether unobserved differences between the insured and uninsured

drive the difference in care received.




                                                                                                   1
         To examine health outcomes and deal with selection problems, this paper focuses on an

unexpected health shock—severe automobile accidents where incapacitated crash victims have

little choice but to use professional medical care. Using a unique data set that links police

accident reports to hospital discharge records, treatment levels and mortality rates are compared

between the insured and uninsured. These data provide a complete picture of each accident and

offer a new way to investigate whether the uninsured are denied access to life-saving health care.

One innovation in the paper is the use of a comparison group that is similar to the uninsured in

terms of risk-taking behavior, income, and vehicle characteristics: drivers who have health

insurance but do not have automobile insurance.

         The focus on severe automobile accidents has a number of advantages. First, police

record thirty-day mortality—whether the victim dies within thirty days of the accident. This

allows a comparison of health outcomes that are rarely studied (Levy and Meltzer, 2001). The

few studies that have looked at inpatient outcomes find mixed evidence of insurance effects

(Ayanian et.al. (1993), Currie & Gruber (1997), Haas and Goldman (1994), Hadley et. al. (1991),

Sada et.al. (1998)).2 These papers do not always control for differences in the illnesses suffered

by the uninsured, while others rely on composite measures of physician diagnoses and

procedures to control for illness severity. Such measures will depend on insurance status if the

uninsured were offered less care. In contrast, this paper uses more objective severity measures




1
  Estimates center around forty percent less care for the uninsured. See, for example, Currie & Gruber (1997),
Currie and Thomas (1995), Haas and Goldman (1994), Long, Marquis, and Rodgers (1997), Spillman (1992), and
Tilford et. al. (1999). Marquis and Long (1994) and Brown (1998) offer reviews.
2
  There is also a literature dealing with moral hazard problems in Workers Compensation, where benefit generosity
has been found to be associated with longer work absences (Dionne and St-Michel, 1991; Fortin and Lanoie, 1992).
These papers are able to exploit changes in insurance laws. Moral hazard problems stem from the subjects’ choice
to return to work, choice of physician, and even choice of injury (e.g. back pain), while the present study focuses on
cases where demand is relatively inelastic—especially for individual diagnoses discussed below.


                                                                                                                     2
such as police-reported injuries and crash characteristics.3 In addition, while previous papers did

not control for differences in the hospitals used by the insured and uninsured, this paper exploits

within-hospital variation in treatment and outcomes to explicitly control for hospital

characteristics that do not vary across patients, such as hospital resources and accounting

procedures.

         Second, contact with professional health care providers is virtually automatic for severe

accidents, as ambulances arrive as part of the crash investigation. The RAND Health Insurance

Experiment dealt with selection bias by randomizing families to health plans (Newhouse, 1993)

and found that participants with more generous health insurance consumed more health care.

This paper focuses on a case where demand is inelastic to overcome the selection bias, as

incapacitated victims have on the roadway have little choice but to receive some care. In

contrast, the uninsured may not seek care for other health problems due to underlying differences

in health risks or preferences that also contribute to their decision not to purchase insurance. In

addition, previous papers were unable to control for the time patients wait to visit the hospital.

The focus on severe crashes allows a comparison of treatment and outcomes from the moment

the health problem begins.

         Third, severe accidents are largely unexpected at the time of the health insurance

purchase decision, as opposed to the chronic conditions that are usually studied (Brown, 1998).

Patients live with chronic health problems and gain private information about future health care

use. These are cases where adverse selection problems are at their most extreme, as those likely

to use health care may be more likely to purchase insurance. This selection into insurance based

on the unobserved propensity to use health care confounds the interpretation of treatment

3
 Haas and Goldman (1994) also study emergency care. However, they include all types of emergency care, and it
appears that the case mix is substantially different between the insured and uninsured in ways that are not controlled.



                                                                                                                     3
differences. If the decision to purchase insurance were not based on the likelihood of being in a

severe automobile accident, then the approach taken here would largely avoid this selection

problem.

         Finally, automobile accidents are a particularly important health problem for the

uninsured. Most health problems are common to older individuals who are almost universally

insured. In contrast, the uninsured tend to be younger, and automobile accidents are the leading

cause of death among those under the age of thirty-five (CDC, 1998).

         The results suggest that the uninsured receive twenty percent less treatment than the

privately insured, controlling for personal, crash, vehicle, neighborhood, and hospital

characteristics. While this represents a substantial difference, it is smaller than the previous

findings, suggesting that selection bias may be important. The uninsured are also found to have

a higher mortality rate—an increase of 1.4 percentage points from the mean mortality rate of

3.8%.

         While the paper attempts to overcome selection bias at the time of the health problem, the

uninsured likely differ from the insured in a number of ways that can affect the interpretation of

the results. Much of the paper discusses tests which suggest that unobserved differences

between the insured and uninsured do not drive the main results. For example, drivers who do

not have automobile insurance have similar observable characteristics compared to the

uninsured, yet automobile insurance status does not predict treatment or health differences.

         The structure of the paper is as follows. Section two briefly presents theoretical

considerations and their implications for interpreting the results. Section three describes the data

and presents mean comparisons of treatment, mortality, and crash characteristics between the

insured and uninsured. Section four presents empirical estimates where within-hospital variation


In addition, the paper does not control for differences in hospital characteristics and times-to-diagnosis.

                                                                                                              4
is used to test the effect of insurance status on treatment and mortality. Differences across

hospital types are also discussed. Section five demonstrates the robustness of the results.

Section six discusses implications of the findings, and section seven concludes.



2. Theory

       At the time of an accident, insurance lowers the price of health care faced by the insured

and raises the effective price that providers can collect. Both factors suggest that the insured will

receive more treatment. The overall effect of insurance on treatment decisions, and ultimately

health outcomes, is a combination of these supply and demand factors. However, when previous

estimates compared treatment levels between the insured and uninsured, they may have

overstated the insurance effect. In particular, the demand for insurance suggests that the insured

may differ from the uninsured.

Demand-side

       Consider first the demand for insurance. Those with a high risk of using health care may

be more likely to purchase insurance. This positive correlation between risk and insurance

coverage, due to adverse selection and/or moral hazard problems, is a standard result from

contract theory (Chiappori and Salanie, 2000; Chiappori et. al. 2001). For example, consider a

simple two-period model of insurance demand where there are two states of the world in the

second period: healthy and sick. Further, consider two types of consumers categorized by their

probability of becoming sick. In the first period, they maximize expected utility and can use

market insurance to allocate resources to different states of the world. These models suggest that

if insurance premiums were actuarially fair, then risk-averse consumers would fully insure.

However, due to information problems, or other frictions, insurance premiums may not be




                                                                                                     5
actuarially fair. One way for insurance companies to overcome information problems is to price

insurance packages, comprised of different deductible and co-payment combinations, in such a

way that the choice of a particular package reveals the type of consumer: a separating

equilibrium. It can be shown that in this environment only the most likely to suffer the sick state

will be fully insured (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). Chiappori et. al. (2001) generalized this

result of a positive correlation between risk and insurance to a number of environments,

including the co-existence of moral hazard and asymmetric information problems.

        Agents will also differ with respect to tastes and income. Perhaps the most interesting

difference for this current study is that individuals with a relatively high degree of risk aversion

may be more likely to both purchase insurance and drive safely (de Meza and Web, 2001;

Jullien, Salanie, and Salanie, 1999). While this is not a general result, it suggests the potential

for a negative correlation between insurance coverage and health risk if safer drivers sustained

less severe injuries. The potential for heterogeneity in risk preference is considered below.

        Further, the demand for health care will depend on insurance status. Those with

insurance face a lower price for health care at the time of an illness—only a deductible and co-

payment. This implies that they will be more likely to visit a doctor once ill, all else equal. One

caveat is that by the time the uninsured do visit a hospital, their illnesses may be more severe.

Previous work has estimated the probability that an individual will make a “health care contact”

multiplied by the difference in treatment once contact has been made. In the cases studied here,

the decision to visit the hospital is largely out of the control of the patient, as police or witnesses

call for medical professionals.

Supply-side




                                                                                                          6
       The effect of reimbursement rules on treatment decisions has received considerable

attention, begun by McGuire and Ellis (1986). Treatment decisions by health care providers are

modeled, abstracting from the decisions of patients. Physicians choose treatment levels to

maximize an objective function that includes both profits and the benefits of treatment to

patients. The model suggests that an increased ability-to-pay, through insurance for example,

would result in greater treatment. This is partially due to moral hazard problems in this

insurance market, though it does not depend on profits being part of the objective function. If

profits were incorporated into a resource constraint, where greater treatment of insured patients

provides resources to treat both insured and uninsured patients, then the prediction of more

treatment for the insured would remain.

       Another factor affecting the supply response is whether insurance status is in the

provider’s information set at the time treatment decisions are made. In fact, it appears that one

of the first pieces of information discovered is insurance status. Medical professionals search

patients to find not only insurance information, but medical and emergency contact information

as well. Insurance companies regularly recommend that consumers carry their insurance card

especially for this type of situation. Once known, the expected payer is reported on the patient’s

chart. When treatment decisions are made, insurance status is likely known.

       Finally, treatment differences may be smaller given the legal ramifications of refusing to

treat patients. For example, federal law mandates that hospitals stabilize trauma patients.

However, treatment differences after stabilization are predicted.

Welfare implications

       Both supply and demand factors tend to suggest that the insured will receive more

treatment. However, the welfare implications are less straightforward. Treatment differences




                                                                                                    7
may be efficient in a number of environments. For example, the uninsured may not value

additional treatment as much as the insured, as suggested by the choice to purchase insurance.

Consider the standard planner’s problem where each person is weighted equally. The optimal

consumption profile is such that the marginal utility of consumption is equated across

individuals. In models of insurance demand, those who expect a higher marginal utility of

consumption when sick are more likely to purchase insurance. If the insured had a higher

marginal utility of consumption when sick, then the insured would require greater treatment

levels to equate marginal utilities.

       One case where inefficiencies are more easily tested is the case of overutilization by the

insured. Consider a health production function that maps treatment into health benefits. It has

been argued that at the advanced state of technology in the U.S., diminishing returns have

resulted in physicians practicing ‘flat-of-the-curve’ medicine. That is, the insured may receive

more care, but it may have little effect on health outcomes. In this case, the marginal benefit of

treatment is close to zero, which is less than the positive marginal cost, and welfare implications

stem from distorted insurance prices. However, if the additional treatment received by the

insured were useful in improving patient outcomes, then observed differences in treatment may

represent underutilization by the uninsured, overutilization by the insured, or both.

       Supply and demand factors largely suggest that the uninsured will receive less treatment.

If health were increasing in treatment, conditional on injury severity, then the insured would

have better outcomes as well. However, if a positive correlation between risk and insurance

coverage were due to private information problems in insurance markets, then self-selection into

insurance markets would contaminate treatment and health outcome comparisons (Heckman,

Lalonde, and Smith, 1999). As opposed to the chronic conditions usually studied, where private




                                                                                                      8
information problems are likely at their most extreme, this paper conditions on an unexpected

health shock to mitigate the effect of this selection problem.



3. Data Description

       The Crash Outcome Data Evaluation System (CODES) offers a unique data set to

compare patients following an automobile accident. CODES links police accident reports with

hospital discharge records using identifiers such as patient name, birth date, and time of accident.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration subsidized individual state efforts to link

these two sources of data, and, until now, they have only been used to study highway safety

(NCSA, 1998).

       This paper uses data from Wisconsin for the period 1992 through 1997.4 In Wisconsin,

all police accident reports are submitted to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and all

inpatient hospital records are submitted to the Wisconsin Department of Health and Family

Services. Analysts at the Center for Health Systems Research and Analysis (CHSRA), located at

the University of Wisconsin at Madison, linked these data in an effort to improve traffic safety

research.

       According to CHSRA, approximately 80% of all crash-related hospitalizations were

linked successfully. Crash victims who die at the scene of the accident are not present in the

inpatient data, so it is not possible to identify the health insurance status of these victims. As a

result, mortality comparisons are done after patients reach the hospital. Other reasons for linkage

failure include the following: the patient was transported out of Wisconsin, the crash was not

reported to the police, or the crash record contained insufficient identifying information. For the




                                                                                                       9
severe accidents investigated here, the proportion of matches is likely to be even higher than

80%. For example, severe crashes are more likely to be reported and identifying information,

such as the time of the accident, is more likely to be known for ambulance transfers. While

difficult to test here, CHSRA data documentation argues that “there is no reason to expect that

the cases not linking are different from cases which do link.”

Police Measures

         The police-report data offer a complete picture of each accident. Characteristics such as

age, sex, ZIP code of residence, seat location, seat belt use, entrapment in the vehicle, and injury

severity are available. Wisconsin Police report injury severity according to the KABCO score:

Killed; A, B, or C injuries consisting of incapacitating injuries, non-incapacitating injuries, or

possible injuries; and other or unknown. At the accident scene, a police officer records the injury

category. If the crash victim later died due to the accident, then the injury severity was scored as

a K—even if the death occurred after hospital discharge.5 Other crash characteristics include

vehicle damage, road condition, population size where the accident occurred, and the types of

crashes, vehicles, and roads.

         The police also record the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) for crash victims in cars

and trucks. These VINs were decoded by Primedia Price Digests6 to categorize vehicles by

engine size, manufacturer’s suggested retail price, two-door status, vehicle weight, and model


4
  Wisconsin is one of the original CODES states and the only state that regularly supplies a public-use data set. All
23 CODES states were contacted. Most of the other states are still in the process of linking the data or did not have
key variables of interest.
5
  The scores of K are the raw data for the often-used Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) distributed by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. It is generally regarded as ‘thirty-day mortality’ meaning that
deaths up to thirty days from the accident are recorded in the police data, though deaths after thirty days are also
recorded. For a small number of cases the patient died in the hospital and the KABCO score does not equal K.
These have been coded as fatal injuries in the analysis, though results are not sensitive to this definition. As noted
above, those who die at the scene do not enter the inpatient data. The severity of injury at the time of entry into the
hospital is explored more fully below.
6
  A Unit of Primedia Business.


                                                                                                                     10
year. The size of the car can affect injury severity, while the quality of the car serves as a proxy

for socio-economic status.

       The ZIP code of residence is also included in the report, as well as the hospital discharge

data. This information allows a comparison of neighborhood characteristics such as the fraction

of the population in poverty, race categories, educational categories, and median household

income, available from the 1990 US Census.7 If patients from wealthier backgrounds receive

favorable treatment and are more likely to have insurance, then controlling for these

neighborhood characteristics provides a way to isolate the effect of insurance on treatment and

health outcomes.

       The linked police data provide a novel comparison group: drivers who have health

insurance but do not have automobile insurance. This information is recorded because it is

illegal to drive a vehicle in Wisconsin without having such insurance. Those who do not have

automobile insurance have revealed that they take risks by forgoing the insurance, and they have

similar observable characteristics to the patients who do not have health insurance in terms of

their vehicles, neighborhoods, and crash types.

       Police-reported crash and personal characteristics offer a new way to control for injury

severity. The police measures are less likely to be influenced by the victim’s health insurance

status compared to diagnoses of health care providers. This paper attempts to control for injury

severity by comparing patients who were in similar accidents. For example, a patient who

crashed on a rural highway resulting in severe vehicle damage will have greater injuries

compared to a patient who crashed on a slower moving urban street. Of course, hospital data can

be used to supplement the police measures of injury severity.




                                                                                                   11
Hospital Measures

         The hospital discharge data also provide a rich set of variables. These also include age,

sex, and measures of treatment, such as total facility charges and length of stay, and codes for

procedures and diagnoses. The total facility charges represent the standard room and procedure

charges as opposed to the amount billed to insurance companies or the government. This is

particularly useful for research purposes, as charges are uniform across insurance plans within

each hospital. Major diagnostic categories are used to compare patients with similar types of

injury, such as nervous system or musculoskeletal injuries.

         Finally, the expected payer is reported. As in previous work, “uninsured” is defined as

having the expected payer identified as self-pay as opposed to a form of private insurance or

government program. While the uninsured may be partially insured through subsequent lawsuits

or through automobile insurance, these are uncertain payments that hospitals do not look to first.

The hospital would have to judge the probability that another driver caused the accident times

the probability that the other driver has liability insurance, in which case the hospital may receive

payment much later.8 In addition, medical insurance within automobile insurance contracts is

usually capped at a low payment level, such as $2500—far below the costs of care in these

severe crashes. Meanwhile, the patients chart will note the lack of insurance as opposed to any

partial coverage afforded to crash victims. It appears, then, that hospitals would regard the

uninsured as likely candidates for uncompensated care, while the partial coverage will make

finding treatment differences for the uninsured more difficult.


7
  The use of ZIP code fixed effects is also explored below. Restricting the analysis to within-ZIP, within-hospital
variation may be too restrictive in identifying mortality effects. Nevertheless, similar results are found when ZIP
code fixed effects are included.
8
  Much of hospital bad debt is due to catastrophic events to uninsured patients, suggesting they often do not get paid.
In addition, Wisconsin is not a no-fault insurance state. That is, reimbursement from an insurance company would
require proving that another driver was at fault. Also, at the time of these crashes, Wisconsin was one of the few
states that did not require automobile policies to include liability insurance.


                                                                                                                    12
         The total number of linked police-hospital records is 28,236 and ten percent are

uninsured. This fraction is similar to the estimated 9-11% of the non-elderly population who are

uninsured in Wisconsin over this period (KFF, 1998). The sample is restricted in a number of

ways to provide more meaningful estimates of treatment and mortality differences, though

results are similar when the entire data set is used as shown below. First, to consider patients

who are the least likely to make treatment decisions, the estimation focuses on the most severely

injured patients: those who were judged by the police to be incapacitated and those who

eventually died.9 This results in 16,648 observations. Patients over the age of sixty-five are

excluded due to near universal insurance coverage through Medicare. Also, hospital records are

available for patients where they were finally discharged, so patients who transferred from

another hospital will mechanically have shorter lengths of stay. These observations are dropped

for comparability, though insurance status does not predict hospital transfer.10 It does not appear

that hospitals transfer the financial risk of treating uninsured patients to other hospitals. Finally,

comparisons are first restricted to the uninsured and the privately insured. Comparisons with

Medicaid recipients are made separately. These restrictions result in 10,842 patients to study, of

which nearly fifteen percent are uninsured.11

         Table 1 shows the basic results in the form of a mean comparison. The top panel

compares the uninsured with the privately insured, while the bottom panel compares medically

9
  According to the National Safety Council’s 1996 Manual on Classification of Motor Vehicle Traffic Accidents, an
incapacitating injury is “any injury, other than a fatal injury, which prevents the injured person from walking,
driving or normally continuing the activities the person was capable of performing before the injury occurred.
Inclusions: severe lacerations, broken or distorted limbs, skull or chest injuries, abdominal injuries, unconsciousness
at or when taken from the accident scene, and unable to leave the accident scene without assistance, and others.
Exclusion: momentary unconsciousness”. It appears that almost all of those with fatal injuries were incapacitated at
the scene as evidenced by their nearly universal rate of ambulance transfer.
10
   5.7% of the incapacitated crash victims were transferred. In a regression predicting hospital transfer with full
controls, an indicator of having health insurance has a coefficient of –0.004 with a standard error of 0.005.
11
   The restrictions dropped 2,113 observations due to age. 804 observations were dropped due to transfer. There
were 2,065 observations where the patient has Medicaid or other government insurance. Medicaid recipients will be



                                                                                                                    13
uninsured drivers to those with private health insurance but no automobile insurance—a group

similar on observable characteristics. In both comparisons, the uninsured receive less treatment

and have higher mortality, on average. For example, the uninsured stay in the hospital for 6.4

days, compared to 9.2 days for the insured—a thirty percent difference. Similarly, average

facility charges are $13,100 versus $20,700. Median differences are smaller, though still

substantial: 4 days in care for the uninsured and 5 days for the insured, while the median facility

charges are $6,700 compared with $8,900.12 The uninsured have higher mortality rates in the

raw data as well, 4.4% vs. 3.7%.

         The predicted mortality is also reported, as a first look at injury severity. This is the

average predicted value from a regression of mortality on all of the police and hospital measures

used in the paper (with the exception of insurance status). Based on these observables, and the

assumption that the effect of these regressors on mortality is homogeneous across the two

groups, it does not appear that the uninsured are more likely to have fatal crash characteristics.13

         Table 2 shows that these treatment differences remain within police-reported injury

severity levels. The table also shows that total facility charges increase with injury severity,

suggesting that police evaluations are informative. The difference in treatment is larger for more

severely injured patients. Patients with possible or unknown injuries are more likely to choose

whether to visit the hospital. Selection of the relatively healthy uninsured victims out of the

hospital data may contribute to the smaller treatment differences found in these categories.


examined in section five. 717 observations were lost due to missing hour of day or major diagnostic code values,
and 107 observations were dropped when all of the patients in a particular hospital were insured.
12
   As the median and mean comparison shows, the treatment measures are right skewed, as usual. In the panel
regressions used below, the natural logarithm of each treatment measure is used to place less weight on the extreme
observations. In addition, the results are shown to be robust to trimming the data of large and small observations.
13
   The standard deviation of predicted mortality is similar in the two groups, so heteroskedasticty due to the
estimated nature of the predicted mortality should not affect the test of mean equivalence. In fact, the t-tests are
identical when observations are weighted by the inverse of the square-root of the predicted mortality standard
deviation.


                                                                                                                  14
Alternatively, there may be less discretion in these types of cases, as they often involve broken

bones that may require similar procedures for both the insured and uninsured.

Differences between the Insured and Uninsured

         Incapacitation at the scene does not mean that patients will have similar observable

characteristics. Indeed, if accidents were completely random, then the differences in the

population, such as age or inclination to wear a seatbelt, would be revealed in the incapacitation

sample. Much of the paper attempts to control for these differences, including the use of patients

who do not have automobile insurance as a comparison group. The CODES data also provide a

particularly rich set of control variables. Table 3 summarizes these controls and reveals some

key differences between the two groups.

         The uninsured are slightly younger (29 vs. 30) and more likely to be male (72% vs. 62%).

Perhaps surprisingly, they are less likely to substitute self-protection in the form of a restraint (a

seat belt or child seat) compared to the insured (19% vs. 30%), consistent with differences in seat

belt use found by Clyde et.al. (1996). The uninsured are more likely to drive late at night (32%

vs. 24%). They also drive older cars and come from poorer neighborhoods, consistent with the

fact that the uninsured tend to be poorer than the privately insured. While these comparisons

suggest that the uninsured may suffer more severe injuries, the uninsured are less likely to have a

diagnosis of multiple significant trauma (16% vs. 20%), or to be trapped at the scene (15% vs.

17%)—both predictors of mortality.14 Table 1 suggests that the predicted mortality for the

uninsured is actually slightly less than the predicted morality for the privately insured.




14
  While the major diagnostic categories are used to compare patients with similar areas of injury, the smaller
proportion of uninsured patients with multiple significant trauma may reflect less treatment received by the
uninsured. The results are shown with and without these controls.



                                                                                                                 15
       There are some similarities between the two groups. Both groups come largely from

rural areas. In addition, vehicle damage and vehicle types are also similar for the two groups.



4. Empirical Model and Results

       The mean differences in treatment and mortality are suggestive that the uninsured receive

less care. Conditioning on observable crash and personal characteristics provides a way to

compare patients with similar injuries. Further, hospital fixed effects are used to exploit within-

hospital variation in treatment. In this way, hospital characteristics that are constant across

patients, such as accounting procedures, charity care policies, and trauma resources, are

controlled. In addition, year indicators are included to control for unobservable characteristics

that vary by year, such as technological advancement, but affect both the insured and uninsured.

Mortality will be used to test the effect of insurance status on patient outcomes. A linear

probability model is used where the dependent variable equals one if the patient died and zero

otherwise, which facilitates the use of hospital and year fixed effects.15

       For person i at hospital h in year t, the estimating equations are:

     (1)     ln(Treatment iht ) = γ 0 + γ 1Uninsured iht + γ 2 Personal Characteristics iht
                                        +γ 3 Crash Characteristics iht + γ 4Vehicle Characteristics iht
                                        +γ 5 Neighborhood Characteristicsiht + θ h + δ t + ε iht ,

                                                     and

           ( 2)    Fatal iht = φ 0 + φ1Uninsured iht + φ 2 Personal Characteristics iht
                                   +φ 3 Crash Characteristics iht + φ 4Vehicle Characteristics iht
                                   +φ 5 Neighborhood Characteristics iht + η h + λt + υ iht

with the usual exogeneity assumptions: letting Z represent all right hand side variables,

                                  (3)       E (ε iht | Z ) = E (υ iht | Z ) = 0




                                                                                                          16
         The natural log transformation of the treatment variables is standard in the literature, as

these variables are right skewed. All personal and crash characteristics listed in Table 3 are used

as controls, with the exception of airbag deployment, which was only available since 1995.16

Given the wide range of ages in the data set, five age categories are included to allow a non-

linear relationship. Individual indicators for the hour of the day and day of the week are also

included.

         From the Vehicle Identification Number, model year indicators are included in the model,

as well as the engine size, MSRP, vehicle weight, and two-door status indicators listed in Table

3. The VIN is recorded in 83% of car and truck crash victims (84% for privately insured and

79% for the uninsured). For observations with missing vehicle information, and for

motorcyclists, bicyclists and pedestrians, the data have been filled with sample mean values and

an indicator for missing VIN information is included.17 Similarly, for the two percent of the

observations that came from ZIP codes where Census data have been suppressed due to small

population sizes, an indicator for these observations has been included in the analysis. Results

are similar when alternative specifications are used, as shown below.

A. The Uninsured Receive Less Treatment

         Table 4 presents the main results where all of the models include hospital and year fixed

effects. Panel A shows the estimates from the treatment regressions. Columns (1) and (6)

15
   The results are similar when probit models are estimated.
16
   In these severe crashes, the VIN is recorded in 83% of car and truck crash victims (84% for privately insured and
79% for the uninsured). For these cases and for motorcyclists, bicyclists, and pedestrians, the vehicle information
has been filled in with sample mean values and an indicator for missing VIN information is included. A second
indicator for is included for the subset of observations with all vehicle information except for vehicle weight. This
is largely due to the older vehicles driven by the uninsured, controlled for in the analysis with model-year and
calendar-year indicators. Similarly, for the two percent of the observations that came from ZIP codes where Census
data have been suppressed due to small population sizes, an indicator for these observations has been included in the
analysis.
17
   A second indicator is included for the subset of observations with all vehicle information except for vehicle
weight. This is largely due to the older VINs not containing such information, which is controlled for in the analysis
with model-year indicators.


                                                                                                                   17
provide estimates from models that include an indicator for insurance status and no additional

controls. The uninsured are found to receive fifteen log points fewer charges and twenty log

points fewer days in care. These estimates are smaller than the insurance effects found in the

mean comparisons of Table 1, which showed differences of thirty log points fewer facility

charges and twenty-eight log points fewer days in care. This is partly due to the fact that the

uninsured tend to be treated at hospitals that offer less treatment to everyone. It could be that the

severity of crashes or hospital resources differ in areas where the uninsured live. This implies

that it is important to consider the effect of hospital and local area characteristics when

measuring treatment differences between the insured and uninsured.18

         The remaining columns progressively add control variables and demonstrate the stability

of the estimates. The inclusion of police crash measures and vehicle characteristics do not alter

the estimated effect of insurance on treatment. The main results in Columns (4) and (9) include

all of the control variables listed in Table 3, including controls for the five major diagnostic

categories. While these categories are a function of treatment decisions, inclusion does not

change the overall results and serves as an attempt to compare patients with similar types of

injury. Total facility charges are approximately fourteen log points lower for the uninsured and

length of stay is seventeen log points lower. An advantage of the relatively large sample of

uninsured patients is that the estimates are fairly precisely estimated with standard errors of

approximately 0.02.

         Re-transforming the estimates in columns (3) and (7) from log points to percentages, the

uninsured are found to receive 22% fewer facility charges and 20% fewer days of care.19


18
   The smaller estimates may also be explained by the increased influence of measurement error in models with
fixed-effects. However, this explanation is not consistent with the mortality results shown below.
19
   The natural logarithm of each treatment measure is used, as is standard in the health literature where the measures,
such as length of stay in the hospital, are right skewed. When interpreting the estimates in terms of percentages or


                                                                                                                    18
Evaluated at the sample mean of the control variables, this represents a difference of $3,300 in

facility charges and 1.8 days in care. 20

          Columns (5) and (10) introduce a categorical variable equal to one if the primary payer

were a Health Maintenance Organization (HMO), with fee-for-service insurance as the omitted

category. HMOs are associated with slightly less treatment, three log points fewer days in care

and four log points fewer charges. The small difference is not surprising, as fee-for-service plans

also contract with hospitals to monitor the care provided. Interestingly, Medicare often pays

HMOs five percent less than fee-for-service arrangements—a difference in treatment similar to

the one found here.

          Other variables largely have the expected results as shown in the appendix. Older and

rural patients receive more treatment, as do those who were in a head-on collision, suffered

multiple significant trauma, or were trapped in their vehicle. Using a seatbelt or child safety seat

is associated with less treatment, as expected from previous studies showing the importance of

seatbelts in preventing injury. Occupants of vehicles with small engines, motor cycle riders and


dollars, as opposed to log points or log dollars, the results are re-transformed, and it is necessary to consider
heteroskedasticity (Manning, 1998). Consider that the estimating equation
is: ln T = Xβ + ε or T = exp( Xβ ) exp(ε ) and E (T | X ) = exp( Xβ ) E (exp(ε )) . To compare the two
groups, letβ 1 be the coefficient associated with being uninsured and evaluate the expectations at common levels of
the remaining right-hand-side variables, X −1 with associated coefficients β −1 . The ratio of expected treatment for
the two groups is given by:
           E (T | Uninsured , X −1 )                exp( X −1 β −1 ) E (exp(ε ) | Uninsured )                E (exp(ε ) | Uninsured )
                                     = exp( β 1 ) *                 *                         = exp( β 1 ) *
            E (T | Insured , X −1 )                 exp( X −1 β −1 ) E (exp(ε ) | Insured )                   E (exp(ε ) | Insured )
Note that because the remaining right hand side variables are evaluated at the same level, they cancel in the ratio.
Also, by Jensen’s inequality, the expectation of the exponentiated error is greater than the exponential of the
expectation of the error. So both groups may have an error term with an expected value of zero, but that need not
translate into the exponentiated error terms having the expected value of one. In practice, the expectations can be
substituted by their sample counterparts--the average of the exponentiated residuals for the two groups--to form the
nonparametric “smearing factor”. The re-transformed estimate of the treatment gap is in percentage terms instead of
 β 1 , which is in log points.
20
   In forming the nonparametric “smearing factor”, the average exponentiated residuals in the charges regression are
1.44 for the uninsured and 1.61 for the insured. For length of stay, they are 1.36 and 1.43. The expected charges
and length of stay for the insured are calculated to be $15,174 and 9.0 days, evaluated at the sample mean of the
control variables.


                                                                                                                                  19
pedestrians receive more treatment. Women tend to receive slightly less treatment as measured

by facility charges, though they stay in care slightly longer.

Differences in Procedures

        Analyzing individual procedures suggests that the uninsured received less treatment on a

broad array of care. Considering the one hundred most frequent three-digit procedure codes used

in these trauma cases, nineteen procedures were found to differ between the insured and

uninsured (at a five-percent level of significance), in a model with full controls and hospital fixed

effects.21 Of those nineteen, only “suture or other closure of skin” was greater among the

uninsured. The uninsured received fewer spinal fusions, skeletal traction, and operations on the

brain, kidney, bladder, chest, large intestine, vessels, and plastic surgery on the face, muscles,

and tendons. They also received fewer diagnostic ultrasounds. Apart from these costly

operations and tests, the uninsured received fewer amputations as well. When hospital fixed

effects are removed from the models, 22 of the top 100 procedures show differences (at the five-

percent level), where two are greater for the uninsured: sutures and “alcohol and drug

rehabilitation and detoxification.” This again points to the potential differences between the two

groups, though controlling for driving under the influence does not affect the main results.

These procedure differences suggest that a lack of health insurance has had a significant effect

on treatment decisions on a wide range of health problems, including potentially life saving

procedures.

B. Effect on Mortality

        Panel B of Table 4 shows the mortality results. Column (1) shows that the uninsured are

associated with a 1.3 percentage point increase in mortality when only hospital and year fixed

21
 The mean number of observations for the 100 comparisons is 83, the median is 19, the minimum is 6 and the
maximum is 1622.



                                                                                                             20
effects are included. This result is stable to the addition of control variables as shown in columns

(2)-(4). Column (4) shows the result using all of the control variables, and the uninsured have

higher mortality by 1.5 percentage points—thirty-nine percent higher than the sample mortality

rate of 3.8%. Finally, HMOs and fee-for-service insurance plans have similar mortality rates,

which is not surprising given the small difference in treatment between HMOs and fee-for-

service insurance plans.

       Other variables again have expected effects as shown in the appendix. For example,

wearing a seatbelt reduces the risk of death, while an increased risk of death is associated with

suffering multiple significant trauma or being trapped in a vehicle.

       The use of hospital fixed effects strengthens the mortality result slightly. In models

without fixed effects but with all other controls, the coefficient on being uninsured is 0.012 with

standard error of 0.006. The larger estimates with hospital fixed effects argue against the

increased influence of measurement error as an explanation for the smaller treatment differences

found when hospital fixed effects were introduced. This larger mortality result is partly due to

the fact that the uninsured tend to have greater mortality differences in hospitals that serve fewer

uninsured patients. These hospitals may face smaller subsidies for providing charity care to the

uninsured, possibly resulting in less care and higher mortality. The insured may live closer to

hospitals that have greater resources, where mortality differences are more likely to be evident.

Again, it is important to consider hospital differences when comparing the insured and

uninsured.

Comparison of Hospital Types

       The 1992 Wisconsin Hospital Fiscal Survey and the 1992 Annual Survey of Hospitals

conducted by the Wisconsin Bureau of Health Information provide detailed information on




                                                                                                    21
hospital resources, usage of charity care and bad debt expenses, teaching status, and mission.

Hospitals that vary by resources, “generosity”, or mission may treat the uninsured differently.

Table 5 shows the results of regressions that restrict the sample to particular types of hospitals.

       First, whether more generous hospitals provide more care is tested. The measures of

generosity are the fraction of total revenue forgone to charity care, and the fraction of total

expenses coming from writing-off bad debt. A higher bad-debt expense ratio may imply less

strict collection policies. One check on the hospital surveys is that hospitals with greater-than-

median bad-debt ratios are found to serve more uninsured patients. Nevertheless, the treatment

and mortality differences at generous hospitals are found to be similar to the main results.

       Second, the resources available to the hospital may influence treatment decisions.

Resources are measured by the hospital’s return on assets in 1992, the number of intensive-care-

unit beds, and income from public sources which may imply access to public money or that the

hospital requires more support. The sample was divided into two groups based on the median

hospital’s resources. Table 5 shows that hospitals with more intensive-care-unit beds and higher

returns on assets have slightly larger treatment differences. Meanwhile, restricting the data to

hospitals with greater than median income from public sources shows similar treatment

differences and greater mortality differences. These hospitals have the greatest potential to

perform costly, life saving procedures. The mortality rate is higher at these hospitals as the most

serious cases may be delivered there. It is not surprising, then, that the difference in treatment

and mortality are more evident in these hospitals.

       Another estimate of resources available is teaching status. There are six teaching

hospitals in Wisconsin, which typically have more advanced technology. That said, young

physicians are learning their craft, and anecdotal evidence suggests that the uninsured may




                                                                                                      22
receive more care from inexperienced physicians. The results suggest that treatment and

mortality differences are much larger at teaching hospitals compared to non-teaching hospitals.

Again, hospitals with more resources may have the ability to provide costly, life-saving care to

the insured.

        The last category is hospital mission. Nonprofit hospitals that are religiously affiliated

are compared to those that are not. This tests whether manager motivations affect the provision

of care.22 Patients at the two types of hospitals are similar, with religious hospitals more likely

to have rural patients (80% vs. 77%). In the non-religiously-affiliated hospitals, where most of

the data reside, show results similar to the full sample. In the subset of hospitals that are

religiously-affiliated, treatment differences are smaller and the mortality result goes away. In

fact, the sign of the effect of no insurance on mortality becomes negative. When the sample size

changes this drastically, the mortality result is more volatile and this result should be interpreted

with caution. Nevertheless, it suggests that such hospitals provide more care to the uninsured

than hospitals that are not religiously affiliated.

        One issue that arises is the selection of hospital by the patient or ambulance driver. With

the most severe crashes, patients are supposed to be taken to the nearest hospital that can

accommodate trauma cases. The uninsured do tend to go to hospitals with fewer resources,

which may be due to the location distribution of accidents. One example is that 10% of the

teaching hospital patients are uninsured (matching the average for the state), while 16% of the

non-teaching hospital patients are uninsured. If the only uninsured patients that go to teaching

hospitals are the worst off, explaining the mortality result, then we would expect them to receive

more treatment in general, not less. On the other hand, the uninsured patients who go to teaching




                                                                                                     23
hospitals may be those who live nearby, whereas the insured patients must travel longer to arrive.

This may offer an explanation of the treatment differences, but not the mortality difference. A

more complete discussion of the potential for unobserved differences in injury severity and time-

to-hospital is discussed in the next section.



5. Specification and Robustness Tests

         Provider sensitivity to insurance status has been offered as an explanation for the lower

treatment levels and higher mortality rates among the uninsured. Alternatively, a number of

unobserved characteristics may explain the results. This section presents a number of

specification and robustness tests, and the results suggest that unobserved heterogeneity in

injuries, crash types, and personal characteristics do not drive the treatment and mortality

differences.

No Health Insurance vs. No Automobile Insurance

         According to the mean comparisons in Table 3, the uninsured tend to be riskier drivers,

come from poorer neighborhoods, and drive older, less expensive vehicles. These differences

suggest that the uninsured may have worse health problems in ways that are difficult to control.

         One way to test the effect of these unobserved differences is to match the uninsured with

a similar group of patients. The linked police data provide a novel comparison group: drivers

who have health insurance but do not have automobile insurance. These drivers have revealed

that they take more risks by forgoing insurance. Table 6 shows that they are similar to the

medically uninsured in terms of age, sex, time and day of the accident, and major diagnosis

codes. In this driver subset, two additional variables are also similar between the groups: an

22
  Nearly all of the hospitals in the data are not-for-profit, precluding the usual comparisons of public vs. private and
for-profit vs. nonprofit (Duggan, 2000; Norton and Staiger; 1994, Sloan, 1999). The only public hospital closed in



                                                                                                                      24
indicator for driving under the influence of alcohol (38% vs. 42%), and an indicator that the

driver was at least partially at fault (72% vs. 77%).

         The two groups also come from similar neighborhoods. While the neighborhoods where

the medically uninsured live differ from those with private health insurance, Table 6 shows that

the race, education, and income measures are close between the two groups. Car and truck

characteristics are also similar, with the exception that the medically uninsured are more likely to

driver newer cars (19% vs. 9%).

         The biggest difference in the two groups is the likelihood of driving a motorcycle (24%

vs. 42%). Those without auto insurance also tend to come from larger cities and are less likely to

wear a seatbelt. Results are not sensitive to considering drivers of cars and trucks only, drivers

in smaller towns, or drivers not wearing a seatbelt as shown below.

         Table 7 shows the results of regressions similar to the main results.23 The medically

uninsured are found to receive fifteen log points fewer charges, nineteen log points fewer days in

care, and have a 1.7 percentage point higher mortality rate. Given the similarity in observable

characteristics, it appears that differences such as income level, vehicle quality, or risk taking

behavior are not driving the main results.

Further Specification Tests

         Table 8 shows the results of further specification tests. The first set considers patients

who have private health insurance and tests whether automobile insurance status affects

treatment and mortality. The main results regress treatment and mortality on an indicator that the

patient was uninsured. If having no insurance were a proxy for some other cause of the

treatment and mortality differences, then the automobile insurance indicator may predict some


1995 (other than the University of Wisconsin’s teaching hospital), and there are no for-profit hospitals in these data.




                                                                                                                     25
difference in treatment and mortality. Table 8 shows that automobile insurance is not related to

treatment or mortality, suggesting that the ability-to-pay of patients is driving the earlier

results—not risk preference or income differences between the medically insured and

uninsured.24

Accident-level fixed effects

           Another consideration is that the uninsured may get into crashes that are different in ways

that are not controlled in the above regressions. For example, the uninsured may be more likely

to crash far from a hospital and the longer travel time may explain the mortality result.25 Table

8 reports results for the 113 accidents where at least one uninsured and one insured patient were

deemed incapacitated and visited the same hospital. The treatment and mortality regressions

were estimated with accident-times-hospital fixed effects, though alternative specifications were

similar.26 The results are remarkably consistent with the estimates using the larger sample:

twelve log points fewer charges, seventeen log points fewer days in care, and a 1.4 percentage

point higher mortality rate. Of course, these estimates are measured with less precision due to

the smaller sample sizes, but the similarity in the point estimates supports the robustness of the

results.


23
   In models comparing all drivers, the results are similar, and the inclusion of an indicator of having automobile
insurance, driving under the influence, and being at fault do not change the estimates.
24
   Analysis was also conducted considering only those who do not have automobile insurance—a smaller sample of
1192 patients of which 30% are medically uninsured. The two groups are similar in terms of seat belt use and areas
of injury, while the uninsured still tend to come from smaller cities and are less likely to ride a motorcycle. Similar
results are found with the medically uninsured receiving 21 log points fewer charges with a standard error of 0.064
and 24 log points fewer days in care with a standard error of 0.057. They also have a mortality rate that is 0.083
percentage points higher (standard error 0.011)—again a large difference given the sample average of 2.0 percent,
though it is less precisely estimated.
25
   Time to the hospital is not available in the data. However, introducing county-of-accident fixed effects to control
for cross-county admissions has no effect on the coefficients.
26
   Another 68 accidents occurred with incapacitated insured and uninsured occupants who were delivered to
different hospitals. Incorporating these accidents in models with accident fixed effects, but no hospital fixed effects,
the coefficients (standard errors) on charges, length of stay, and mortality are -0.14 (0.10) ,-.20 (.09) , and .010 (.02)
respectively. Including hospital fixed effects yields estimates of -0.08 (0.12), -0.16 (0.10), and 0.015 (0.03),
respectively.


                                                                                                                       26
Comparison of Injury Severity

       Results shown in Table 8 suggest that unobserved differences in injury severity do not

drive the treatment and mortality results. First, insurance status does not predict police-reported

injury severity. Using the full sample of survivors, a linear probability model was estimated with

the dependent variable equal to one if police report that the patient were incapacitated and zero

otherwise. The full set of controls and hospital and year fixed effects are also included. Table 8

shows that being uninsured is not associated with incapacitation at the scene. Another test

focuses on the use of an ambulance. If the uninsured were more likely to refuse to travel by

ambulance and arrive later to the hospital, they may be lost from the sample or have

systematically different injuries. Table 8 shows that insurance status does not predict whether

the patient uses an ambulance.

       One way that the uninsured can affect injury severity is the way they drive. This would

explain the treatment differences if the uninsured succeeded in avoiding the most severe

accidents, while it would explain the mortality result if they had more severe accidents. One way

to abstract from the effect of driving quality is to examine passengers only. While uninsured

passengers may be similar to drivers due to positive assortative “mating”, they have less control

over the likelihood of an accident. Table 8 shows that the results are similar for the subset of

passengers.

       These tests suggest that the uninsured are not likely to have different levels of injury

severity. This is also suggested by the finding that the uninsured receive less treatment yet die

more often. For example, the mortality difference may be due to more severe injuries suffered

by the uninsured, as suggested by their disproportionate representation in the incapacitation

sample, their apparent risk taking behavior of not wearing a seatbelt, and their older, potentially




                                                                                                    27
less safe, cars compared to the privately insured. However, if they had more severe injuries,

more treatment should have been observed for survivors, not less. Alternatively, less severe

injuries, suggested by the smaller proportion of uninsured patients who were trapped at the

accident or who suffered multiple significant trauma, would be associated with less treatment

and lower mortality—not higher mortality as observed. While less treatment and higher

mortality may be expected if the uninsured were more likely to be almost dead on arrival,

estimates below suggest that these cases have little effect on the estimates. The combination of

less treatment and higher mortality suggests that the results are not due to systematic differences

in injury severity.

Medicaid Recipients vs. the Uninsured

        Like those who do not have auto insurance, Medicaid recipients offer another interesting

contrast to the uninsured. Medicaid is health insurance publicly provided to those who meet

specific criteria such as members of low-income, single-parent families and disabled

Supplemental Security Income recipients. If income differences were driving the earlier results,

then treatment and outcomes for the uninsured should be similar to Medicaid recipients.

        The groups have some major differences, however. Table 9 shows that the uninsured are

older (29 vs. 21) and less likely to be female (29% vs. 49%) due to eligibility requirements that

favor the inclusion of mothers and children. Accordingly, the uninsured are more likely to ride

a motorcycle and crash in the middle of the night. The uninsured are more likely to wear a

seatbelt, though this difference goes away when adults are compared. Also, Medicaid recipients

are more likely to crash in a large population area (26% vs. 7%).

        Given that Medicaid eligibility requires a low income or a disability, this group may have

worse underlying health status than the uninsured. This can also be seen from the neighborhoods




                                                                                                    28
where Medicaid recipients live. They have lower median incomes ($25,000 vs. $28,000), and

have larger nonwhite populations (26% vs. 8%). Despite these differences, Medicaid recipients

have similar areas of injury and car sizes (engine and vehicle weights).

          Table 10 shows results for treatment and mortality. The effects are magnified, suggesting

that income differences between the insured and uninsured are not driving the earlier results.

The uninsured receive substantially less treatment (37 log points fewer charges and 50 log points

fewer days in care), and have even higher mortality (by 4.7 percentage points). Retransforming

the estimates to percentage terms, the uninsured are found to receive forty-eight and fifty-one

percent fewer facility charges and shorter lengths of stay, respectively. At the sample mean of

the control variables, this represents a $9,800 difference in facility charges and 5.7 fewer days in

care.27

          While the combination of lower treatment levels and higher mortality for the uninsured

provides additional support for the earlier results, the difference in treatment is much larger. A

likely explanation is that differences in the Medicaid population make comparisons difficult.

Medicaid recipients are likely to have poorer underlying health status due to disability eligibility

and the effects of poverty. Unlike the privately insured, they may become incapacitated more

easily and require more treatment due to their chronic health problems, despite less severe

injuries in the crash. This would partly explain the larger treatment and mortality differences.

Accordingly, male Medicaid recipients, who are almost always eligible due to disability

requirements, have substantially larger treatment differences compared to women, many of

whom qualify due to income standards. Also, treatment differences are smaller comparing


27
  When re-transforming the estimates, the average exponentiated residuals in the charges regression are 1.41for the
uninsured and 1.87 for the insured. For length of stay, they are 1.33 and 1.65. The predicted values of the
retransformed charges and length of stay for the insured are $20,452 and 11.1 days, evaluated at the sample mean of
the control variables.


                                                                                                                 29
children in Medicaid and those who are privately insured, as they usually qualify for Medicaid

due to family-income standards instead of disability.

         Another explanation for the larger treatment difference is that Wisconsin Medicaid

reimbursement rules may encourage greater treatment levels. In Wisconsin, many of the cases

studied here qualify for ‘outlier’ payments—additional funds from Medicaid based on their high

cost. That is, additional charges mean additional reimbursement at the margin.28 In contrast,

most private insurers contract with each hospital and pay on a capitated basis—the hospital is

paid a fixed amount for each individual treated as an inpatient. These results suggest that

Medicaid’s cost-based reimbursement scheme may lead to greater treatment levels.

         Further, mandated benefits in Wisconsin’s Medicaid program appear to be generous,

which may prevent contractors, such as HMOs that manage part of the program, from restricting

physician choices. Duggan (2000) shows that Medicaid patients were more profitable in

California over this period.29 This may be true in Wisconsin as well, as Medicaid appears to be

more generous there than in California.30 In addition, Skinner and Silverman (2001) and Dafny

(2002), among others, show that payments can vary substantially within illness categories. They

find evidence that hospitals categorize Medicare patients in diagnostic groups that offer greater

payments. Consistent with this notion “upcoding” in the Medicaid program, the introduction of

controls for diagnosis-related groups decreases the treatment differences as discussed below.

         Finally, the larger treatment differences may be due to more adequately matched samples

in terms of unobserved injury severity. If the uninsured suffered from worse injuries in ways

28
   When costs exceed reimbursement by $31,000 for large hospitals and $5,100 for small hospitals, Medicaid
reimbursement is roughly fifty percent of the hospital charges above the threshold.
29
   This was done through additional subsidies to hospitals with large shares of low-income patients, paid on a per-
diem basis for Medicaid recipients. While Wisconsin did not take as large a part in this Federal program as
California did, Wisconsin did begin its own initiative to subsidize the treatment of Medicaid patients in such
hospitals.




                                                                                                                      30
that are not controlled, then the magnitude of the estimated treatment differences would be

smaller than the true differences. This would imply that the results comparing the uninsured

with the privately insured may understate the effect of insurance on treatment, though this would

be inconsistent with the mortality differences found. 31 This possibility was tested using a

propensity score approach (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983) for the uninsured versus privately

insured comparison, and similar results were found.32

Robustness to Sample Changes and Additional Controls

         The results are robust across a number of specifications as shown in Table 11. For

example, the results are similar for samples including: the entire data set, all ages, adults less

than sixty-five years old, patients who did not use a seatbelt or safety seat, and all those who

traveled by ambulance even if they were not judged by police to be incapacitated. For the

ambulance transfer sample, the coefficient on being uninsured in the mortality equation is 0.01.

This is again quite large given that the mortality rate in this subset is 2.5%.




30
   According to the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), Medicaid spending per recipient is nearly twice
as large in Wisconsin compared to California (www.hcfa.gov).
31
   Another explanation would be that the most severely-injured uninsured patients were deemed disabled and
therefore eligible for Medicaid. In this case, the remaining uninsured patients would necessarily receive lower
treatment levels. However, the expected payer is defined as the person or organization to which the bill was
originally submitted. According to Wisconsin hospital administrators, determining Medicaid eligibility usually
takes over five months—long after most patients are discharged. As shown below, the comparisons are robust to
restricting the sample to stays that were less than one month.
32
   The propensity score is a predicted probability that a given patient is uninsured, using all of the control variables
to predict whether the patient has insurance or not. Within deciles of these scores, the control variables are similar,
or balanced, and it is hoped that the unobserved characteristics are also similar. The largest treatment differences
are in the decile least likely to be uninsured, with coefficients of -.31 and -.39. For the remaining deciles, the
charges coefficient varies from -.27 to -.035, with the most likely to be insured decile recording a coefficient of -
.203. For length of stay, the top nine deciles have coefficients ranging from -.33 to -.11 in the most likely to be
insured decile. In the next to most likely to be insured decile the difference in length of stay is -.18. For mortality,
the top and bottom deciles show no mortality effect, with the least likely to be insured showing a negative
coefficient. For the remaining eight deciles, the coefficients range from .006 to .067, with most close to 0.2. Not
surprisingly, the mortality results are noisier given the smaller sample sizes, but the lack of a pattern as the
likelihood of being uninsured increases suggests that severity of injury did not systematically increase with the
propensity to be uninsured.


                                                                                                                      31
        Car drivers are considered separately, as a comparison to the auto insurance-health

insurance comparison, with the addition of DUI and at-fault indicators. Results are not sensitive

to this restriction.

        Trimming the data of large and small observations does not affect the results. If

uninsured patients were more likely to be very close to death when entering the hospital, then

treatment may be lower for these patients. Table 10 shows that removing patients who were

given little treatment from the analysis does not alter the results. Similarly, the re-transformed

estimates are not affected by trimming.

        To consider patient decisions, the results are robust to dropping observations where the

patient left the hospital “against medical advice.” This happens in rare cases, though not

surprisingly more frequently for the uninsured (1.4% vs. 0.3%). However, Table 11 shows that

the results are not sensitive to dropping these observations.

        The main results use ZIP code characteristics to control for patient demographics such as

race, education, and income. Another way to proceed would be to use ZIP code fixed-effects.

While finding one percentage-point mortality differences within ZIP codes within hospitals

would appear to ask too much of the data, Table 11 shows similar results when ZIP code fixed

effects are included.33

        The adequacy of controlling for injury severity is also considered. The results are similar

when dummy variables for 128 diagnostic related groups (DRG) are introduced. While

including the five major diagnostic categories served to control for the broad area of injury, these

groups are more specific. For example, DRGs include “peripheral and cranial nerve and other

nerve system procedures” and “major chest trauma without complications or comorbitites”.

However, the DRG is defined by diagnoses that may be related to insurance status. If the




                                                                                                     32
uninsured were given less care, they would be compared to insured patients who were less

severely injured. This would tend to shrink the treatment differences and widen the mortality

differences. While the coefficients move in those directions, the similar results further

demonstrate the robustness of the findings.

           Table 11 also reports the treatment results in models where the level of treatment is used

as the dependent variable, instead of using the natural log transformation. Differences in

treatment increase for total facility charges to $4,100, and are similar for length of stay—1.6

days.

           Finally, Table 11 shows that the auto insurance-health insurance comparison and the

Medicaid comparison are robust as well. The Medicaid differences are larger for men, who are

much more likely to have a disability to become eligible. Consistent with upcoding, the use of

DRG fixed effects yields smaller treatment differences, but larger mortality differences,

particularly in the Medicaid comparison.



6. Implications

           Previous studies found that the uninsured received approximately 40% less health care

than the insured, though some estimates are as low as twenty-five percent (Marquis and Long

(1994) offer a review, Haas and Goldman (1994) show results for emergency care). The

estimates here are at the low end of this range, suggesting that previous estimates of treatment

differences may have had substantial selection bias.

           While the treatment difference is less than previously found, it is still substantial and

represents a relatively low cost of saving a statistical life. The difference in facility charges is



33
     The data are restricted to ZIP codes and Hospitals where at least one uninsured patient is present.


                                                                                                           33
estimated to be $3,300 at the sample mean of the control variables.34 With an increased

mortality rate of 1.5 percentage points, the implied cost of saving a statistical life, then, is

roughly $220,000 (=$3,300/0.015). For the Medicaid-uninsured comparison, the implied cost of

saving a statistical life is $209,000.

         This is much cheaper than most attempts to lower mortality, especially given how young

the uninsured are. Tengs et.al. (1995) discuss five hundred life-saving interventions and find that

the median cost per life-year saved from fatal injury reductions is $48,000. For other

interventions such as toxin control, the estimate increases to $2.8 million. Given the $220,000

cost of saving a statistical life attributed to health insurance, the comparable figure here would be

approximately $11,000 per life-year saved.35

         To place the increased risk of death in context, it is larger than a more commonly

considered effect of health provider actions—complications or misadventures during surgery. It

is estimated that there is a thirty-percent chance of being in a serious automobile accident in a

lifetime.36 Say the insured and uninsured face that same risk, but the uninsured are more likely

to die by 1.5 percentage points. This implies that the uninsured have a 0.45 percentage point

increase in the lifetime risk of dying due to severe automobile accidents. This is over five times

the lifetime risk of dying due to complications or misadventures during surgery.



34
   Cost audits performed by Medicaid and Medicare suggest that the cost of the treatment is roughly seventy percent
of charges, consistent with private insurers typically contracting with hospitals to pay seventy-five to eighty percent
of charges. However, items that are excluded from facility charges, such as physician fees, roughly offset this
adjustment. Comparing aggregate data for total charges and total facility charges in Wisconsin reveals that total
facility charges are seventy-two percent of total charges. Note that these cost audits reveal that accounting
procedures do vary by hospital—one reason why exploiting within-hospital variation is important.
35
   Assuming an equal cost per life-year saved and a discount rate of 5%, the discounted present value of spending
$11,000 each year in perpetuity would be approximately $220,000—the cost of saving a statistical life calculated
above.
36
   The National Safety Council calculates the lifetime risk of death in an automobile accident to be roughly 1.25%.
This is roughly consistent with the estimated thirty-percent chance of a severe accident and a 4% chance of death
once in a severe accident. The lifetime risk of death due to complications or misadventures during surgery is
calculated to be 0.08%.


                                                                                                                     34
       Taking this calculation one step further, it is possible to place a rough value on having

insurance. If the value were much larger than the cost of insurance, then these results may be

regarded as “too big.” It appears, however, that the cost of catastrophic health insurance is

similar in magnitude to the value of the reduction in mortality. Taking the 0.45 percentage point

decrease in lifetime risk, and assuming, for the moment, that each year is an independent and

equal risk, then the annual decrease in the risk of death for an insured adult is on the order of

0.01 percentage points. Given a value of life estimate of three million dollars, the willingness to

pay for a 0.01 percentage point decrease in the annual risk of death would be approximately

$300(=$3,000,000*0.0001) per year. In a casual survey of catastrophic insurance rates in

Wisconsin, a policy with a $1500 deductible was found to be approximately $300 per year for a

twenty-three year old man. It appears, then, that the magnitudes of the benefits and costs of

catastrophic insurance are roughly similar and that the differences in treatment and mortality are

not unreasonably large.

Flat-of-the-curve Medicine

       There is a debate in the health literature over whether diminishing returns have set in on

the ability of health care to improve outcomes. Physicians may be practicing ‘flat-of-the-curve’

medicine, as discussed in section two. An empirical test of the effectiveness of additional

treatment is complicated by the fact that more severely ill patients receive more health care. For

example, Table 2 shows that for patients who die—the most severely injured—total facility

charges are greater. More treatment is associated with worse health outcomes.

       The analysis here suggests that we are not on the “flat-of-the-curve”. An alternative

characterization of the results is to consider insurance status as an instrumental variable for

treatment. If insurance status were related to treatment levels because providers are sensitive to




                                                                                                    35
the patient’s ability-to-pay, and not due to differences in unobserved injury severity, then

insurance status could used as an instrumental variable for treatment. This would break the

spurious positive relationship between treatment and mortality. The first stage is represented in

Table 3 where treatment is regressed on insurance status to calculate the predicted facility

charges. The second stage, which predicts the probability of death, reveals a coefficient on the

instrumented charges of –0.110 with a standard error of 0.047. This implies that a ten percent

increase in facility charges is associated with a reduction in the mortality rate of roughly 1.1

percentage points.37 Again, this is a large difference as suggested by the low cost per statistical

life saved calculated above. It appears that when it comes to emergency medicine, we are not on

the “flat of the curve”.

         If evidence had been found for flat-of-the-curve medicine, then welfare implications

would stem from distorted insurance prices. However, with mortality differences, the welfare

implications are not straightforward. The uninsured may receive too little care, the insured may

receive too much, or both.



7.       Conclusion

         Using automobile accidents as unexpected health shocks where contact with medical

professionals is virtually automatic, this paper avoids selection problems inherent in previous

studies. The results suggest that there are real consequences to being uninsured. Controlling for

personal, crash, vehicle, neighborhood, and hospital characteristics, the uninsured are estimated

to receive 20% less treatment than the privately insured following serious accidents. In addition,

there appear to be large effects on mortality. The uninsured are found to have a 1.5 percentage

37
  This result can be derived from the above tables where the coefficient on uninsured in the mortality regression is
divided by the coefficient in the facility charges regression to form an IV estimate of the effect of charges on



                                                                                                                   36
point higher mortality rate compared with a mean mortality rate of 3.8%. These estimates imply

that physicians are not practicing ‘flat-of-the-curve’ medicine, at least in these trauma cases.

         Provider sensitivity toward insurance status appears to account for the difference in care,

as opposed to unobserved characteristics of the uninsured. For example, similar groups, such as

drivers who have health insurance but do not have automobile insurance, receive more treatment

and die less. In addition, the uninsured receive fewer major operations—decisions that are likely

the domain of physicians. Finally, the combination of less treatment and higher mortality is

inconsistent with systematic differences in health status between the insured and uninsured. It

appears, then, that having health insurance significantly affects treatment decisions and

ultimately patient outcomes.




mortality. The IV estimate on log length of stay on mortality is -0.088 with a standard error of 0.032.


                                                                                                          37
Bibliography

Ayanian, J.Z., Kohler, B.A., Abe, T. and A. M Epstein. “The Relation Between Health
        Insurance Coverage and Clinical Outcomes Among Women with Breast Cancer.” New
        England Journal of Medicine. 329(5). July 29, 1993: 326-31
Brown, M. E., Bindman, A. B., and N. Lurie. “Monitoring the Consequences of Uninsurance:
        A Review of Methodologies.” Medical Care Research and Review. 55(2). June 1998.
        177-210.
CDC National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National Mortality Data 1997.
        Hyattsville (MD): NCHS 1998.
Chiappori, P.A., Jullien, B., Salanié, B and F. Salanié. "Asymmetric Information in Insurance:
        A Robust Characterization.” Working paper, University of Chicago. 2001.
Chiappori, P.A. and B. Salanié. "Testing for Asymmetric Information on Insurance Markets."
        Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), 2000. 56-78.
Clyde, A. T., Hemenway, D., and J. T. Nagurney. “Seat Belt Use, Insurance Status, and
        Hospital Bad Debt.” The Journal of Trauma. 41(1). 1996: 100-104.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. “The Technology of Birth: Health Insurance, Medical
        Interventions, and Infant Health.” NBER Working Paper. No. 5985. 1997.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. “Medical Care for Children: Public Insurance, Private
        Insurance, and Racial Differences in Utilization.” Journal of Human Resources. 30(1).
        1995: 135-62.
Dafny, Leemore. “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?” mimeo. Northwestern
        University. November 2002.
Dionne, G. and P. St-Michel. “Wokers’ Compensation and Moral Hazard.” The Review of
        Economics and Statistics. 73(2). May 1991: 236-244.
Duggan, Mark. “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics. November 2000: 1343-1373.
Enthoven, Alain C. Health Plan. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 1980.
Fortin, B. and P. Lanoie. “Substitution Between Unemployment Insurance and Wokers’
        Compensation: An Analysis Applied to the Risk of Workplace Accidents.” Journal of
        Public Economics. 49(3). December 1992: 287-312.
Haas, J. S. and L. Goldman. “Acutely Injured Patients with Trauma in Massachusetts:
        Differences in Care and Mortality, by Insurance Status.” American Journal of Public
        Health. 84(10). October 1994: 1605-1608.
Hadley, J. Steinberg, E.P., and J. Feder. “Comparison of Uninsured and Privately Insured
        Hospital Patients. Condition on Admission, Resource Use, and Outcome.” Journal of
        the American Medical Association. 265(3). January 16, 1991: 374-9.
Heckman, J., Lalonde, R., and Smith, J. "The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor
        Market Programs," Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Ashenfelter, O. and D.
        Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 1999.
Jullien, B., Salanie, B., and F. Salanie. “Should More Risk-Averse Agents Exert More Effort?”
        The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory. 24. 1999: 19-28.
Kaiser Family Foundation. State Facts: Health Needs and Medicaid Financing.
        http://www.kff.org/docs/state/states/wi.html. February 1998.
Levy, Helen and Meltzer, David. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
        Affects Health?” JCPR Working Paper. No. 275 December 2001.



                                                                                             38
Long, S.H., M.S. Marquis, and J. Rodgers. “Do people Shift Their Use of Health Services over
       Time to Take Advantage of Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics. 17. 1997: 105-
       115.
Manning, W.G. “The Logged Dependent Variable, Heteroscedasticity, and the
       Retransformation Problem.” Journal of Health Economics. 17(3). June 1998: 283-295.
Marquis M. S. and S. H. Long. “The Uninsured Access Gap: Narrowing the Estimates.”
       Inquiry. 31 (4). Winter 1994/1995: 405-414.
Maza, D. de, and D.C. Webb. “Advantageous Selection in Insurance Markets”. RAND Journal
       of Economics 32 (2). Summer 2001: 249-262.
McGuire, T.G. and R. P. Ellis. “Provider Behavior Under Prospective Reimbursement.” Journal
       of Health Economics. 5. 1986: 129-151
National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2002 With Chartbook on Trends in
       the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, Maryland: 2002.
National Center for Statistics and Analysis, National Highway Traffic Safety
       Administration. Revised Catalog of Types of Applications Implemented Using Linked
       State Data. DOT HS 808 793. Washington, DC: Department of Transportation,
       October, 1998.
National Safety Council and ANSI. Manual on Classification of Motor Vehicle Accidents: Sixth
       Edition. ANSI D16.1. Itasca, IL: NSC. 1996.
Newhouse, Joseph P. Free for all? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment.
       Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press. 1993.
Norton, E.C. and Staiger, D.O. “How hospital ownership affects access to care for the
       uninsured.” The Rand Journal of Economics. 25(1) Spring1994: 171-85.
Rosenbaum, P. and D.B. Rubin. "The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational
       Studies for Causal Effects." Biometrika. 70. 1983: 41-55.
Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on
       the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 90(4) 1976:
       630-49
Sada, M.J., French, W. J., Carlisle, D. M., Chandra, N. C., Gore, J. M., and W. J. Rogers.
       “Influence of Payor on Use of Invasive Cardiac Procedures and Patient Outcome after
       Myocardial Infarction in the United States.” Journal of the American College of
       Cardiology. 31(7). June 1998: 1474-80.
Saywell, Jr. R. M., Zollinger, T. W., Chu, D. K. W., Macbeth, C. A., and M. E. Sechrist.
       “Hospital and Patient Characteristics of Uncompensated Hospital Care: Policy
       Implications.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law. 14(2). Summer 1989: 287-
       307.
Sloan, 1999 “Does Where You Are Admitted Make A Difference? An Analysis of Medicare
       Data”. NBER Working Paper. No. 6896. 1999.
Silverman, E. and J. Skinner. “Are For-Profit hospitals Really Different? Medicare Upcoding
       and Market Structure.” NBER Working Paper. No. 8133. 2001.
Spillman. “The Impact of Being Uninsured on Utilization of Basic Health Care Services.”
       Inquiry. 29. 1992: 457-466.
Tengs, T.O., Adams, M.E., Pilskin, J.S., Gelb Safran, D., Siegel, J.E., Weinstein, M.C., and J.D.
       Graham. “Five-Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and Their Cost-Effectiveness.”
       Risk Analysis. 15(3). 1995: 369-390.




                                                                                               39
Tilford, J.M., Robbins, J.M., Shema, S.J., and F.L. Farmer. “Response to Health Insurance by
        Previously Uninsured Rural Children.” Health Services Research 34(3). 1999: 761-775.




                                                                                           40
Data Sources

Annual Survey of Hospitals. Bureau of Health Information, Division of Health Care
      Financing, Department of Health and Family Services. State of Wisconsin. 1992.

Crash Outcome Data Evaluation System. Bureau of Health Information, Division of Health Care
       Financing, Department of Health and Family Services. State of Wisconsin. 1992-1997.

Primedia Price Digests, a Unit of Primedia Business.

U.S. Census Bureau; 1990 Census of Population and Housing, Summary Tape File 3B: ZIP
       Codes.

Wisconsin Hospital Fiscal Survey. Bureau of Health Information, Division of Health Care
      Financing, Department of Health and Family Services. State of Wisconsin. 1992.




                                                                                          41
                            Table 1: Summary Statistics for Patients Incapacitated at the Scene
A. Privately Insured vs. Uninsured

                                                                     Privately Insured       Uninsured            t
Variable                                                             Mean       Std Dev    Mean    Std Dev

Treatment                       Length of Stay                        9.17        13.93     6.44       8.30      -7.56
                                ln(Length of Stay)                    1.73         0.90     1.45       0.84     -11.41
                                Facility Charges ('000s)             20.68        37.34    13.10      19.75      -7.88
                                ln(Facility Charges)                  2.27         1.18     1.97       1.05      -9.37

Outcome                         Mortality                            0.037        0.19     0.045      0.21      1.60

                                Predicted Mortality                  0.038        0.05     0.036      0.04      -2.19

                                Observations                         9261                   1581

B. Privately Insured but No Auto Insurance vs. No Health Insurance: Drivers Only

                                                                     Private Health,
                                                                      No Auto Ins.        No Health Insurance     t
Variable                                                             Mean     Std Dev      Mean      Std Dev

Treatment                       Length of Stay                        9.06        10.91     6.66       7.90     -4.77
                                ln(Length of Stay)                    1.77         0.89     1.50       0.84     -5.76
                                Facility Charges ('000s)             21.03        32.85    14.60      22.65     -4.29
                                ln(Facility Charges)                  2.35         1.14     2.08       1.05     -4.84

Outcome                         Mortality                            0.019        0.14     0.036      0.19      2.05

                                Predicted Mortality                  0.025        0.05     0.028      0.06      1.09

                                 Observations                         807                   661
Predicted mortality calculated from a linear regression of mortality on all controls.
                               Table 2: Treatment by Injury Severity and Insurance Status


                                                            Privately Insured                     Uninsured
                                                    Mean    Std Dev Min         Max    Mean    Std Dev Min    Max
Fatal
                            total charges (000's)   27.53    29.79     2.33     170    17.44   13.54   1.46   76
                            length of stay           4.53     5.35     1.00      30     2.97    3.80   1.00   20

                            Observations            333                                 67


Incapacitating Injury
                            total charges (000's)   20.42    37.57     0.00     974    12.90   19.96   0.29   232
                            length of stay           9.34    14.12     1.00     355     6.59    8.41   1.00    89

                            Observations            8928                               1514


Non-incapacitating Injury
                            total charges (000's)   7.41     12.44     0.26     282    6.41    12.04   0.41   234
                            length of stay          4.72      5.51     1.00      89    3.83     4.23   1.00    64

                            Observations            3800                                700


Possible Injury
                            total charges (000's)   6.20     11.45     0.26     260    4.31     5.63   0.27   46
                            length of stay          4.44      5.89     1.00     143    3.24     3.02   1.00   23

                            Observations            1459                                222
                      Table 3: Summary Statistics for those Incapacitated at the Scene
                                                      Privately Insured      Uninsured        t
Variable                                              Mean       Std Dev   Mean    Std Dev

Personal             age                               30          14       29        12     3.46
 Characteristics     female                           0.38        0.49     0.28      0.45    7.24

Vehicle Types        car                              0.61        0.49     0.60      0.49    0.53
                     truck                            0.14        0.34     0.13      0.34    0.38
                     motorcycle                       0.14        0.35     0.15      0.36    1.20
                     other vehicle                    0.12        0.32     0.12      0.32    0.09

Crash                car passenger                    0.23        0.42     0.25      0.43    1.77
 Characteristics     restraint seat belt/child seat   0.30        0.46     0.19      0.39    9.59
                     severe vehicle damage            0.49        0.50     0.48      0.50    0.98
                     trapped                          0.17        0.38     0.15      0.36    2.34
                     head-on collision                0.13        0.33     0.12      0.32    1.12
                     angle collision                  0.29        0.45     0.22      0.42    5.76
                     sideswipe collision              0.04        0.20     0.05      0.21    0.75
                     other collision                  0.54        0.50     0.61      0.49    5.64
                     wet pavement                     0.24        0.43     0.21      0.41    2.79

Road Types           urban street                     0.20        0.40     0.22      0.42    2.12
                     rural street                     0.36        0.48     0.39      0.49    1.75
                     urban highway                    0.09        0.29     0.08      0.28    1.18
                     rural highway                    0.30        0.46     0.27      0.44    2.36
                     urban interstate                 0.01        0.12     0.01      0.09    2.08
                     rural interstate                 0.03        0.18     0.03      0.17    0.29

Day and Hour         weekend                          0.53        0.50     0.56      0.50    2.53
                     between 7am and 4pm              0.37        0.48     0.30      0.46    5.28
                     between 4pm and 11pm             0.39        0.49     0.38      0.48    0.64
                     between 11pm and 7am             0.24        0.43     0.32      0.47    6.56

Population Size      small town <25,000               0.79        0.41     0.76      0.42    1.85
                     medium town <250,000             0.15        0.36     0.16      0.36    0.77
                     large town >250,000              0.07        0.25     0.08      0.27    1.95

Major Diagnostic     nervous system                   0.20        0.40     0.22      0.41    0.98
 Categories          respiratory                      0.07        0.25     0.07      0.25    0.21
                     musculoskeletal & tissue         0.35        0.48     0.35      0.48    0.03
                     skin, tissue, & breast           0.06        0.24     0.08      0.27    2.25
                     multiple significant trauma      0.20        0.40     0.16      0.37    3.16
                     other                            0.11        0.32     0.12      0.33    1.13

Fewer Observations   airbag deployed                  2.59        0.86     2.64      0.83    1.79

                     Observations                      9261                1581
The number of observations for airbag deployment is 7015.
                Table 3: Summary Statistics for those Incapacitated at the Scene (Cont'd)
                                                       Privately Insured                 Uninsured                       t
Variable                                               Mean       Std Dev              Mean    Std Dev

Neighborhood     white                                  0.94        0.13                0.92        0.17               3.52
 Characteristics black                                  0.03        0.11                0.05        0.15               2.76
                 other race                             0.02        0.04                0.03        0.06               2.65

                  high school dropout                   0.22        0.08                0.24        0.09               6.35
                  high school degree                    0.38        0.07                0.38        0.07               0.08
                  some college                          0.24        0.05                0.23        0.05               5.41
                  college                               0.17        0.10                0.15        0.09               4.60

                  median household income              30726        8188               27955        7752               8.76
                  poverty                               0.10        0.07                0.12        0.09               6.84

                  Observations                          9040                           1545

Automobile       2-door                                 0.61        0.49                0.63        0.48               1.25
 Characteristics Engine Size: <2 liters                 0.19        0.39                0.22        0.41               2.02
                    >=2 & <2.4 liters                   0.22        0.42                0.23        0.42               0.55
                    >=2.4 & <2.9 liters                 0.19        0.40                0.23        0.42               2.38
                    >2.9 & <3.9 liters                  0.19        0.39                0.14        0.35               3.37
                    >3.9 liters                         0.20        0.40                0.18        0.38               1.68

                  Vehicle Weight: <2420 pounds          0.25        0.43                0.30        0.46               3.06
                    >=2420 & <2830 pounds               0.24        0.43                0.26        0.44               0.83
                    >=2830 & < 3730 pounds              0.26        0.44                0.22        0.41               2.73
                    >=3730 pounds                       0.25        0.43                0.23        0.42               1.15

                  MSRP: <=$7435                         0.15        0.36                0.22        0.42               5.58
                    >$7435 & <=$9027                    0.16        0.37                0.19        0.39               2.06
                    >$9035 & <=$10400                   0.16        0.37                0.18        0.38               1.62
                    >$10400 & <=$12320                  0.17        0.37                0.16        0.37               0.48
                    >$12320 & <=$15470                  0.18        0.39                0.15        0.35               2.85
                    >$15470                             0.18        0.39                0.11        0.31               5.64

                  Vehicle Age: <=4 years-old            0.28        0.45                0.19        0.39               5.71
                    >4 & <=7 years-old                  0.26        0.44                0.20        0.40               3.61
                    >7 & <=10 years-old                 0.27        0.44                0.29        0.45               1.36
                    >10 years-old                       0.20        0.40                0.32        0.47               8.47

                  Observations                          5767                            901

Vehicle Weight data has 5,340 observations for the privately insured and 773 for the uninsured.
Neighborhood characteristics are population fractions at the ZIP code level and t-tests use standard errors clusterd by ZIP.
                                                  Table 4: The Uninsured Receive Less Treatment than the Privately Insured

A. Treatment
                                                                  Ln(Total Charges)                                               Ln(Length of Stay)
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)             (9)      (10)
uninsured                                 -0.149         -0.156         -0.154         -0.137        -0.145    -0.203    -0.183         -0.183          -0.170    -0.182
                                         (0.026)        (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.025)       (0.026)   (0.023)   (0.023)        (0.023)         (0.022)   (0.024)
HMO                                                                                                  -0.044                                                       -0.028
                                                                                                    (0.026)                                                      (0.022)
Police Measures Included                    No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes       No       Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                   No             No           Yes            Yes            Yes       No        No             Yes            Yes        Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included             No             No            No            Yes            Yes       No        No              No            Yes        Yes
Observations                              10840          10840         10840          10840           9861    10842     10842           10842          10842       9863
R-squared                                  0.25           0.28          0.29           0.39           0.39     0.12      0.15            0.15           0.23       0.23


B. Outcome
                                                                      Mortality
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
uninsured                                 0.013          0.014          0.014          0.015         0.016
                                         (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)
HMO                                                                                                  -0.002
                                                                                                    (0.005)
Police Measures Included                    No             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                   No              No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included             No              No             No           Yes           Yes
Observations                              10842           10842         10842          10842          9863
R-squared                                  0.03            0.04           0.04          0.07          0.07
Models include hospital and year fixed effects.
Police measures include five age categories, indicators for each hour of the day and day of the week.
Vehicle measures include individual model year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                    Table 5: Hospital Comparisons

                                                                                                               Mean of
                                                                               Uninsured Coeff.    Std Error   Dep. Var   Obs.

Main Results                                        Ln (Charges)                    -0.137          (0.025)     2.225     10840
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.170          (0.022)     1.692     10842
                                                    Mortality                        0.015          (0.006)     0.038     10842

Hospitals with greater than median:

Generosity        Charity Care                      Ln (Charges)                    -0.149          (0.032)     2.361     6961
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.180          (0.029)     1.781     6961
                                                    Mortality                        0.016          (0.008)     0.042     6961

                  Bad Debt                          Ln (Charges)                    -0.141          (0.037)     2.242     4137
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.175          (0.034)     1.648     4137
                                                    Mortality                        0.015          (0.008)     0.036     4137

Resources         Return on Assets                  Ln (Charges)                    -0.169          (0.032)     2.298     6912
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.206          (0.029)     1.749     6912
                                                    Mortality                        0.016          (0.008)     0.044     6912

                  Intensive Care Unit Beds          Ln (Charges)                    -0.187          (0.034)     2.379     6655
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.205          (0.031)     1.784     6657
                                                    Mortality                        0.010          (0.008)     0.045     6657

                  Revenue from Public Sources       Ln (Charges)                    -0.120          (0.033)     2.392     6690
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.178          (0.030)     1.774     6692
                                                    Mortality                        0.022          (0.008)     0.045     6692

Hospitals categorized as:

                  Teaching                          Ln (Charges)                    -0.340          (0.069)     2.835     2435
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.423          (0.064)     1.979     2435
                                                    Mortality                        0.056          (0.020)     0.070     2435

                  Non-Teaching                      Ln (Charges)                    -0.085          (0.026)     2.048     8405
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.110          (0.023)     1.609     8407
                                                    Mortality                        0.007          (0.006)     0.028     8407

Mission           Religiously-Affiliated            Ln (Charges)                    -0.100          (0.045)     2.050     3248
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.119          (0.041)     1.666     3248
                                                    Mortality                       -0.008          (0.008)     0.031     3248

                  Non-Religiously Affiliated        Ln (Charges)                    -0.122          (0.031)     2.155     5758
                                                    Ln (Length of Stay)             -0.161          (0.028)     1.611     5760
                                                    Mortality                        0.024          (0.008)     0.041     5760


Models include hospital and year fixed effects;
Police measures include five age categories, indicators for each hour of the day and day of the week;
Vehicle measures include individual model year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                    Table 6: Summary Statistics: No Auto Insurance vs. No Health Insurance
                                                      Privately Insured
                                                       w/ No Auto Ins.             No Health Insurance        t
Variable                                              Mean       Std Dev            Mean      Std Dev

Personal               age                              30          11                31          11         0.67
 Characteristics       female                          0.24        0.43              0.27        0.44        1.28

Vehicle Types          car                             0.49        0.50              0.63        0.48        5.22
                       truck                           0.09        0.29              0.13        0.34        2.59
                       motorcycle                      0.42        0.49              0.24        0.43        7.29

Crash                  restraint (seat belt)           0.14        0.35              0.23        0.42        4.62
 Characteristics       severe vehicle damage           0.43        0.49              0.53        0.50        4.07
                       trapped                         0.13        0.33              0.18        0.39        3.11
                       head-on collision               0.11        0.31              0.16        0.37        2.78
                       angle collision                 0.26        0.44              0.23        0.42        1.41
                       sideswipe collision             0.05        0.21              0.06        0.24        1.42
                       other collision                 0.59        0.49              0.55        0.50        1.33
                       wet pavement                    0.17        0.37              0.21        0.41        2.38

Road Types             urban street                    0.23        0.42              0.17        0.38        2.80
                       rural street                    0.38        0.49              0.41        0.49        1.26
                       urban highway                   0.11        0.31              0.10        0.29        0.78
                       rural highway                   0.25        0.43              0.29        0.45        1.73
                       urban interstate                0.01        0.12              0.01        0.08        1.46
                       rural interstate                0.02        0.14              0.03        0.16        0.89

Day and Hour           weekend                         0.60        0.49              0.57        0.50        1.09
                       between 7am and 4pm             0.29        0.46              0.32        0.47        1.04
                       between 4pm and 11pm            0.40        0.49              0.37        0.48        1.11
                       between 11pm and 7am            0.31        0.46              0.31        0.46        0.13

Population Size        small town <25,000              0.73        0.44              0.81        0.39        3.76
                       medium town <250,000            0.18        0.38              0.14        0.34        2.24
                       large town >250,000             0.09        0.29              0.05        0.22        2.95

Major Diagnostic       nervous system                  0.19        0.39              0.18        0.39        0.37
 Categories            respiratory                     0.05        0.23              0.06        0.25        0.78
                       musculoskeletal & tissue        0.39        0.49              0.38        0.49        0.13
                       skin, tissue, & breast          0.06        0.23              0.08        0.27        1.37
                       multiple significant trauma     0.17        0.38              0.16        0.37        0.66
                       other                           0.14        0.34              0.13        0.34        0.21

Driver Indicators      at fault                        0.71        0.45              0.77        0.42        2.36
                       DUI alcohol                     0.38        0.49              0.42        0.49        1.24

Available 1994-1997 airbag deployed                    2.78        0.70              2.71        0.71        1.59

                       Observations                    807                           671
Data are for drivers only;
Airbag Deployment has 462 observations for no auto insurance and 447 observations for no health insurance.
             Table 6: Summary Statistics: No Auto Insurance vs. No Health Insurance (Cont'd)
                                                           Privately Insured
                                                            w/ No Auto Ins.              No Health Insurance                    t
Variable                                                   Mean       Std Dev             Mean       Std Dev

Neighborhood       white                                    0.93         0.14               0.93         0.14                  0.03
 Characteristics   black                                    0.04         0.12               0.04         0.13                  0.51
                   other race                               0.03         0.06               0.03         0.04                  1.02

                   high school dropout                      0.23         0.08               0.23         0.08                  1.10
                   high school degree                       0.39         0.07               0.38         0.07                  0.59
                   some college                             0.23         0.04               0.23         0.05                  1.40
                   college                                  0.15         0.09               0.15         0.09                  0.18

                   median household income                 29432        7162               28890         7657                  1.27
                   poverty                                  0.10        0.08                0.11         0.08                  1.33

                   Observations                             790                             657

Automobile         2-door                                   0.65         0.48               0.61         0.49                  1.08
 Characteristics   Engine Size: <2 liters                   0.25         0.43               0.23         0.42                  0.59
                      >=2 & <2.4 liters                     0.22         0.41               0.26         0.44                  1.30
                      >=2.4 & <2.9 liters                   0.21         0.41               0.24         0.43                  1.13
                      >2.9 & <3.9 liters                    0.13         0.34               0.12         0.32                  0.58
                      >3.9 liters                           0.19         0.40               0.15         0.36                  1.55

                   Vehicle Weight: <2420 pounds             0.33         0.47               0.31         0.46                  0.48
                     >=2420 & <2830 pounds                  0.23         0.42               0.28         0.45                  1.50
                     >=2830 & < 3730 pounds                 0.23         0.42               0.22         0.42                  0.23
                     >=3730 pounds                          0.21         0.41               0.18         0.39                  0.85

                   MSRP: <=$7435                            0.29         0.45               0.23         0.42                  1.84
                     >$7435 & <=$9027                       0.21         0.41               0.21         0.41                  0.10
                     >$9035 & <=$10400                      0.14         0.35               0.19         0.39                  1.71
                     >$10400 & <=$12320                     0.14         0.34               0.14         0.35                  0.11
                     >$12320 & <=$15470                     0.14         0.35               0.14         0.35                  0.12
                     >$15470                                0.08         0.27               0.10         0.30                  0.75

                   Vehicle Age: <=4 years-old               0.09         0.29               0.19         0.39                  3.67
                     >4 & <=7 years-old                     0.22         0.41               0.20         0.40                  0.63
                     >7 & <=10 years-old                    0.29         0.45               0.28         0.45                  0.35
                     >10 years-old                          0.40         0.49               0.34         0.47                  1.78

                   Observations                             347                             405

Vehicle Weight data has 283 observations for the privately insured and 347 for the uninsured.
Neighborhood characteristics are population fractions at the ZIP code level and t-tests use standard errors clusterd by ZIP.
                                Table 7: The Uninsured Receive Less Treatment than the Privately Insured who Lack Auto Insurance

A. Treatment
                                                                  Ln(Total Charges)                                               Ln(Length of Stay)
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)             (9)      (10)
no health insurance                       -0.178         -0.146         -0.155         -0.148        -0.155    -0.218    -0.194         -0.191          -0.190    -0.191
                                         (0.055)        (0.057)        (0.057)        (0.053)       (0.061)   (0.046)   (0.048)        (0.048)         (0.046)   (0.052)
HMO                                                                                                  -0.051                                                       -0.032
                                                                                                    (0.088)                                                      (0.078)
Police Measures Included                   No            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes       No       Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                  No             No            Yes            Yes            Yes       No        No            Yes             Yes        Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included            No             No             No            Yes            Yes       No        No             No             Yes        Yes
Observations                              1478           1478           1478           1478           1380     1478      1478           1478            1478       1380
R-squared                                 0.26           0.33           0.35           0.43           0.43     0.14      0.21           0.24            0.29       0.29


B. Outcome
                                                                      Mortality
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
no health insurance                       0.022          0.022          0.018          0.017         0.020
                                         (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.010)
HMO                                                                                                  0.001
                                                                                                    (0.012)
Police Measures Included                    No             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                   No             No             Yes           Yes           Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included             No             No             No            Yes           Yes
Observations                              1478            1478           1478          1478          1380
R-squared                                  0.05           0.08           0.12          0.15           0.16
Models include hospital and year fixed effects.
Police measures include five age categories, indicators for each hour of the day and day of the week.
Vehicle measures include individual model year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                           Table 8: Additional Tests

                                                                                                              Mean of
Uninsured=No Auto Insurance                                                Uninsured Coeff.      Std. Error   Dep. Var.   Observations
Drivers with private health insurance        Ln(charges)                       -0.005             (0.037)      2.298         5256
                                             Ln(length of stay)                -0.007             (0.031)      1.751         5257
                                             Mortality                         -0.006             (0.006)      0.027         5257

Accident*Hospital Fixed Effects              Ln(charges)                         -0.119            (0.133)     2.068          249
                                             Ln(length of stay)                  -0.171            (0.115)     1.587          249
                                             Mortality                            0.014            (0.033)     0.028          249

Injury Severity
All Survivors                                Incapacitated                       -0.004            (0.010)     0.605         17311
All                                          Go in Ambulance                     -0.002            (0.007)     0.880         17743


Car Passengers                               Ln(charges)                         -0.193            (0.054)     2.193         2359
                                             Ln(length of stay)                  -0.240            (0.048)     1.683         2360
                                             Mortality                            0.012            (0.012)     0.038         2360


All models include full controls and hospital and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                   Table 9: Uninsured vs. Medicaid: Key Differences
                                                              Medicaid                      Uninsured                          t
Variable                                                   Mean    Std Dev                Mean    Std Dev

Treatment              Facility Charges                    29.91        64.15              13.41       20.02               9.42
                       Length of Stay                      13.90        24.68               6.55        8.42              10.79

Outcome                Mortality                            0.03        0.18               0.05         0.21                  1.65

Personal               age                                   22          14                 29           12                8.87
 Characteristics       female                               0.49        0.50               0.28         0.45              11.12

Vehicle Types          truck                                0.05        0.22               0.13         0.34                  6.64
                       motorcylce                           0.04        0.20               0.15         0.36                  9.12
                       Vehicle Age: <=4 years-old           0.09        0.29               0.18         0.38                  4.15

Crash                  driver                               0.29        0.45               0.49         0.50              10.51
 Characteristics       restraint seat belt/child seat       0.12        0.33               0.18         0.39               4.09
                       severe vehicle damage                0.33        0.47               0.48         0.50               7.77
                       head-on collision                    0.07        0.25               0.12         0.32               4.42
                       between 11pm and 7am                 0.20        0.40               0.32         0.47               6.44
                       large town >250,000                  0.36        0.48               0.08         0.27              18.44

Neighborhood           Median HH Income                    24676        7669              28014        7789                   3.73
                       White                                0.74        0.32               0.92        0.17                   3.24

                       Observations                        1090                            1525

Neighborhood characteristics are population fractions at the ZIP code level.
Vehicle age has 1306 observations.
Neighborhood characteristics are population fractions at the ZIP code level and t-tests use standard errors clusterd by ZIP
                                                   Table 10: The Uninsured Receive Less Treatment than Medicaid Recipients

A. Treatment
                                                                  Ln(Total Charges)                                              Ln(Length of Stay)
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)             (9)      (10)
uninsured                                 -0.255         -0.351         -0.358         -0.370       -0.374    -0.428    -0.479         -0.490          -0.497    -0.498
                                         (0.048)        (0.053)        (0.054)        (0.050)      (0.052)   (0.042)   (0.046)        (0.047)         (0.044)   (0.046)
Medicaid HMO                                                                                        -0.033                                                       -0.001
                                                                                                   (0.090)                                                      (0.082)
Police Measures Included                   No            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes       No       Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                  No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes       No        No            Yes             Yes        Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included            No             No             No            Yes           Yes       No        No             No             Yes        Yes
Observations                              2615           2615           2615           2615          2615     2615      2615           2615            2615       2615
R-squared                                 0.27           0.32           0.33           0.42          0.42     0.17      0.22           0.23            0.29       0.29


B. Outcome
                                                                      Mortality
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
uninsured                                 0.034          0.047          0.048          0.047        0.044
                                         (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.010)
Medicaid HMO                                                                                        -0.020
                                                                                                   (0.017)
Police Measures Included                   No             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Vehicle Measures Included                  No              No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Major Diagnostic Codes Included            No              No             No           Yes           Yes
Observations                              2615            2615          2615           2615          2615
R-squared                                 0.05            0.08           0.09          0.13          0.13
Models include hospital and year fixed effects.
Police measures include five age categories, indicators for each hour of the day and day of the week.
Vehicle measures include individual model year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                         Table 11: Robustness to Sample Changes and Additional Controls
Uninsured vs Private Insurance

                                                                Ln (Charges)                          Ln (Length of Stay)             Mortality
                                                                Uninsured Coeff.     Std Error        Uninsured Coeff.    Std Error   Uninsured Coeff.   Std Error   Observations

                  No Sample Restrictions                             -0.132           (0.018)              -0.180          (0.015)         0.009         (0.004)        26746
                  All Ages                                           -0.145           (0.024)              -0.177          (0.022)         0.011         (0.006)        11838
                  Adults < 65                                        -0.144           (0.027)              -0.164          (0.024)         0.013         (0.006)        8686
                  Ambulance Transfer                                 -0.121           (0.020)              -0.152          (0.018)         0.010         (0.004)        15473
                  No Seatbelt                                        -0.137           (0.028)              -0.169          (0.026)         0.015         (0.007)        7711
                  Cars & Trucks Only                                 -0.149           (0.029)              -0.179          (0.026)         0.013         (0.007)        7958
                  Car Drivers (with alcohol & fault controls)        -0.133           (0.036)              -0.145          (0.032)         0.013         (0.008)        5566
                  Trim: Top 1% of Charges                            -0.120           (0.024)              -0.156          (0.022)         0.015         (0.006)        10732
                  Trim: Top 1% of Length of Stay                     -0.132           (0.024)              -0.166          (0.022)         0.015         (0.006)        10730
                  Length of Stay<30 days                             -0.103           (0.023)              -0.142          (0.020)         0.014         (0.006)        10325
                  Charge>$1,000                                      -0.140           (0.024)              -0.169          (0.023)         0.015         (0.006)        10689
                  >1 Procedure or >1 One Day                         -0.125           (0.025)              -0.154          (0.022)         0.015         (0.006)        10609
                  No Leave Against Med. Advice                       -0.134           (0.025)              -0.165          (0.023)         0.015         (0.006)        10797
                  ZIP code fixed effects                             -0.128           (0.027)              -0.157          (0.024)         0.010         (0.006)        9005
                  DRG Fixed Effects                                  -0.079           (0.018)              -0.131          (0.020)         0.018         (0.006)        10648

                  Levels: Charges ('000s), LOS (days)                -4.088           (0.631)              -1.580          (0.280)                                      10842

Models include full controls and hospital and year fixed effects; Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                    Table 11: Robustness to Sample Changes and Additional Controls (Cont'd)

Uninsured vs Privately Insured who Lack Auto Insurance

                                                               Ln (Charges)                           Ln (Length of Stay)             Mortality
                                                               Uninsured Coeff.      Std Error        Uninsured Coeff.    Std Error   Uninsured Coeff.   Std Error   Observations

                  No Seatbelt                                        -0.147           (0.061)              -0.182          (0.054)         0.019         (0.011)        1169
                  Cars & Trucks Only                                 -0.124           (0.066)              -0.167          (0.058)         0.015         (0.011)         956
                  Small Town Only                                    -0.141           (0.060)              -0.196          (0.051)         0.013         (0.011)        1135
                  Trim: Top 1% of Charges                            -0.143           (0.052)              -0.186          (0.046)         0.017         (0.009)        1467
                  Trim: Top 1% of Length of Stay                     -0.156           (0.052)              -0.197          (0.045)         0.018         (0.009)        1471
                  Length of Stay<30 days                             -0.121           (0.050)              -0.159          (0.043)         0.014         (0.009)        1421
                  Charge>$1,000                                      -0.134           (0.051)              -0.182          (0.046)         0.018         (0.009)        1462
                  >1 Procedure or >1 One Day                         -0.136           (0.053)              -0.180          (0.045)         0.018         (0.009)        1437
                  ZIP code fixed effects                             -0.212           (0.068)              -0.219          (0.060)         0.011         (0.012)        1144
                  DRG Fixed Effects                                  -0.115           (0.037)              -0.166          (0.039)         0.020         (0.009)        1500

Uninsured vs Medicaid

                                                               Ln (Charges)                           Ln (Length of Stay)             Mortality
                                                               Uninsured Coeff.      Std Error        Uninsured Coeff.    Std Error   Uninsured Coeff.   Std Error

                  Adults < 65                                        -0.451           (0.061)              -0.551          (0.053)         0.038         (0.011)        1879
                  All <18 years-old                                  -0.377           (0.112)              -0.541          (0.105)         0.080         (0.031)         616
                  Men Only                                           -0.464          (0.069)               -0.583          (0.064)         0.053         (0.014)        1546
                  No Seatbelt                                        -0.434           (0.055)              -0.553          (0.049)         0.053         (0.011)        2170
                  Cars & Trucks Only                                 -0.365           (0.061)              -0.507          (0.053)         0.040         (0.012)        1712
                  Small Town Only                                    -0.376           (0.064)              -0.480          (0.056)         0.031         (0.011)        1680
                  Trim: Top 1% of Charges                            -0.312           (0.049)              -0.442          (0.043)         0.045         (0.010)        2588
                  Trim: Top 1% of Length of Stay                     -0.311           (0.049)              -0.438          (0.043)         0.045         (0.010)        2588
                  Length of Stay<30 days                             -0.173           (0.046)              -0.305          (0.038)         0.041         (0.011)        2468
                  Charge>$1,000                                      -0.372           (0.049)              -0.501          (0.045)         0.048         (0.010)        2561
                  >1 Procedure or >1 One Day                         -0.368           (0.051)              -0.483          (0.044)         0.046         (0.010)        2534
                  ZIP code fixed effects                             -0.391           (0.061)              -0.515          (0.054)         0.049         (0.012)        2046
                  DRG Fixed Effects                                  -0.190           (0.037)              -0.354          (0.039)         0.054         (0.010)        2531

Models include full controls and hospital and year fixed effects; Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                Table A1: Full Treatment Results
                                                Ln(Total Charges)                                     Ln(Length of Stay)
                                        Main     vs. No Auto Ins. vs. Medicaid                Main      vs. No Auto Ins.      vs. Medicaid
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)                    (4)              (5)                 (6)
uninsured                              -0.137         -0.148          -0.370                 -0.170           -0.190              -0.497
                                      (0.025)         (0.053)        (0.050)                (0.022)          (0.046)             (0.044)
age<16                                 -0.268         -0.228          -0.471                 -0.195           -0.030              -0.408
                                      (0.041)         (0.263)        (0.093)                (0.036)          (0.252)             (0.084)
age>=16 & <25                          -0.169         -0.088          -0.212                 -0.197           -0.219              -0.204
                                      (0.029)         (0.086)        (0.073)                (0.025)          (0.077)             (0.065)
age>=25 & <35                          -0.115         -0.008          -0.139                 -0.150           -0.163              -0.135
                                      (0.030)         (0.086)        (0.075)                (0.025)          (0.077)             (0.067)
age>=35 & <45                          -0.080          0.026          -0.133                 -0.084           -0.094              -0.140
                                      (0.031)         (0.095)        (0.081)                (0.026)          (0.082)             (0.073)
female                                 -0.044         -0.005          -0.096                 0.039            0.046               -0.020
                                      (0.020)         (0.059)        (0.045)                (0.017)          (0.053)             (0.040)
car                                    -0.162         -0.295          -0.268                 -0.135           -0.245              -0.232
                                      (0.046)         (0.092)        (0.087)                (0.040)          (0.080)             (0.077)
truck                                  -0.130         -0.226          -0.231                 -0.113           -0.224              -0.249
                                      (0.050)         (0.112)        (0.104)                (0.044)          (0.109)             (0.091)
motorcycle                             0.023           0.000          -0.051                 -0.017           0.000               -0.101
                                      (0.040)         (0.000)        (0.084)                (0.034)          (0.000)             (0.075)
car passenger                          0.015           0.000          -0.021                 0.023            0.000               -0.018
                                      (0.024)         (0.000)        (0.050)                (0.021)          (0.000)             (0.044)
restraint seat belt/child seat         -0.161         -0.177          -0.198                 -0.090           -0.070              -0.139
                                      (0.023)         (0.070)        (0.059)                (0.020)          (0.061)             (0.051)
severe vehicle damage                  0.052           0.267          0.137                  0.025            0.170                0.102
                                      (0.030)         (0.082)        (0.061)                (0.025)          (0.070)             (0.053)
trapped                                0.222           0.199          0.249                  0.118            0.169                0.169
                                      (0.027)         (0.079)        (0.061)                (0.024)          (0.071)             (0.056)
angle collision                        -0.262         -0.156          -0.143                 -0.141           -0.067              -0.074
                                      (0.031)         (0.085)        (0.075)                (0.027)          (0.078)             (0.068)
sideswipe collision                    -0.100          0.117          -0.038                 -0.062           0.088                0.023
                                      (0.050)         (0.135)        (0.122)                (0.042)          (0.121)             (0.100)
other collision                        -0.207         -0.104          -0.085                 -0.119           -0.051              -0.035
                                      (0.029)         (0.077)        (0.069)                (0.026)          (0.072)             (0.064)
wet pavement                           0.003           0.215          -0.008                 0.009            0.184                0.016
                                      (0.022)         (0.071)        (0.050)                (0.019)          (0.062)             (0.045)
rural street                           0.172           0.028          0.345                  0.088            -0.011               0.232
                                      (0.040)         (0.105)        (0.088)                (0.034)          (0.091)             (0.078)
urban highway                          0.001          -0.114          0.108                  0.002            -0.057              -0.001
                                      (0.037)         (0.109)        (0.080)                (0.032)          (0.093)             (0.073)
rural highway                          0.173          -0.006          0.294                  0.090            -0.005               0.208
                                      (0.041)         (0.109)        (0.090)                (0.035)          (0.092)             (0.080)
urban interstate                       0.055           0.566          0.177                  0.011            0.501               -0.126
                                      (0.084)         (0.250)        (0.166)                (0.069)          (0.200)             (0.194)
rural interstate                       0.153          -0.366          0.098                  0.064            -0.217               0.013
                                      (0.066)         (0.186)        (0.160)                (0.056)          (0.177)             (0.140)
small town <25,000                     0.167           0.219          0.125                  0.142            0.219                0.073
                                      (0.062)         (0.173)        (0.132)                (0.053)          (0.141)             (0.118)
medium town <250,000                   0.159           0.055          0.209                  0.104            0.068                0.142
                                      (0.059)         (0.157)        (0.117)                (0.051)          (0.139)             (0.106)
nervous system                         0.120           0.043          0.184                  0.195            0.147                0.190
                                      (0.038)         (0.100)        (0.074)                (0.031)          (0.083)             (0.063)
respiratory                            0.020           0.074          0.212                  0.188            0.249                0.314
                                      (0.043)         (0.128)        (0.096)                (0.034)          (0.105)             (0.080)
musculoskeletal & tissue               0.184           0.142          0.172                  0.254            0.219                0.283
                                      (0.031)         (0.080)        (0.063)                (0.025)          (0.068)             (0.054)
skin, tissue, & breast                 -0.449         -0.375          -0.384                 -0.295           -0.184              -0.269
                                      (0.038)         (0.106)        (0.081)                (0.030)          (0.089)             (0.066)
multiple significant trauma            0.982           0.845          1.039                  0.706            0.606                0.761
                                      (0.034)         (0.090)        (0.070)                (0.030)          (0.084)             (0.067)
Continued on Next Page

Models include hospital and year fixed effects and indicators for day of the week, hour of the day, and vehicle model year.
Missing vehicle and ZIP code data have been filled with sample means and indicators for missing values are included.
Omitted categories are age>45, head-on collision; other vehicle, bicycle & pedestrians; urban street; large town;
    smallest vehicle engines, weight, and MSRP; fraction white; fraction with college education; and other major diagnosis.
Robust standard errors in parentheses;
                                                 Table A1: Full Treatment Results (Cont'd)
                                                        Ln(Total Charges)                                           Ln(Length of Stay)
                                                Main      vs. No Auto Ins. vs. Medicaid                       Main     vs. No Auto Ins.   vs. Medicaid
                                                 (1)               (2)            (3)                          (4)             (5)              (6)
black                                          -0.146           -0.653          0.185                        -0.067          -0.213            0.039
                                              (0.138)          (0.406)         (0.212)                      (0.121)         (0.343)          (0.202)
other race                                     0.159             0.261          0.029                        -0.207          -0.056           -0.203
                                              (0.245)          (0.539)         (0.403)                      (0.245)         (0.469)          (0.401)
high school dropout                            -0.174           -0.217          0.136                        -0.134          0.025            -0.044
                                              (0.258)          (0.714)         (0.507)                      (0.228)         (0.629)          (0.487)
high school degree                             0.249             0.055          0.768                        0.121           0.200             0.619
                                              (0.199)          (0.538)         (0.443)                      (0.177)         (0.500)          (0.420)
some college                                   -0.535           -0.815          -0.576                       -0.432          -0.755           -0.686
                                              (0.374)          (0.960)         (0.820)                      (0.322)         (0.877)          (0.742)
median household income ('000s)                 -.033            -.003           .040                         -.039           -.027            .018
                                               (.024)           (.081)          (.060)                       (.020)          (.073)           (.057)
poverty                                        0.051             0.394          -0.405                       0.020           -0.130           -0.347
                                              (0.295)          (0.888)         (0.604)                      (0.251)         (0.777)          (0.535)
small ZIP code                                 0.005             0.083          0.034                        -0.027          0.082            -0.093
                                              (0.055)          (0.150)         (0.124)                      (0.052)         (0.150)          (0.114)
2-door                                         0.013             0.087          0.038                        0.007           0.091             0.114
                                              (0.027)          (0.074)         (0.060)                      (0.023)         (0.066)          (0.054)
Engine Size: >=2 & <2.4 liters                 -0.033            0.129          -0.010                       -0.057          0.084             0.025
                                              (0.040)          (0.110)         (0.086)                      (0.034)         (0.100)          (0.074)
    >=2.4 & <2.9 liters                        -0.078            0.035          0.034                        -0.061          0.016             0.081
                                              (0.048)          (0.124)         (0.099)                      (0.041)         (0.115)          (0.087)
    >2.9 & <3.9 liters                         -0.138           -0.106          -0.058                       -0.108          -0.065            0.037
                                              (0.053)          (0.145)         (0.115)                      (0.046)         (0.130)          (0.104)
    >3.9 liters                                -0.092            0.244          0.162                        -0.067          0.318             0.235
                                              (0.055)          (0.159)         (0.124)                      (0.048)         (0.139)          (0.105)
Vehicle Weight: >=2420 & <2830 pounds          0.009            -0.009          0.016                        -0.006          0.070             0.020
                                              (0.044)          (0.130)         (0.098)                      (0.037)         (0.116)          (0.089)
    >=2830 & < 3730 pounds                     -0.006           -0.035          -0.003                       -0.025          -0.044           -0.042
                                              (0.053)          (0.150)         (0.123)                      (0.046)         (0.141)          (0.109)
    >=3730 pounds                              0.025            -0.105          -0.050                       0.013           -0.097           -0.111
                                              (0.057)          (0.169)         (0.131)                      (0.049)         (0.158)          (0.116)
missing vehicle weight                         0.109             0.117          0.106                        0.048           0.108             0.082
                                              (0.086)          (0.254)         (0.204)                      (0.081)         (0.218)          (0.178)
MSRP: >$7435 & <=$9027                         0.005            -0.106          -0.093                       0.001           -0.125           -0.085
                                              (0.045)          (0.113)         (0.087)                      (0.038)         (0.103)          (0.076)
    >$9035 & <=$10400                          0.010            -0.009          0.001                        -0.012          -0.153           -0.104
                                              (0.048)          (0.128)         (0.100)                      (0.041)         (0.120)          (0.089)
    >$10400 & <=$12320                         0.083            -0.046          -0.004                       0.044           -0.211           -0.086
                                              (0.053)          (0.148)         (0.117)                      (0.046)         (0.145)          (0.104)
    >$12320 & <=$15470                         0.058            -0.046          -0.014                       0.031           -0.052           -0.099
                                              (0.059)          (0.170)         (0.140)                      (0.051)         (0.160)          (0.120)
    >$15470                                    0.090            -0.081          -0.158                       0.058           -0.151           -0.214
                                              (0.068)          (0.211)         (0.156)                      (0.060)         (0.198)          (0.147)
missing other vehicle information              -0.143           -0.079          -0.098                       -0.068          -0.061           -0.063
                                              (0.085)          (0.231)         (0.182)                      (0.079)         (0.198)          (0.159)
at fault                                                         0.095                                                       0.088
                                                               (0.065)                                                      (0.055)
DUI alcohol                                                      0.065                                                       0.047
                                                               (0.070)                                                      (0.063)
Constant                                       2.400             2.193          1.892                        1.806           1.277           1.566
                                              (0.247)          (0.658)         (0.527)                      (0.217)         (0.597)         (0.470)
Observations                                   10840             1478            2615                        10842            1478           2615
R-squared                                       0.39              0.43           0.42                         0.23            0.29            0.29
Models include hospital and year fixed effects and indicators for day of the week, hour of the day, and vehicle model year.
Missing vehicle and ZIP code data have been filled with sample means and indicators for missing values are included.
Omitted categories are age>45, head-on collision; other vehicle, bicycle & pedestrians; urban street; large town;
      smallest vehicle engines, weight, and MSRP; fraction white; fraction with college education; and other major diagnosis.
 Robust standard errors in parentheses;
                                          Table A2: Mortality Results
                                                               Fatal
                                                Main      vs. No Auto Ins. vs. Medicaid
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)
uninsured                                      0.015            0.017          0.047
                                              (0.006)          (0.009)        (0.010)
age<16                                         -0.006          -0.021          -0.003
                                              (0.009)          (0.020)        (0.020)
age>=16 & <25                                  -0.013           0.013          -0.013
                                              (0.006)          (0.015)        (0.016)
age>=25 & <35                                  -0.015           0.005          -0.020
                                              (0.006)          (0.015)        (0.015)
age>=35 & <45                                  -0.008          -0.002          -0.009
                                              (0.006)          (0.016)        (0.017)
female                                         0.001            0.013          0.011
                                              (0.004)          (0.011)        (0.009)
car                                            -0.012           0.005          0.002
                                              (0.010)          (0.015)        (0.019)
truck                                          -0.009           0.018          0.006
                                              (0.011)          (0.023)        (0.024)
motorcycle                                     -0.011           0.000          -0.019
                                              (0.008)          (0.000)        (0.017)
car passenger                                  -0.003           0.000          -0.001
                                              (0.005)          (0.000)        (0.009)
restraint seat belt/child seat                 -0.007          -0.008          0.000
                                              (0.004)          (0.012)        (0.010)
severe vehicle damage                          0.005           -0.003          -0.010
                                              (0.006)          (0.014)        (0.012)
trapped                                        0.013           -0.020          -0.007
                                              (0.006)          (0.012)        (0.012)
angle collision                                0.005           -0.000          0.005
                                              (0.006)          (0.016)        (0.015)
sideswipe collision                            0.013            0.004          0.021
                                              (0.010)          (0.024)        (0.022)
other collision                                0.009           -0.001          0.006
                                              (0.006)          (0.014)        (0.014)
wet pavement                                   0.005            0.004          0.012
                                              (0.005)          (0.012)        (0.010)
rural street                                   0.009            0.030          0.027
                                              (0.007)          (0.016)        (0.014)
urban highway                                  0.013           -0.017          0.027
                                              (0.008)          (0.013)        (0.016)
rural highway                                  0.006            0.020          0.019
                                              (0.008)          (0.015)        (0.014)
urban interstate                               -0.011          -0.018          0.025
                                              (0.015)          (0.023)        (0.053)
rural interstate                               0.013            0.039          0.025
                                              (0.013)          (0.031)        (0.028)
small town <25,000                             -0.015          -0.025          -0.055
                                              (0.012)          (0.025)        (0.025)
medium town <250,000                           -0.010           0.005          -0.035
                                              (0.012)          (0.027)        (0.025)
nervous system                                 0.027            0.041          0.049
                                              (0.007)          (0.016)        (0.013)
respiratory                                    -0.007          -0.007          0.003
                                              (0.007)          (0.013)        (0.015)
musculoskeletal & tissue                       -0.022          -0.005          -0.020
                                              (0.005)          (0.009)        (0.009)
skin, tissue, & breast                         -0.020          -0.013          -0.009
                                              (0.005)          (0.011)        (0.010)
multiple significant trauma                    0.076            0.069          0.093
                                              (0.008)          (0.019)        (0.018)
Continued on Next Page

Models include hospital and year fixed effects and indicators for day of the week, hour of the day, and vehicle model year
Missing vehicle and ZIP code data have been filled with sample means and indicators for missing values are included.
Omitted categories are age>45, head-on collision; other vehicle, bicycle & pedestrians; urban street; large town;
    smallest vehicle engines, weight, and MSRP; fraction white; fraction with college education; and other major diagno
Robust standard errors in parentheses;
                                         Table A2: Mortality Results (Cont'd)
                                                                Fatal
                                                 Main      vs. No Auto Ins. vs. Medicaid
                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)
black                                            0.006            0.053           -0.036
                                               (0.028)          (0.061)          (0.045)
other race                                       0.133           -0.042           -0.006
                                               (0.072)          (0.075)          (0.064)
high school dropout                              0.068           -0.085            0.177
                                               (0.053)          (0.126)          (0.120)
high school degree                               0.010            0.031           -0.095
                                               (0.042)          (0.096)          (0.103)
some college                                    -0.011            0.054            0.241
                                               (0.074)          (0.194)          (0.166)
median household income (000's)                  0.006            0.007           -0.007
                                                (.005)           (.014)           (.012)
poverty                                         -0.019            0.100           -0.024
                                               (0.056)          (0.142)          (0.136)
small ZIP code                                   0.010           -0.025            0.064
                                               (0.013)          (0.041)          (0.036)
2-door                                          -0.001           -0.018           -0.030
                                               (0.005)          (0.015)          (0.011)
Engine Size: >=2 & <2.4 liters                   0.003           -0.008           -0.014
                                               (0.007)          (0.016)          (0.015)
    >=2.4 & <2.9 liters                         -0.004            0.037           -0.006
                                               (0.009)          (0.023)          (0.020)
    >2.9 & <3.9 liters                           0.005           -0.006           -0.015
                                               (0.011)          (0.024)          (0.023)
    >3.9 liters                                 -0.002           -0.017           -0.042
                                               (0.011)          (0.028)          (0.023)
Vehicle Weight: >=2420 & <2830 pounds            0.006           -0.020           -0.014
                                               (0.009)          (0.023)          (0.019)
    >=2830 & < 3730 pounds                       0.013            0.019           -0.016
                                               (0.011)          (0.029)          (0.023)
    >=3730 pounds                                0.002            0.012            0.021
                                               (0.011)          (0.032)          (0.025)
missing vehicle weight                           0.019            0.024            0.008
                                               (0.017)          (0.067)          (0.044)
MSRP: >$7435 & <=$9027                           0.004            0.029            0.037
                                               (0.009)          (0.023)          (0.017)
    >$9035 & <=$10400                            0.003            0.003            0.036
                                               (0.010)          (0.026)          (0.022)
    >$10400 & <=$12320                           0.007            0.046            0.039
                                               (0.011)          (0.033)          (0.023)
    >$12320 & <=$15470                          -0.001           -0.027            0.033
                                               (0.012)          (0.029)          (0.028)
    >$15470                                     -0.010           -0.022            0.034
                                               (0.014)          (0.038)          (0.033)
missing other vehicle information               -0.015           -0.027            0.010
                                               (0.017)          (0.059)          (0.040)
at fault                                                          0.007
                                                                (0.010)
DUI alcohol                                                       0.005
                                                                (0.012)
Constant                                        0.002            -0.070           -0.015
                                               (0.049)          (0.120)          (0.119)
Observations                                    10842             1478             2615
R-squared                                        0.07             0.15              0.13
Models include hospital and year fixed effects and indicators for day of the week, hour of the day, and vehicle model year.
Missing vehicle and ZIP code data have been filled with sample means and indicators for missing values are included.
Omitted categories are age>45, head-on collision; other vehicle, bicycle & pedestrians; urban street; large town;
      smallest vehicle engines, weight, and MSRP; fraction white; fraction with college education; and other major diagnosi
 Robust standard errors in parentheses;
