                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF MEDICAL INNOVATION:
                 A CASE STUDY OF HIV ANTIRETROVIRAL TREATMENTS

                                            Mark G. Duggan
                                            William N. Evans

                                          Working Paper 11109
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11109


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




This work was supported by grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Duggan), the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation (Duggan), the National Science Foundation (Evans), and the Maryland Population
Research Center. We thank Julian Cristia, Tami Hayford, Scott Imberman, Victor Macias, and Daniel
Perlman for outstanding research assistance and Jim Klein from the California Department of Health
Services for assistance with the Medicaid data. We are also grateful to David Autor, Dana Goldman,
Michael Greenstone, Steven Levitt, Frank Lichtenberg, Justin McCrary, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar
participants at the Brookings Institution, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, University
of California at Berkeley, University of Chicago, Columbia University, RAND, Rochester University,
Stanford University, the World Bank, and the NBER Health Care meetings for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of any of the individuals
or institutions mentioned above. All errors are our own.

© 2005 by Mark G. Duggan and William N. Evans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Impact of Medical Innovation: A Case Study of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments
Mark G. Duggan and William N. Evans
NBER Working Paper No. 11109
February 2005, Revised October 2006
JEL No. H51,I12,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

As health care consumes a growing share of national income in the U.S., the demand for better estimates
regarding both the benefits and the costs of new health care treatments is likely to increase. Estimating
these effects with observational data is difficult given the endogeneity of treatment decisions. But
because the random assignment clinical trials (RACTs) used in the FDA's approval process do not
consider costs, there is often no good alternative. In this study we use administrative data from the
Medicaid program to estimate the impact of a particular category of new treatments - HIV antiretroviral
drugs - on health care spending and health outcomes. We use the detailed information on health care
utilization to proxy for health status and exploit the differential take-up of ARVs following their FDA
approval. Our estimate of a 70 percent reduction in mortality is in line with the results from RACTs
and with studies that had more detailed clinical data. We also find that the ARVs lowered short-term
health care spending by reducing expenditures on other categories of medical care. Combining these
two effects we estimate the cost per life year saved at $22,000. Our results suggest that the administrative
data that is readily available from programs like Medicaid, used with a properly specified econometric
model that allows for heterogeneity in take-up rates and in effectiveness based on initial health conditions,
can produce reliable estimates of the impact of new health care treatments on both spending and health.

Mark G. Duggan
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3115L Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
duggan@econ.bsos.umd.edu

William N. Evans
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
evans@econ.umd.edu
I. Introduction

        During the 2004 calendar year, health care expenditures accounted for 16 percent of GDP in the

U.S., with this share substantially greater than in any other industrialized country and more than twice as

large as the corresponding value in 1970. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services predict that

this rapid growth will continue with health spending expected to account for 19 percent of GDP by 2014.

Much of the past and projected growth in health care spending has been fueled by the Medicaid and

Medicare programs, which provided health insurance to nearly 90 million individuals in 2005 at a cost of

more than $650 billion. According to estimates from the Congressional Budget Office, the share of

federal spending accounted for by these two programs will increase from 22 to 35 percent during the

coming decade (CBO, 2006).

        Previous research has suggested that an important contributor to rising health care costs in the

U.S. and in other industrialized countries is the introduction and diffusion of new and more expensive

treatments (Newhouse, 1992; Cutler, 2004). The pace at which these changes occur is likely to be

affected by health insurance, which reduces or even eliminates a patient's incentive to consider price

when choosing between alternative treatments. To date, most private and public insurers base coverage

decisions for new treatments solely on safety and efficacy grounds. However, budgetary pressures may

soon lead insurers to require that coverage also be based on cost effectiveness by considering whether the

increment to health from a new treatment is sufficiently large to justify its cost (Garber, 2004). Recent

evidence for this can be found in the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA), which allows the private drug

plans that provide Medicare recipients with coverage for prescription drug expenses to use cost-

effectiveness as one criterion for excluding treatments from their list of covered prescription drugs.

        Unfortunately, research evaluating the cost effectiveness of new treatments lags behind what

patients, physicians, insurers, and policymakers need to make well-informed decisions. Part of the

problem is that the dominant method for determining causal relationships in medicine is the random

assignment clinical trial (RACT). For example, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration uses RACTs in

deciding whether to approve new health care treatments. While these trials make important contributions


                                                      1
to knowledge, they have a number of important limitations. Perhaps most importantly, they rarely

consider the effect of a new treatment on expenditures but instead focus only on health.1 Additionally,

results from RACTs may not apply to real-world settings, where adherence to a treatment regimen may be

different from in the controlled environment of an RACT.

         Researchers must therefore use alternative methods and sources of data to measure the benefits of

new medical innovations in real world settings. One possible strategy is to use administrative data on

health care utilization generated by government programs such as Medicaid and Medicare. These claims

data sets have the advantage of large sample sizes and of capturing treatment patterns in the real world.

But they also have limitations. The two most important are that treatments are not randomly assigned and

that there is limited clinical information that can be used to measure health status. Despite these and other

limitations, claims data has been used in previous work to estimate the impact of alternative treatments

and of changes in policy. For example, McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse (1994) use Medicare claims

data merged with mortality records to study the impact of heart attack treatments.

        In this paper, we use similar data but take a different approach from these authors and from most

previous work by using approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of new health care

treatments as a plausibly exogenous source of variation in treatment options. We focus on the effect of

pharmaceutical innovations for a particular condition – HIV/AIDS - that has been the focus of much

previous work and for which treatment patterns have changed dramatically in recent years. We exploit

the fact that there were sharp changes in the treatment of this illness following the FDA’s approval of

certain antiretroviral drugs (ARVs). The most striking changes occurred after the approvals of Epivir and

three protease inhibitors in late 1995 and early 1996, which preceded the sharp reduction in mortality

among individuals with HIV/AIDS.2




1
  Because the variance of medical spending is typically large in a cross section of patients, sample sizes in RACTs
would have to be extremely large to generate precise estimates of the impact of treatment on medical expenditures.
2
  According to data from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), AIDS deaths increased from 31,538 in 1990 to a
peak of 51,670 in 1995, then dropped sharply to 38,296 in 1996, 22,245 in 1997 and to a low of 17,139 in 2000.


                                                         2
        To estimate the effect of these and other ARVs on health outcomes and health care expenditures,

we use individual-level claims and eligibility data for a large sample of Medicaid patients from the state

of California with one or more months of eligibility for the program between 1993 and 2003. Our data

includes patient demographic characteristics along with detailed information on each individual’s health

care utilization during this eleven-year period, which includes the approval dates of 19 of the 22 drugs

available to treat HIV/AIDS by the end of 2003. Additionally, the Medicaid data has been linked to

individual-level mortality records through the end of 2001.

        The key obstacle to obtaining reliable estimates for the effect of ARVs is that treatment is

endogenous. The guidelines in effect during our study period recommended that HIV-positive individuals

abstain from treatment until their health deteriorated to a certain level. Failing to account for this would

therefore lead us to understate the benefits of ARVs. Fortunately, the detailed information on health care

utilization in our data allows us to proxy for health status at the time the treatments were approved.

Consistent with suggested protocols, we find that sicker patients are significantly more likely to initiate

treatment following the approval of Epivir and protease inhibitors (hereafter Epivir/PI).

        In investigating the effects of these treatments, we demonstrate that controlling for pre-treatment

health status substantially increases our estimate for the effect of the treatments on mortality probabilities.

Moreover, we uncover substantial heterogeneity in this effect, with the sickest patients experiencing the

largest reductions in mortality. In all, we estimate that Epivir/PI reduced mortality by approximately 70

percent among the patients who took them. This corresponds quite closely with the decline in overall

mortality rates for AIDS patients observed during the 1995 to 1998 period, suggesting that these

treatments were the driving force behind the decline in mortality for AIDS patients in the U.S. These

estimates are similar in magnitude to those from RACTs and from studies that had more detailed clinical

data for these same pharmaceutical treatments. However, few of these previous studies have analyzed

data for a vulnerable population such as Medicaid recipients. Additionally, our sample sizes are

sufficiently large that we can examine impacts for particular subgroups like females and minorities. And

most importantly, these previous studies did not also consider the effect on health care spending.


                                                       3
         Our findings for the effect of the treatments on expenditures reveal substantial heterogeneity, with

large reductions in spending for the sickest patients but statistically significant increases for healthier

patients. The mechanism for this is that the use of the new treatments increased pharmaceutical spending

but reduced the need for hospitalizations and other types of medical care. Healthier patients had little care

to offset and thus the increase in ARV utilization increased total spending on them. We also find that

Medicaid spending actually increased for dual eligibles, the one-third of our sample also eligible for

Medicare when the new treatments were approved. This is because Medicare realized much of the

savings from this offset because it is the primary expected payer for those eligible for both programs.

         In the final section of our paper, we investigate the effect of the new treatments on long-term

Medicaid spending, life expectancy, and the corresponding cost per life-year saved.3 The new treatments

reduced quarterly Medicaid spending by an average of 10 percent for those not on Medicare but increased

life expectancy by more than a factor of three. Combining these two effects leads us to estimate the cost

per life year saved of the four treatments introduced in late 1995 and early 1996 at close to $22,000,

which is well within the range of what is considered to be cost effective.

         Claims data sets from programs such as Medicaid and Medicare are inexpensive and plentiful.

Our findings demonstrate that one can use this data - combined with an econometric model that allows for

heterogeneous takeup and effectiveness - to reliably estimate the impact of new treatments on health

outcomes and health care spending.4 This suggests that studies using administrative data can be a useful

complement to RACTs as patients, physicians, insurers, and policymakers strive to allocate resources

optimally in an environment characterized by rapidly expanding choices and costs.5



3
  Of course these treatments may have influenced other outcome variables as well. For example, Lakdawalla et al.
(2006) find that ARVs increase risky behavior such as unprotected sex and intravenous drug use. While important,
we consider these outcomes to be outside the scope of the current study, though a full welfare calculation would
have to include them as well as the gains to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
4
  A related literature has estimated the benefit to consumers of new products. For example, Petrin (2002) develops a
technique for estimating the benefits of the minivan. A key difference between the health care market and other
markets is that patients with health insurance typically do not share in the cost of their medical care. In the current
setting the price of all ARVs is essentially zero (though California has recently introduced small co-pays).
5
  While we consider here the effect of new medical innovations, a large literature has investigated the determinants
of innovation. For recent examples see Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Finkelstein (2004), and Acemoglu et al. (2006).


                                                          4
II. Background and Significance

A. Previous Research Using Claims Data and Replicating RACTs

        Insurance claims data bases have large sample sizes, are inexpensive to construct, and contain a

wealth of information about patients’ treatments in real-world situations. Previous research has used

samples from claims data bases to analyze the impact of various treatment options. McClellan, O’Neil

and Newhouse (1994) use a sample of Medicare patients to analyze the effectiveness of various heart

attack treatments. Cutler (1995) uses data on hospital discharges for Medicare patients to examine

whether movement to the Prospective Payment System altered patient outcomes. Cutler et al. (1998) use

Medicare claims data to construct medical care price indices for heart attack treatment.

        To date however, little research has examined whether analyses using a claims data base can

replicate a stylized result generated from a more controlled research environment such as a random

assignment clinical trial (RACT). These types of replication exercises have been important in economics

in shaping research agendas and fostering the use of new statistical techniques. Lalonde’s 1986 paper,

which demonstrated that econometric evaluations of job training programs could not replicate results

from random assignment trials, led to a long line of research evaluating the statistical methods used in

such studies. In contrast, the results in Dehejia and Wahba (1999) which showed that propensity score

matching techniques could replicate the results from these same job training experiments, helped launch

the use of this technique in economics.

        In this paper, we follow the lead of these previous authors and examine whether applying

appropriate econometric methods to a claims data base can replicate the results of studies that benefit

from randomization. To do this we use administrative data from California’s Medicaid program to

construct a sample of HIV/AIDS patients. The context within which we are conducting this exercise is

interesting in its own right. The Centers for Disease Control report that through 2004, approximately one

million people in the U.S. had been diagnosed with AIDS, with more than half of these individuals dying

by the end of that same year. Prior to the introduction of Epivir/PI in November of 1995, annual

mortality rates of AIDS patients stood at 30 percent. Among HIV/AIDS patients in the U.S., half are


                                                     5
insured through the Medicaid program (Bhattacharya et al., 2003)

        The focus on examining the effectiveness of a pharmaceutical intervention in Medicaid is also of

interest given the important role that new drugs have played in raising Medicaid expenditures, which

exceeded $300 billion during the 2004 fiscal year. Between 1995 and 2004, the fraction of Medicaid

costs devoted to prescription drugs nearly doubled, from 7.4 to 13.7 percent. Most of this increase was

driven by the introduction of new and more expensive treatments, with the average cost of a Medicaid-

reimbursed prescription increasing by 90 percent since 1995. In 2004, 65 percent of prescription drug

costs for branded drugs6 in the Medicaid program were for treatments introduced in or after 1997, while

only 6 percent were attributable to drugs introduced in 1990 or earlier.



B. Background on HIV/AIDS and Antiretroviral Treatments

        AIDS is a chronic disease that damages, and ultimately destroys, an individual’s immune system.

AIDS is caused by HIV, an infection that kills the body=s "CD4 cells", a type of white blood cell that

helps the body fight off infections. When this epidemic first appeared, providers could only treat

opportunistic illnesses resulting from the weakened immune system rather than attack the virus itself.

This changed with the entry of Retrovir (AZT) to the market in 1987. This drug was the first one

approved by the FDA in the therapeutic class known as NRTIs (nucleoside reverse transcriptase

inhibitors). Despite the entry of three additional NRTIs from 1991 to 1994, use of these drugs among

AIDS patients actually declined from 1992 through 1995. This trend reversed following the approval of

Epivir (another NRTI) and three drugs from a new class known as protease inhibitors (PIs) in late 1995

and early 1996. The first NNRTI (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor) was approved in June of

1996. Twelve additional drugs were approved in the seven years from 1997 to 2003 (Table 1).

        The release of Epivir/PI spawned the use of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), which

is the simultaneous use of two or more ARVs to treat HIV. The optimal time to initiate HAART depends


6
 Brand name drugs accounted for approximately half of Medicaid prescriptions in 2004 but 85 percent of the $39
billion in Medicaid prescription drug spending.


                                                       6
both on the strength of the patient’s immune system and on the concentration of HIV in the patient’s

blood. Current guidelines recommend HAART for all patients with less than 200 CD4 cells per cubic

millimeter of blood and suggest that all patients with CD4 cell counts between 200 and 350 be offered

treatment (NIH, 2004; Yeni et al., 2002).7 Thus those HIV-positive individuals who take the drugs will

tend to be sicker than their counterparts who do not. 8

        In a short period after the approval of Epivir/PI, HAART became the standard treatment for those

infected with HIV.9 The sharp increase in the use of the drugs coincided with a substantial decline in the

mortality rate among AIDS patients. According to data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control,

between 1995 and 1998, the mortality rate for individuals with AIDS fell by 70 percent.

        A large number of studies, some using randomized research designs (Hammer et al., 1997; Delta

Coordinating Committee, 2001; Floridia et al., 2002) and others using observational data with detailed

clinical information (Palella et al., 1998; Detels et al., 1998; CASCADE Collaboration, 2003)

investigated the life saving benefits of the new ARVs.10 All of these studies found that the new

treatments generated statistically significant reductions in mortality. For example, in a random

assignment trial examining the effectiveness of one protease inhibitor in combination with Retrovir and

Epivir, Hammer et al. (1997) found that 48-week mortality rates were 55 percent lower among those

taking a protease inhibitor. Palella et al. (1998) used observational data for 1255 patients in eight U.S.

cities to examine the impact of ARVs on mortality. Controlling for a variety of socioeconomic factors

and CD4 count levels prior to treatment, the authors found that mortality fell by more than 70 percent

among those using protease inhibitors with two or more NRTIs.11

        Demonstrating that we could replicate the results from RACTs or studies with more detailed
7
  The main benefit of starting HAART early is that it can prevent both the degradation of the immune system and the
elevation of viral loads. The main costs are that patients often experience severe side effects and they can also
develop drug resistance, thereby reducing future treatment options.
8
  Individuals with HIV are defined as having AIDS once their CD4 count falls below 200 or once they are diagnosed
with an AIDS-defining illness.
9
  Bozzette et al., (1998 and 2001) found that by the end of 1996, nearly 60 percent of HIV infected patients were
using protease inhibitors.
10
   Lichtenberg (2003) uses aggregate, national-level data for the U.S. to estimate the effect of ARV approvals.
11
   There are no RACTs of which we are aware that compare the use of both Epivir and PI with the use of neither,
though this Palella study using observational data essentially does.


                                                        7
clinical information within a claims data base offers a potential leap forward in the types of questions that

can be addressed with non-clinical data in a real-world setting. We therefore view estimates from these

studies as a useful benchmark in our analyses below. If the treatments are similarly effective for those on

Medicaid and if these individuals adhere well to the treatment regimens then we should detect a similar

effect for them on mortality.12 One important advantage of our study relative to virtually all previous

work is that we simultaneously consider the effect on both spending and health outcomes.13



III. Constructing the Analysis Files

A. The California Medicaid Claims and Eligibility Data

         We utilize claims and eligibility data14 for a random 24 percent sample of Medicaid recipients

from the state of California to estimate the effect of HIV antiretroviral drugs. In our data there are 4.03

million people who were eligible for the program in at least one month between January of 1993 and

December of 2003. The eligibility files contain demographic information for program participants

including gender, month and year of birth, race, ethnicity, and zip code of residence. Additionally, there

are two variables that allow us to determine whether an individual is dually eligible for health insurance

through Medicare in each month. Finally, the eligibility file indicates whether the Medicaid recipient is

enrolled in a Medicaid managed care plan in each month and if so, lists the plan number.

         The claims data includes all fee-for-service payments made from January of 1993 until June of

2004, though because there is often a lag in processing the claims, we consider utilization through just

December of 2003. There are three types of claims in our data. Inpatient claims are generated for

admissions to hospitals and long-term care facilities and include information about the patient’s primary

and secondary diagnosis, the dates of service, the amount paid by Medicaid, and the procedures

performed. Outpatient claims have similar data about payments to physicians, clinics, hospital outpatient

12
   According to the results from previous research, Medicaid patients typically had lower use rates for the new drugs
(Bozzette et al., 2001; Shapiro et al., 1999).
13
   Other studies have used individual-level data to consider the effect of ARVs on health care utilization and
expenditures. See for example Gebo et al. (1999).
14
   See Duggan (2005) for a detailed description of this Medicaid data.


                                                          8
facilities, laboratories, and other health care providers. Finally, prescription drug claims provide data on

payments made to pharmacies for drugs covered by Medicaid. Each pharmacy claim includes an eleven-

digit National Drug Code that allows us to determine the drug and the dosage amount. All three types of

claims include the patient=s Medicaid identifier, which can then be matched to the eligibility files.

Finally, we reached an agreement with the California Center for Health Statistics and the Medical Care

Statistics Section that allowed us to merge death records for the 1993 through 2001 period to the

Medicaid data. These records identify date and cause of death for all residents of the state of California.15



B. Defining the HIV/AIDS Sample

         A number of previous researchers have used Medicaid claims data to construct samples of

HIV/AIDS patients (Eichner and Kahn, 2001; Kahn et al., 2002; Morin et al., 2002). Following this

research, we use ICD-9 diagnosis codes on the Medicaid inpatient and outpatient claims to determine

whether individuals are diagnosed with this illness. To reduce the possibility of false positives, we restrict

attention to patients with two or more non-prescription HIV/AIDS claims.16 This algorithm yields a

sample of 12,932 individuals who have one or more HIV/AIDS claims, are eligible for Medicaid at some

point during our study period, have a valid social security number, and have consistent age and gender

information across years in the eligibility files.17

         Although our Medicaid claims data contain a rich set of information, it does have some important

limitations. First, our data is for just one state and thus our results may not generalize to Medicaid

recipients elsewhere in the U.S. Second, we lose patients who temporarily or permanently exit because


15
   This match could only be performed for the 92 percent of our sample with a valid social security number.
16
   False negatives are also a possible concern though we can use external data to gauge the importance of this.
Using our mortality data, we identify 4,371 individuals in the 24 percent sample who died with HIV/AIDS as the
primary cause. Our algorithm captures 3,617 of these individuals (almost 83 percent). The patients missed by our
algorithm have fewer eligible months (11.6 versus 22.6) and a much large fraction of months in Medicaid managed
care (49.1 percent versus 9.7 percent). This latter difference reflects the fact that utilization data for those in MMC
will typically be incomplete (Duggan, 2004) and we therefore exclude MMC recipients in constructing our sample.
If we also include individuals who take any ARVs we increase the number from 3,617 to 3,723.
17
   Previous research using Medicaid claims data has found that this algorithm captures the vast majority of recipients
diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. For example, Rosenblum et al., (1993) matched Medicaid claims data to medical records
of patients known to be infected with HIV and found that they successfully identified 91 percent of the patients.


                                                          9
they become ineligible for Medicaid.18 Third, we do not know when patients were first diagnosed with

HIV or AIDS but instead only the date of their first Medicaid HIV/AIDS claim during our study period.

Fourth, claims data do not contain diagnostic information about patients such as CD4 cell counts or HIV

viral loads. This information is important because it indicates who is recommended to receive ARVs.

Fifth, we do not have Medicare expenditure data for people also eligible for that program. Medicare will

typically cover most of the hospitalization costs of dual eligibles. Thus while we can accurately measure

utilization, we will understate health care expenditures by the government for this group.19 Finally, we

have incomplete utilization data for patients enrolled in a Medicaid managed care plan and thus exclude

them from our analyses.

         Even with these limitations, our data has a number of important benefits over the data sets used in

all previous research. First, it is the largest sample of HIV/AIDS patients generated from one consistent

source.20 Second, our period of analysis covers an important time including three full years before and

nearly eight years after the introduction of Epivir/PI, allowing us to investigate the effect of the treatments

on both short and long-term health and spending. Third, because of the rich set of information in our

claims data we can proxy for individual’s pre-treatment health status and thus try to account for

endogenous treatment decisions. Finally, we can estimate not just the average effect of antiretroviral

treatments but also the extent to which this varies across individuals.



C.       Sample Characteristics

         On the left-hand axis in Figure 1, we plot the number of Medicaid recipients in our sample who

were alive at the beginning of half-year periods starting in January of 1994. The patients in each half-



18
   Less than 2 percent of the sample exits the sample per quarter and this actually declines during our study period.
For example it falls from 1.96% in the last quarter of 1995 to 1.42% in the first quarter of 1998.
19
   Medicare did not cover prescription drugs for dual eligibles during our study period.
20
   The HIV Cost and Services Utilization Consortium (Shapiro et al., 1999) followed a cohort of 2,864 HIV patients
for January of 1996 through January of 1998. The CASCADE Collaboration (2003) pooled data from 22 cohorts of
HIV patients from European, Canadian and Australian studies to construct a sample of 7740 HIV patients covering
the pre-1997 through 2001 period. The ART Cohort Collaboration (Egger at al., 2002) pooled data from 13 cohort
studies of patients starting HAART from Europe and North America to generate a sample of 12,574 patients.


                                                         10
year cell had their first HIV/AIDS claim by the end of that period although they may have been enrolled

in Medicaid for some time before that date. Roughly one-fourth of the sample appears in the first half-

year of the time period and the sample grows steadily after that date. On the right-hand axis of the figure,

we graph the total number of people living with AIDS in California21 at the end of each six month period

as reported by the CDC in their publication HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. These two surveys track one

another quite closely (ρ=0.98). Our numbers suggest that roughly 52 percent of people living with AIDS

in California are on Medicaid,22 a number close to the national average (Bhattacharya et al., 2003).

Similarly the number of individuals in our sample grows at an almost identical rate to the statewide total

(58 percent for both from 1994 to 2001). Given the possible limitations with using claims data outlined

above, our algorithm for identifying Medicaid recipients with HIV/AIDS appears to work quite well.23

         In Figure 2, we graph half-year mortality rates for the Medicaid recipients in our sample of

12,932 patients during the 1994-2001 period. On the second vertical axis of the table, we graph the half-

year mortality rate among all California AIDS patients. Death rates in our sample are 1.5 – 2.5

percentage points higher than deaths rates for all AIDS patients in California, indicating that our sample is

substantially sicker than the typical AIDS patient. The timing and magnitude of the change in mortality

in our sample is similar to the changes found for California AIDS patients. Between the first half of 1995

and the second half of 1997, six month mortality rates fell by 69 percent in our sample and 79 percent


21
   We should note that our sample includes not only patients with AIDS but also some who are just HIV-positive.
Unfortunately, in most years California only reported to the CDC the number of people living with AIDS, not the
number with HIV. Thus in one respect it is plausible that the patients in our sample would be healthier than the
typical AIDS patient in California. However, most of the individuals in our sample qualify for Medicaid through the
means-tested Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. Thus they must be in relatively poor health to meet
SSI’s medical eligibility criteria. As we document below, the death rates for our sample are substantially higher
than for non-Medicaid AIDS patients in California. Therefore, comparing trends in the number of HIV/AIDS
patients on Medicaid to overall trends of AIDS patients seems a reasonable compromise given the available data.
22
   Consider the first half of 1994 when there are 3,237 individuals in our sample. To estimate the number on
Medicaid with HIV/AIDS one must multiply this by (1/.24). Additionally we must multiply by 1.058 to account for
the exclusion of those with an invalid SSN. This yields 14,270, which is 52.0% of the statewide total of 27,454.
The actual fraction may be even higher given that we exclude individuals with just one HIV/AIDS claim or with
prescription drug claims only during the study period. On the other hand, some of the individuals in our sample
have not yet progressed to AIDS and thus our estimate will to some extent overstate the Medicaid fraction.
23
   One possible concern with focusing just on Medicaid recipients is that the incentive to enroll in the program will
change after new treatments become available (Goldman et al., 2001), raising the possibility of composition bias.
The fact that our series tracks closely with the total number in the state suggests this is not too problematic.


                                                         11
among all California AIDS patients.

         In Table 2, we report descriptive information about our Medicaid HIV/AIDS sample at four

points in time: 1994, 1997, 2000 and 2003. In constructing this sample we drop the 1,063 individuals

who live in one of the eight counties that moved its Medicaid recipients into a county-organized health

system during our study period because our claims data would often be incomplete for them. We also

drop the 1,802 individuals with one or more months in a Medicaid managed care plan during our eleven-

year study period.24 This leaves us with a final sample of 10,067 HIV/AIDS patients. As the table shows,

the annual mortality rate in the sample fell from 23.0 percent in 1994 to 5.2 percent in 2000, contributing

to a large increase in the average age of the sample. The fraction of the population under 40 fell from 50

percent in 1994 to 28 percent nine years later. During our study period the fraction of the sample that is

black and female increased by 47 and 19 percent, respectively.

         In the bottom half of the table, we report some basic information about health care utilization in

our sample. Patients have high medical care use but some measures are improving over time. Almost 48

percent of patients in the sample had an inpatient stay in 1994 and this number fell to 28 percent during

the next nine years. Annual inpatient spending fell by an even larger percentage from $7125 to $3510.25

In contrast, annual outpatient spending increased slightly while spending on prescription drugs tripled,

driven primarily by the increased use of antiretroviral drugs and their high cost. Although average

annual spending on prescription drugs increased by $8,000 over the period, total spending increased by

just $4,800. The fraction of HIV/AIDS patients who are also eligible for Medicare increased from 28 to

45 percent, with this change likely contributing to the fall in average Medicaid spending on inpatient care

given that Medicare covers most inpatient costs for dual eligibles.


24
   The lack of data for patients in managed care could be problematic if it leads to changes in the composition of our
sample over time. The fraction of all Medicaid recipients in a managed care plan does increase substantially during
our study period, though as Duggan (2004) notes, these changes differentially affected AFDC/TANF recipients who
account for a small share of our sample. SSI recipients, who account for nearly 70% of the patients in our sample,
were not required to enroll in managed care in any counties except those moving to a county-organized health
system and it is for this reason that we drop these counties. The fact that the number of individuals in our sample
tracks the number statewide with AIDS quite closely (Figure 1) suggests that this issue is not too problematic.
25
   Expenditure data cited here and elsewhere in the paper are adjusted to December, 2001 dollars using the Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Consumer Price Index for Urban consumers (CPI-U).


                                                         12
IV. The Impact of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments: A Graphical Presentation

        The FDA’s approval of Epivir in November of 1995 and of three protease inhibitors during the

next four months coincided with a sharp decline in the mortality rate among the Medicaid recipients in

our sample. As Figure 2 demonstrates, from the latter half of 1995 to the same period in 1997, the six-

month mortality rate among California Medicaid recipients diagnosed with HIV/AIDS fell by 70 percent,

from 11.3 to 3.4 percent. This decline was quite similar to the corresponding decline reported by the

CDC for all California residents diagnosed with AIDS, though the figure demonstrates that the

individuals in our sample appear to be in worse health than the average California AIDS patient. During

the next four years the mortality rate in our sample declined gradually and was equal to 2.8 percent in the

second half of 2001. Figure 3 depicts the fraction of individuals in the sample filling at least one

prescription for an ARV in the quarter. From the third quarter of 1995 to the second quarter of 1997, this

fraction more than doubled, increasing from 28.7 to 59.0 percent. This growth was entirely driven by an

increase in the use of Epivir/PI, with no one taking these drugs in the third quarter of 1995 and 56.0

percent taking one or more of these treatments in the second quarter of 1997 (Figure 4). There were no

significant changes in utilization for other ARVs. Taken together, the series depicted in Figures 2, 3, and

4 strongly suggest that Epivir/PI were the primary cause of the significant decline in mortality rates

observed during our study period.

        This is more easily represented in Figure 5, where on the left vertical axis, we report the fraction

of patients that are using either Epivir or protease inhibitors, and on the right vertical axis, we report the

patient quarterly mortality rate. There are three things to highlight in this graph. First, notice that prior to

the first quarter of 1996, quarterly mortality rates had been falling (though this trend had leveled off early

in 1995). This suggests that there might have been some decline in AIDS mortality rates from 1995 to

1997 even if Epivir/PI had not been introduced. Second, as Epivir/PI use increased from zero to 56

percent between the fourth quarter of 1995 and the second quarter of 1997, quarterly mortality rates fell

by 72 percent, from 6.7 percent to just under 2 percent. As Epivir/PI use stabilized in mid-1997, so did


                                                      13
mortality rates. Between mid 1997 and the end of our sample, quarterly mortality rates were originally

1.8 percent, fell as low as 1.4 percent, and ended at 1.6 percent.

        The potential importance of Epivir/PI as an explanation for the decline in mortality is most easily

illustrated with a simple time series model in which we regressed the first-difference in quarterly

HIV/AIDS mortality rates on the first difference in quarterly Epivir/PI use among HIV/AIDS patients in

the California Medicaid sample during the 1994-2001 period. The coefficient on the first-difference in

Epivir/PI use is -0.0789 (with a standard error of 0.0148). Epivir/PI use peaked at 56 percent in mid

1997, and therefore this simple time series regression suggests that the introduction of these drugs can

explain 4.4 percentage points of the 4.7 percentage point drop in quarterly mortality.26



V. The Impact of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments: Individual-Level Evidence

        In this section we estimate the impact of Epivir/PI use on medical and cost outcomes with

individual-level data. There are two key factors we must consider when constructing an econometric

model. First, individuals who are in worse health are both more likely to die and more likely to use these

treatments. Failing to account for this would likely lead us to underestimate the benefits of the treatments

and overestimate their effect on Medicaid expenditures. Second, the effect of the treatment is likely to

vary substantially across individuals. If patients and their physicians accurately forecast the effects of the

treatments and are trying to maximize their health, then one would expect to see a relatively small health

benefit for the marginal patient. If the effect does vary substantially across individuals, the effect for the

marginal patient would shed little light on the effect for all other patients.



A. Estimating Health Status from Claims Data

        In an effort to address these identification issues, we begin by exploiting the longitudinal nature

of the Medicaid claims data to construct a proxy for the severity of a person’s HIV/AIDS diagnosis before

26
  It is worth noting that many taking Epivir and/or a protease inhibitor were also taking one or more other ARVs. A
very common combination soon after the release of the new treatments was AZT, Epivir, and one protease inhibitor.
Thus our estimates are to some extent capturing an interaction of new and existing treatments.


                                                        14
use of ARVs. We start with a simple approach and count the quarterly number of inpatient and outpatient

claims for each patient with a primary or secondary diagnosis of HIV/AIDS. Because treatment patterns

may change over time, the average health of an individual with N claims in one quarter may differ from

their counterpart with N claims in a subsequent quarter. To account for this possibility, we calculate the

percentile in which each patient is located in each quarter. A person with a value of 0.75 for our severity

index would therefore have more HIV claims than 75 percent of the other individuals in the sample in that

quarter. Of course the distribution of health may change over time. Thus to reduce the possibility of

composition bias we focus on the period immediately before and after the release of Epivir/PI when

estimating the effect of these treatments.

        While this measure is no doubt an imperfect proxy for health status, it is a powerful predictor of

mortality during the first three quarters of 1995, just prior to the approval of Epivir and the first protease

inhibitors. The first two columns of Table 3 summarize regression results from models that have the

outcome of interest as an indicator variable Mj,t+1 that equals one if person j dies in the next quarter and is

otherwise equal to zero. The model we estimate is of the form

                                  (1)       Mj,t+1 = αt + μ * Hjt + Θ * Xjt + εjt

where Hjt is individual j’s percentile in the severity index distribution in period t. The vector Xjt includes

a set of control variables for the person’s age, gender, race, and Medicare eligibility and αt is a full set of

year*quarter indicator variables. The equations are estimated as linear probability models, though the

results are qualitatively similar if we instead estimate them as probits. For a person-quarter observation to

be included in the sample, he/she must be alive at the end of quarter t and must have an HIV/AIDS claim

in the current quarter or a previous one.

        The results summarized in the first column of Table 3 do not include our measure of health status.

The statistically significant estimate of -.0305 for the FEMALE variable implies that women were three

percentage points less likely than men to die in the next quarter. Given an average quarterly mortality

rate of approximately 7 percent among the men during this period, this represents a substantial difference.




                                                        15
Younger patients were also less likely to die as were individuals who were enrolled in the Medicare

program. This latter relationship could reflect an effect of Medicare on health status, or it may simply

reflect the fact that non-elderly individuals typically qualify for Medicare through the Social Security

Disability Insurance (DI) program. To be eligible for DI, a person must have worked in at least five of

the ten most recent years.27 Thus Medicare enrollment may be proxying for income or some other factor

that is also related with health status.

        The second specification includes our HIV severity measure. As expected, the sign of the

coefficient is positive and it is precisely estimated. The point estimate implies that a 10 percentage point

increase in the severity distribution is associated with a 1.6 percentage point increase in the quarterly

mortality rate. Interestingly, the inclusion of this variable reduces the magnitude of all of the coefficients

that were statistically significant in column one. For example, the estimate for the FEMALE coefficient

falls by more than half to -0.0152, though it remains statistically significant. This suggests that the lower

mortality rates of women are due in part to the fact they have less severe cases of HIV/AIDS. The same

holds true for younger individuals in the sample and those enrolled in the Medicare program.

        As mentioned above, the guidelines for the use of ARVs recommended that patients initiate

treatment only once their health had declined to a certain level. We would therefore expect to observe a

positive relationship between our severity index and the use of ARVs even prior to the introduction of

Epivir/PI in late 1995. The results summarized in column 4 indicate this is the case. The point estimate

of 0.2617 implies that a ten percentage point increase in the severity index is associated with a 2.6 percent

increase in the utilization of ARVs. In the first three quarters of 1995, women were significantly less

likely than men to use ARVs, but the differences by race were small and statistically insignificant.

        The next two columns describe the results from linear probability models in which we examine

the determinants of Epivir/PI use after their entry in late 1995. The pattern of results is similar to what we

found for older ARVs, though in this case the relationship between severity and ARV use is even

27
  Most individuals in our sample qualify for Medicaid through the means-tested Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) program. This program pays benefits to low-income aged, blind, and disabled individuals and individuals do
not need work experience to be eligible. Many of those on SSI are also eligible for DI.


                                                       16
stronger. The estimate of 0.5704 for the severity coefficient is more than twice as large as the

corresponding one from specification 4. Thus takeup of the drug was greatest among patients with the

lowest level of health as measured by medical care usage.28 As before, there are large differences in use

by gender, with women less likely to take the new treatments. But in this case, statistically significant

differences also emerge by race. Usage rates among African-Americans were more than ten percentage

points lower than among other individuals in the sample. The last two columns show an almost identical

set of results when the dependent variable is the use of any ARV. The similarity in the results is not

surprising given that the vast majority of patients taking an ARV during this period were taking either

Epivir or a protease inhibitor.



B. Estimating the Impact of ARVs on Mortality and Medicaid Expenditures

         In this section we estimate the effect of Epivir/PI on mortality and health care spending for the

individuals in our sample. We focus on the two year period from the first quarter of 1995 to the final

quarter of 1996. This gives us essentially four quarters of information prior to the introduction of

Epivir/PI and four quarters when the new treatments were rapidly diffusing. There are three main reasons

for focusing on this two year period even though we have eleven years of data. First, it is clear from the

trends in mortality that this two year period is the most important one, with mortality rates falling by more

than 60 percent during a one-year period. Second, there were no other treatments released in 1995 and

1996, except for one drug in another category that had very low utilization (1.0 and 3.3 percent in the

third and fourth quarters, respectively, of 1996). This reduces the possibility that changes in other

treatment patterns might bias our results. The third and most important reason is that, once the new

treatments were released, the distribution of health in our Medicaid sample begins to change rapidly. By

choosing a smaller time period we reduce (but do not eliminate) the possibility of changes in the

composition of the sample that could bias our estimates of the impact of the new treatments.

28
  If we estimate this regression separately by quarter the coefficient increases. For example, in the fourth quarter of
1995 our estimate is a statistically significant .127, but one year later it is .669. The constants in these specifications
(controlling for age, race, and Medicare enrollment) are .002 and .197, respectively.


                                                            17
         Mortality rates for individual j in the next quarter (t+1) are estimated to be a function of treatment

in the previous period (t) for Epivir or PI, denoted as E_PIjt plus the same covaiates that appeared in

equation (1). The equation we estimate is of the form

                                (2) Mj,t+1 = α + βjt * E_PIjt + μ * Hjt + Θ * Xjt + εjt

In this equation, βjt captures the effect of the treatment, which is allowed to vary both across individuals

and within an individual over time. The health index Hjt and demographic covariates Xjt control for

health status and other characteristics (e.g. age and gender) that are plausibly related to an individual’s

baseline mortality probability.29

         In considering whether to take the treatment, a forward-looking individual might be interested not

only in the effect on mortality in the current period but also the effect in future periods. Put simply, an

individual could rationally decide to delay treatment even if the magnitude of βjt was high because by

doing so he/she would increase the likely effect of the treatment in the future. But even considering this

dynamic effect, one would expect individuals who take the treatment in period t to have significantly

higher values of βjt in (1) above. Thus the magnitude of the average effect on the treated (ATT) would

likely exceed the average treatment effect (ATE) for all individuals with HIV/AIDS.

         The empirical results summarized in Table 4 examine the relationship between mortality and the

use of Epivir or a protease inhibitor. The sample is constructed from the sample of 10,067 HIV/AIDS

patients described in section 3, though because we are considering a two-year period rather than the full

eleven-year period the number of individuals considered here is lower. The outcome of interest is Mj,t+1,

which is equal to one if individual j dies in the next quarter and zero otherwise. There are 20,235

quarterly observations for 4152 individuals, with the number of observations for each person ranging

from one to eight. All specifications are estimated as linear probability models and include eight

year*quarter indicators. Standard errors are clustered by person.

29
  Of course the treatments may also influence health status, which could lead us to understate their impact on
mortality. But to the extent that individuals' position in the severity distribution (measured in Hjt) does not change,
failing to account for this indirect effect will not bias our estimates for the effects of interest. We obtained very
similar results if we held H fixed after the introduction of the treatments, though the estimated effects for mortality
were slightly larger (76 percent rather than 70 percent reduction).


                                                           18
        The results of various mortality equation specifications are reported in Table 4. In the first

column, we report results that include only the time effects and the dummy indicating whether the patient

takes Epivir/PI in the current quarter. Because sicker patients were likely to take these treatments, the

magnitude of this estimate is likely to be biased down. The point estimate of -.0101 suggests that the

treatments reduce mortality rates by approximately one percentage point. Recall that the quarterly

mortality rate in the period just prior to the introduction of Epivir/PI was about 7 percent. This is much

lower than the time series estimates presented above or than the estimates from random assignment

clinical trials mentioned in section two. The inclusion of demographic variables and the fraction of

months in which the person was enrolled in Medicare lead to a modest increase in this coefficient

estimate to -.0126. In both cases the estimate of interest is statistically significant at the one percent level.

        Neither of these first two specifications control for health status. In the third specification we add

the HIV severity measure defined above to the set of explanatory variables. The inclusion of this variable

leads to more than a threefold increase in the magnitude of the estimate for the impact of Epivir/PI to -

.0394. This estimate increases still further to -.0461 in the fourth specification, which adds controls for

utilization of other types of medical care in the previous quarter. This should to some extent capture the

severity of other conditions afflicting individuals with HIV/AIDS. Dividing this point estimate by the

average mortality rate just prior to the introduction of these treatments, this suggests a 66 percent

reduction in mortality rates. Of course, given that sicker patients with higher baseline mortality

probabilities were the ones taking the drugs, the implied effect would be somewhat lower.

        In the fifth specification we allow the effect of the treatments to vary with severity by interacting

the treatment indicator with our measure of HIV severity. This assumes that the effect of the treatment

increases linearly with this severity measure.30 The results suggest that the effect of the treatment is

increasing in severity, with an implied reduction of 8.57 (0.0952-0.0102) percentage points in the

quarterly mortality rate for the sickest patients. The point estimate for the Epivir/PI coefficient is slightly

30
  This is analogous to an assumption of a linear demand curve, with the health benefits corresponding to the
consumer's willingness to pay. As mentioned above, Medicaid-insured patients do not share in the cost of their care
and thus the financial cost for all patients is equal to zero.


                                                        19
positive, which likely reflects the fact that the treatments deliver little benefit to relatively healthy

patients. In the final specification we constrain this main effect coefficient to equal zero, implying that

the healthiest HIV/AIDS patients would derive no benefit. The point estimate of -.0825 implies that the

sickest patient experienced an 8.3 percentage point decline in mortality as a result of taking the

treatments. Dividing this estimate by the corresponding one for the severity coefficient, our results

suggest that taking Epivir/PI reduced individuals’ mortality rates by 70 percent. This is similar to the

results reported above for the RACTs31 and for studies that had detailed clinical information on patients.

It therefore appears that our estimates do a good job of replicating the results from studies with superior

data or with the benefits of randomization.

         Given the apparent impact of Epivir/PI on mortality rates among Medicaid recipients with

HIV/AIDS, it is plausible that the treatments would also influence health care expenditures. Both the sign

and the magnitude of this effect are theoretically ambiguous. These treatments were substantially more

expensive than their predecessors and it is therefore possible that overall spending increased.

Alternatively, the improvements in health resulting from their use could have reduced the demand for

other types of medical care, such as emergency room and hospital visits.32 Although a large number of

RACTs have considered the impact of ARVs on health, none have looked at their impact on medical care

use or health care expenditures.

         Suggestive evidence of the impact of Epivir/PI on medical care use is presented in Figure 6,

which shows that while average Medicaid spending on prescription drugs began increasing in the final

quarter of 1995, average Medicaid spending on all other categories of medical care started to decline at

that same time. The net effect of this in the quarters right after the introduction of Epivir/PI was a small

decline in quarterly Medicaid spending, from $5,172 in the last quarter of 1995 to $4,995 in the first

quarter of 1997.

31
   It is not strictly comparable to the RACT results because most of these studies considered the effect of just
protease inhibitors when combined with AZT and Epivir. Other RACT research suggests that Epivir produced
significant health improvements even with no protease inhibitor (Gulick et al. 1997).
32
   See Lichtenberg (1996) for an exploration of the effect of pharmaceutical treatments on the utilization of other
types of medical care.


                                                          20
        In Table 5, we report results similar to those in Table 4 but use as the dependent variable different

measures of quarterly Medicaid expenditures. In the first three models, the dependent variables are total

Medicaid spending, prescription drug spending, and non-prescription drug spending, respectively.

Because Medicare will cover a substantial share of the non-prescription drug costs for dual eligibles, and

this will have a larger effect on Medicaid spending for the sicker patients, we interact our MEDICARE

variable with the severity index. The first three specifications include essentially the same sample of

individuals as in Table 4.33 In this case we do not constrain the main effect to be zero given that taking

the treatment could have an effect on spending even for relatively healthy patients.

        The statistically significant point estimate of $967 for the Epivir/PI dummy in the first column

suggests that the new treatments substantially increased spending for relatively healthy patients. But the

estimate for the interaction of this variable with the HIV severity measure demonstrates that this effect

declines with severity. For the sickest patients, the point estimate implies a $320 ($967-$1,287) reduction

in quarterly Medicaid spending. This variation with health status is driven by an effect on other

categories of Medicaid spending. The results listed in column 3 show that Epivir/PI reduced spending on

other health care and that this effect was largest for the patients with the most severe cases of HIV.

        One limitation with this set of results is that we are unable to observe all health care spending for

the one-third of the patients who are also eligible for Medicare in our sample. Thus in the next panel of

results, we exclude those who were dually eligible for this other program. We would expect to estimate a

larger reduction in spending for the group remaining in the sample and this is what we find. The

estimates in column 4 suggest that for the vast majority of HIV/AIDS patients on Medicaid but not on

Medicare, the new treatments reduced spending. This was apparently driven by a much larger offset of

spending on inpatient and outpatient care, as the estimates in Table 6 show. According to our estimates,

the treatments reduced quarterly spending for the median patient by $504 and for the sickest patients by



33
  The sample is not identical because if a person is not enrolled in Medicaid then we do not observe their spending
in the next quarter. We would, however, be able to observe whether they had died. Thus we have slightly more
individuals and observations in the mortality specifications.


                                                         21
$1,389. Thus the introduction of these treatments reduced Medicaid spending and would have lowered it

by even more had it not been for the one-third of the sample also on Medicare.34

         Taken together, the results presented in Tables 4 and 5 strongly suggest that the impact of the

treatments varied substantially across individuals. Our estimates in Table 4 suggest a 70 percent

reduction in mortality rates, which corresponds quite closely to the estimates from earlier studies with the

benefit of randomization or with more detailed clinical information. Sicker patients benefited more

because they had higher baseline mortality rates. The effect on Medicaid spending also varied across

recipients, with modest increases for healthy patients or those on Medicare and large reductions for the

sickest patients only on Medicaid.



C. Variation by Gender and Race in ARV Use, Expenditures, and Mortality

         Given the significant differences across groups in the takeup of Epivir/PI, it is plausible that there

were corresponding differences across groups in the evolution of Medicaid spending and mortality

following the introduction of these treatments. Figure 7 shows that the use of Epivir/PI was much greater

among men after these treatments became available and that this remained true throughout our study

period. An examination of mortality rates for the two groups summarized in Figure 8 suggests that

differential use of the drugs may partially explain the observed changes. In the last half of 1995, male

half-year mortality rates were 13.3 percent, versus just 7.2 percent for women. If anything these rates

were diverging just prior to the introduction of Epivir/PI. But just one year later in the last half of 1996,

these rates were very close at 6.8 and 6.1 percent, respectively.

         If the average effect of the drug on those taking it (ATT) was similar for men and women, then

one could estimate this parameter using the commonly employed differences-in-differences strategy. But

it seems likely that this average effect would differ between the two groups, in which case an identifying

34
  An examination of trends in Medicaid spending for duals and all others supports this finding. Average quarterly
Medicaid spending for those not also on Medicare declined from $6,242 in the third quarter of 1995 to $5,149 two
years later. But during that same period, average Medicaid spending for dual eligibles increased significantly, from
$3,037 to $4,373. This latter change presumably occurred because there was much less non-prescription drug
spending to offset for this group.


                                                         22
assumption of this method would be violated. Recognizing this possibility, in Table 6 we summarize the

results from specifications that examine whether there were differential changes by gender and race

following the approval of the new treatments:

     (3) Y j, t +1 = θ 0 POSTt + θ 1 FEMALE j + θ 2 BLACK j + θ 3 FEMALE j * POSTt + θ 4 BLACK j * POSTt + ε jt

In this equation, Y is an outcome variable such as mortality or Medicaid expenditures for individual j in

quarter t+1. To be included in the analysis sample an individual must still be alive at the end of the

quarter. We use just eight quarters of data from the first quarter of 1995 through the final quarter of 1996,

thus focusing on the period just prior to and following the introduction of the new treatments. We do this

to reduce the possibility that other changes which could differentially affect the two groups would bias

our results and to reduce the possibility of composition bias. The variable POST is set equal to zero in the

period prior to the approval of Epivir/PI and rises in increments of 0.2 from the last quarter of 1995 to the

last quarter of 1996.35 We do this to capture the fact that the treatments did not diffuse instantaneously

but had come close to their equilibrium rate in the final quarter that we consider. All regressions are

clustered by individual given that we have multiple observations for most individuals in the sample.

           The estimates summarized in the first two columns demonstrate that, consistent with the earlier

results, the takeup of the new treatments was significantly lower among women and African-Americans.

Despite this, there is little evidence of differential changes for overall Medicaid spending, as shown by the

small and statistically insignificant point estimates for FEMALE*POST and BLACK*POST in column

three. This total spending masks differential changes by spending category, as columns four and five

reveal. The point estimates there suggest that Medicaid spending on prescription drugs rose by less for

women and blacks, but that their spending on other categories of care fell by less as well (though these

latter estimates are not significant). This provides some suggestive evidence of offset, with spending on

prescription drugs leading to declines in the utilization of other categories of medical care.




35
     Our results are very similar if we do not include the POST variable but instead have five year*quarter indicators.


                                                            23
         In the final column we investigate whether there were differential changes in quarterly mortality

rates by race and gender as well. The statistically significant point estimate of .032 for the

FEMALE*POST coefficient implies that the gender gap of more than three percentage points in mortality

rates was almost eliminated after the new treatments hit the market. No corresponding differences in

mortality rate changes were observed for blacks. This could be because the average effect of the

treatment was larger for blacks and this made up for their lower utilization rates. Taken together, our

results provide some evidence that the differential takeup of the new treatments by race and gender

influenced both health and spending on other categories of medical care.



VI. The Impact on Long-Term Medicaid Spending and the Cost per Life-Year Saved

         In this section we investigate the impact of Epivir/PI on long-term health care spending in the

Medicaid program. There are two factors that diverge when calculating these costs. First, although

Epivir/PI is an expensive treatment, the results in Table 5 suggest that these higher costs are more than

offset by lower inpatient expenditures. In contrast, the large reduction in mortality generated by Epivir/PI

use increased life expectancy, and hence the amount of time that individuals were eligible for Medicaid.36

In this section, we build an illustrative model that allows us to capture these two opposing factors in a

simple calculation.

         Consider an HIV positive patient that has progressed in their illness to the point that physicians

would recommend Epivur/PI use, which we label as quarter 0. Suppose in the absence of ARVs, a patient

will have medical expenditures of M0 in period 0, and for simplicity, assume this amount grows at a real

rate of (p) per quarter. Patients are assumed to die at a rate of δ in each quarter and this rate is assumed to

be constant over time. If r is the quarterly interest rate, the discounted expected lifetime costs for this

patient in the absence of antiretroviral treatments are

36
  As Meltzer (1997) outlines, there is some controversy about whether future medical costs should be considered in
medical cost-effectiveness studies. Meltzer argues that for cost-effectiveness studies to be consistent with utility
maximization, they must include all future lifetime costs, including non-medical expenses. At the other extreme,
others argue that only future medical costs directly related to the illness should be included in these calculations.
Given available data, we examine all future medical costs but do not include non-medical expenses.


                                                         24
                                                     ∞
                                       (3) LTwo =   ∑M
                                                    t =0
                                                           0 [(1 +   ρ ) /(1 + r )]t (1 − δ ) t


For simplicity, assume that ρ is equal to r37 and therefore, that discounted lifetime costs equal M0/δ. When

Epivir/PI were introduced, assume baseline costs and the mortality rates changed to M 0a and δa

respectively, and therefore, lifetime costs would then be M 0a /δa. The increase in life expectancy in

quarters is simply [1/δa – 1/δ] and the corresponding change in lifetime costs is [ M 0a /δa - M0/δ]. Dividing

this number by 4[1/δa – 1/δ] produces the cost per life year saved.

        An examination of our data reveals that the median patient on ARVs in 1997 had a severity index

of 0.61. Using the results from Table 3, quarterly Medicaid expenditures for this person before the

release of Epivir/PI are estimated to be $6,636 (M0) and quarterly mortality in late 1995 for someone at

this severity level is 8.27 percent. Use of Epivir/PI is estimated to reduce quarterly spending to $5,920

and quarterly mortality rates by 62 percent to 3.15 percent. These numbers indicate that the discounted

lifetime costs of treating an HIV/AIDS patient on Medicaid increased from $80,242 to $187,937

following the introduction of Epivir/PI. The resulting drop in mortality increased expected life

expectancy by 4.91 years so Epivir/PI use is estimated to cost a total of $21,918 per life year saved.38 So,

although the use of Epivir/PI increased the lifetime costs of treating HIV/AIDS patients on Medicaid by

over $100,000, the cost per life year saved is actually somewhat modest.

        We should note that we make a number of strong assumptions; including a constant mortality rate

and that the discount rate is equal to the growth in quarterly Medicaid expenditures. The marginal cost

per life year saved calculation is not particularly sensitive to the assumed values of M0 and Ma0. If we

assume there is no change in spending associated with ARVs then the cost per life year saved increases to

roughly $26,544. Likewise, the results are not very sensitive to the precise drop in mortality produced by


37
   This assumption seems reasonable given that our estimate of the average growth rate in individual-specific
quarterly Medicaid spending in both the pre and post periods was between 0 and 1 percent.
38
   This estimate is similar to estimates presented by Freedberg et al (2001). Those authors use estimates from
RACTs to simulate the cost-effectiveness of three-drug anti-retroviral regimens. The authors estimate that such a
regimen costs $13,000 to $23,000 per quality adjusted life year in real 1998 dollars.


                                                           25
ARVs. Notice that the numerator and denominator in the marginal cost calculation both contain 1/δa so

the rise in lifetime costs associated with living longer is functionally proportional to additional life

expectancy costs. If quarterly prices are assumed to increase twice as fast as the quarterly discount rate,

the cost per life saved increases to about $37,000 per year. But it is clear that even if we relax one or

more of our assumptions, the four ARVs studied here and released more than a decade ago are well

within the range of what is considered to be cost effective.39

           It is worth noting that the estimates for this treatment do not generalize to other ARVs or to other

new health care treatments. Indeed since the utilization of Epivir/PI settled to its new equilibrium in early

1997, there has been little further decline in mortality rates among Medicaid patients with HIV/AIDS.

This has been true despite a consistent increase in pharmaceutical spending in the last several years of our

sample, which increased from $2,385 in the second quarter of 1997 to almost $3,900 per quarter in 2001.

Of course it could be that mortality rates would have started to rise again had it not been for the new

treatments. But the contrast between the drugs released one decade ago and those released since strongly

suggest that the cost-effectiveness of the more recent ARVs is much lower.




VII. Discussion

           The steady increase in health care spending in recent years and that is projected for the coming

decades suggests that greater scrutiny may be given to the benefits of new and more expensive health care

treatments. Potential sources of data for these analyses are the claims data sets from insurers such as

Medicare, Medicaid, the Veterans Health Administration, or private insurance companies. These data

sets have large sample sizes, have detailed information on individuals’ treatments, and have very accurate

data on expenditures. It is, however, difficult to reliably estimate the effects of interest with this data

because of the absence of clinical information that would allow one to control for baseline health status

and because treatment decisions are endogenous.

39
     Recent estimates of the value of a life-year lie between $75000 and $150000 (Cutler and Richardson, 1998).


                                                          26
        In this study we investigate whether claims data can shed light on the impact of new health care

treatments by utilizing a sample of claims and eligibility data for more than 4 million individuals with one

or more months of eligibility for California’s Medicaid program during an eleven-year period from 1993

to 2003. This large sample size is especially important for our purposes given that AIDS is a relatively

rare disease that currently afflicts just 0.14 percent of U.S. residents. We argue that given drug protocols,

an econometric model must allow for heterogeneity in both take-up rates and effectiveness based on the

initial health of patients. We show that by exploiting the longitudinal nature of the data it is possible to

construct proxies for health status. We focus primarily on four drugs released in late 1995 and early

1996, as these are the ones that appear to have generated the largest improvements in health.

        Our findings are in line with those from previous studies of the effect of these treatments that use

randomized research designs or that have the benefit of more detailed clinical information. Specifically

our results suggest that the treatments led to a seventy percent reduction in mortality rates among the

individuals who took them. In contrast to these earlier studies, we can investigate the extent to which the

use of the treatments in real-world settings varies across individuals and how the effects of the treatments

do as well. Additionally, we can consider the effect on health care expenditures. For a variety of reasons

– imperfect information, provider financial incentives, and the moral hazard effects of health insurance –

current treatment patterns could substantially deviate from what is optimal. This possibility is not limited

to HIV/AIDS treatments.

        In recent years, a number of authors have developed econometric methods to estimate

heterogeneity in the effect of education, job training, and welfare programs.40 While few would expect

any treatment to have uniform effects across all subjects, in many situations, there is often no definitive

prediction about how the treatment effect should vary across these people. In the case we consider, the

receipt of treatment and the benefits of treatment should both vary monotonically with patient severity,

which is exactly what we find.


40
  For three recent examples see Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997), Abadie, Angrist, and Imbens (2002), and
Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (forthcoming).


                                                      27
        The methods utilized in this paper could also potentially be applied to evaluate the impact of

other health care treatments. The need for this type of information is high already. From 2000 to 2004

Medicaid prescription drug spending almost doubled, increasing from $20.0 billion to $39.2 billion.

Government involvement in this sector is set to increase even further as a result of the recently enacted

Medicare Modernization Act. As of January of 2006, the federal government has begun to subsidize

prescription drug coverage for many of the 45 million beneficiaries of the Medicare program, with the

projected costs of this averaging $70 billion per year through 2015. The private insurance plans that

provide this coverage will be allowed to consider cost-effectiveness when deciding which drugs to

include on their lists of covered drugs, which is a first for the Medicare program.

        Although random assignment clinical trials are considered the gold standard for determining the

effect of health care treatments, not all questions can be analyzed through experiments because of cost

considerations or other factors. For example, Raffi et al. (2001) notes that in the case of AIDS, ARVS

have reduced the probability of death to such levels that samples sizes would have to be exceedingly large

for mortality to be a clinical outcome in a drug trial of a new ARV. Likewise, because the variance of

health care spending in a cross section of patients is typically very large, samples sizes would be

prohibitively large to obtain precise estimates of the impact of treatment on this outcome.

        Researchers must therefore increasingly rely on non-experimental econometric methods to

evaluate the effects of new health care treatments. The methods utilized here suggest that one can use

observational data from a real-world setting to estimate the effects of health care treatments on both

expenditures and health outcomes, even without detailed clinical data. This is especially true if one has

detailed information for the period both before and after the introduction of the new treatments. Analyses

that provide reliable estimates of the effect of alternative treatments on health and on health care spending

could be an important input to efforts to increase the efficiency of the U.S. health care system.




                                                     28
References

Abadie, A., J.D. Angrist, and G. Imbens, 2002. "Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of
Subsidized Training on the Quantiles of Trainee Earnings," Econometrica 70(1): 91-117.

Acemoglu and Linn, 2004. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharmaceutical
Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 1049-1090.

Acemoglu, D., D. Cutler, A. Finkelstein, J. Linn. 2006. “Did Medicare Induce Pharmaceutical
Innovation?” forthcoming in the AEA Papers and Proceedings.

Bhattacharya, J., D. Goldman, and N. Sood, 2003. "The Link Between Public and Private Insurance and
HIV-Related Mortality," Journal of Health Economics 22(6), 1105-1122.

Bitler, M., J.P. Gelbach, and H.W. Hoynes, forthcoming. "What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional
Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments," American Economic Review.

Bozzette, S.A., et al., 1998. “The care of HIV-infected adults in the United States. HIV Cost and Services
Utilization Study Consortium,” The New England Journal of Medicine 339(26): 1897-904.

Bozzette, S.A., et al., 2001. “HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study Consortium. Expenditures for the
Care of HIV-Infected Patients in the Era of Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy,” The New England
Journal of Medicine 344(11): 817-23.

CASCADE Collaboration, 2003. “Determinants of survival following HIV-1 Seroconversion After the
Introduction of HAART,” The Lancet 362(9392): 1267-74.

Congressional Budget Office, 2006. “CBO’s Current Budget Projections (as of January 26, 2006).”
Available at http://www.cbo.gov/budget/budproj.pdf.

Cutler,D. 1995. “The Incidence of Adverse Medical Outcomes Under Prospective Payment.”
Econometrica, 63(1), January 1995, 29-50.

Cutler, D., M. McClellan, J. Newhouse, D. Remler. 1998. "Are Medical Prices Declining? Evidence for
Heart Attack Treatments." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 4.

Cutler, D. and E. Richardson. 1998. “The Value of Health: 1970-1990.” AEA Papers and Proceedings
88(2): 97-100.

Cutler D.M., 2004. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System, (New
York: Oxford University Press).

Dehejia, Rajeev and Sadek Wahba. 1999. “Causal Effects in Non-experimental Studies: Reevaluating the
Evaluation of Training Programs.” Journal of the American Statistical Association. 94: 1053-1062.
Delta Coordinating Committee, 2001. “Evidence for Prolonged Clinical Benefit from Initial Combination
Antiretroviral Therapy: Delta Extended Followup,” HIV Medicine 2(3): 181-188.

Detels, R., et al.,1998. “Effectiveness of Potent Antiretroviral Therapy on Time to AIDS and Death in
Men with Known HIV Infection Duration," Journal of the American Medical Association 280(17):1497-
1503.



                                                    29
Duggan, M., 2004. “Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs? Evidence
for Medicaid HMOs,” Journal of Public Economics 88(12): 2549-2572.

Duggan, M., 2005. "Do New Prescription Drugs Pay for Themselves? The Case of Second-Generation
Anti-Psychotics,” Journal of Health Economics 24(1): 1-31.

Egger, M., et al., 2002. “Prognosis of HIV-1-Infected Patients Starting Highly Active Antiretroviral
Therapy: A Collaborative Analysis of Prospective Studies,” The Lancet 360(9327): 119-129.

Eichner J., and J.G. Kahn, 2001. “Coordination of Health Coverage for Medicare Enrollees: Living with
HIV/AIDS in California,” The National Academy of Social Insurance, Medicare Brief, No. 8. Available
at http://www.nasi.org/usr_doc/medicare_brief_8.pdf.

Finkelstein, A. 2004 “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine Industry,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2): 527-564.

Floridia, M., et al., 2002. “HIV-Related Morbidity and Mortality in Patients Starting Protease Inhibitors
in Very Advanced HIV Disease,” HIV Medicine, 3(2): 75-84.

Freedberg, K.A., et al., 2001. “The Cost Effectiveness of Combination Antiretroviral Therapy for HIV
Disease,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 344(11): 824-31.

Garber, A. 2004. Cost-Effectiveness and Evidence Evaluation as Criteria for Coverage Policy. Health
Affairs, May.

Gebo, K.A., et al., 1999. “Costs of HIV Medical Care in the Era of Highly Active Antiretroviral
Therapy,” AIDS 13(8): 963-9.

Goldman, D., et al, 2001. "Effect of Insurance on Mortality in an HIV-Positive Population in Care,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association 96(455): 883-894.

Hammer, S.M., et al., 1997. “A Controlled Trial of Two Nucleoside Analogues Plus Indinavir in Persons
with Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection and CD4 Cell Counts of 200 per Cubic Millimeter or
Less,” The New England Journal of Medicine 337(11): 725-33.

Heckman, J.J., J. Smith, and N. Clements, 1997. "Making the Most out of Programme Evaluations and
Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Programme Impacts," Review of Economic Studies
64(4): 605-54.

Kahn, J.G., et al., 2002. “Access to and Use of HIV Antiretroviral Therapy: Variation by Race/Ethnicity
in Two Public Insurance Programs in the U.S.,” Public Health Reports 117(3): 252-62.

Lakdawalla, D., N. Sood, and D. Goldman. 2006. “HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual Behavior,”
forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.

LaLonde, Robert. 1986. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data.” American Economic Review. 76(4): 604-620.

Lichtenberg, F., 2003. "The Effect of New Drug Approvals on HIV Mortality in the U.S., 1987-1998,"
Economics and Human Biology 1(2): 259-266.


                                                    30
Lichtenberg, F. 1996. “Do More (and Better) Drugs Keep People Out of Hospitals?” AEA Papers and
Proceedings 86: 384-388.

McClellan, M., B.J. McNeil, and J.P. Newhouse, 1994. “Does More Intensive Treatment of Acute
Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality? Analysis Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal
of the American Medical Association 272(11):859-66.

Meltzer, David, 1997. "Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness Analysis," Journal of
Health Economics 16: 33-64.

Morin, S.F., et al., 2002. “Responding to Racial and Ethnic Disparities in use of HIV drugs: Analysis of
State Policies,” Public Health Reports 117(3): 263-72.

National Institutes of Health, 2004. “Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-Infected
Adults and Adolescents," Available at http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov//guidelines/adult/AA_102904.pdf

Newhouse, J. 1992. “Medical care costs: How much welfare loss?” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6(3): 3-21.

Palella, F.J. Jr, et al., 1998. “Declining Morbidity and Mortality Among Patients with Advanced Human
Immunodeficiency Virus Infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators,” The New England Journal of
Medicine 338(13): 853-60.

Petrin, Amil, 2002. "Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan." Journal of
Political Economy 110: 705-729.

Raffi, F., et al., 2001. APROCO Study Group. Anti-protease cohort. “Progression to AIDS or Death as
Endpoints in HIV Clinical Trials,” HIV Clinical Trials 2(4): 330-5.

Rosenblum, L., et al., 1993. “HIV Infection in Hospitalized Patients and Medicaid Enrollees: The
Accuracy of Medical Record Coding,” American Journal of Public Health 83(10): 1457-9.

Shapiro, M.F., et al., 1999. “Variations in the Care of HIV-Infected Adults in the United States: Results
from the HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study,” Journal of the American Medical Association
281(24): 2305-15.

Yeni, P.G., et al., 2002. “Antiretroviral Treatment for Adult HIV Infection In 2002: Updated
Recommendations Of The International AIDS Society–USA Panel,” Journal of the American Medical
Association 288(2): 222–35.




                                                    31
                                          Figure 1: HIV/AIDS Cases in the 24% Medicaid Sample and # Living with AIDS in CA


                           6000                                                                                                                                                                    50000



                           5500
                                                                                                                                               All of CA                                           45000
24% Medicaid Sample




                           5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   40000




                                                                                                                                                                                                              California
                                                                                                                                                   24% Medicaid Sample
                           4500

                                                                                                                                                                                                   35000
                           4000


                                                                                                                                                                                                   30000
                           3500



                           3000                                                                                                                                                                    25000
                                   1994.1           1995.1                1996.1            1997.1            1998.1               1999.1              2000.1                2001.1
                                                                                                       Year:Half


                                                                      Figure 2: Half-Year Mortality Rate for AIDS Patients


                           15.0%

                           13.5%

                           12.0%

                           10.5%
Half-year Mortality Rate




                           9.0%

                           7.5%

                           6.0%

                           4.5%                                                                                                                          24% CA Medicaid

                           3.0%

                           1.5%
                                                                                                                                                                         All of CA
                           0.0%
                                     1


                                                2


                                                           1


                                                                      2


                                                                                 1


                                                                                            2


                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                  2


                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                              2


                                                                                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                   4.


                                            4.


                                                      5.


                                                                 5.


                                                                            6.


                                                                                       6.


                                                                                                  7.


                                                                                                             7.


                                                                                                                        8.


                                                                                                                                   8.


                                                                                                                                              9.


                                                                                                                                                         9.


                                                                                                                                                                    0.


                                                                                                                                                                               0.


                                                                                                                                                                                          1.


                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.
                                 9


                                            9


                                                       9


                                                                  9


                                                                             9


                                                                                        9


                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                              9


                                                                                                                         9


                                                                                                                                    9


                                                                                                                                               9


                                                                                                                                                          9


                                                                                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                              19


                                         19


                                                    19


                                                               19


                                                                          19


                                                                                     19


                                                                                                19


                                                                                                           19


                                                                                                                      19


                                                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                                                            19


                                                                                                                                                       19


                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                  Year:Half




                                                                                                                       32
                   Figure 3: Fraction of CA Medicaid Sample Taking 1+ HIV Drugs in Each Quarter


        70%



        60%



        50%



        40%
% Use




        30%



        20%



        10%



        0%
          1994.1   1995.1    1996.1    1997.1     1998.1    1999.1     2000.1     2001.1    2002.1       2003.1
                                                        Year:Quarter


                       Figure 4: Diffusion of Epivir and Protease Inhibitors: 1994Q1 - 2003Q4


        60%

                                                                                                  Any Epivir or PI

        50%

                                                                                                  Any Epivir

        40%
% Use




        30%                                                                                     Any PI




        20%



        10%
                                                                                Any HIV Drug but no PI or
                                                                                E i i

        0%
          1994.1   1995.1    1996.1    1997.1     1998.1    1999.1     2000.1     2001.1    2002.1       2003.1
                                                        Year:Quarter




                                                             33
                                                  Figure 5: Quarterly Mortality Rate and Use of PI/Epivir


                         9%                                                                                                      60%


                         8%
                                                                                                Epivir/PI Use                    50%
                         7%




                                                                                                                                       % Using Epivir and/or PI
                         6%                                                                                                      40%
% Dying Next Quarter




                         5%
                                                                                                                                 30%
                         4%


                         3%                                                                                                      20%

                                                                                                Quarterly Mortality
                         2%
                                                                                                                                 10%
                         1%


                         0%                                                                                                      0%
                           1994.1       1995.1    1996.1      1997.1       1998.1      1999.1        2000.1       2001.1
                                                                       Year:Quarter


                                          Figure 6: Average Quarterly Spending in the Medicaid HIV/AIDS Sample


                         $7,000



                         $6,000
                                                                                                            Total Expenditures
Spending (in 2003Q4 $)




                         $5,000



                         $4,000                                                                         Prescription Drugs




                         $3,000



                         $2,000                                                                               Inpatient + Outpatient




                         $1,000
                               1994.1    1995.1   1996.1    1997.1     1998.1    1999.1     2000.1     2001.1      2002.1    2003.1
                                                                             Year.Quarter




                                                                                 34
                   Figure 7: Use of PI and/or Epivir by Gender in the Medicaid HIV/AIDS Sample


70%



60%                                                                                   Males



50%

                                                                                                       Females
40%



30%



20%



10%



0%
  1995.1        1996.1       1997.1      1998.1      1999.1           2000.1      2001.1      2002.1       2003.1
                                                         Year.Quarter


                         Figure 8: Half-Year Mortality Rates in the Medicaid HIV/AIDS Sample


14.0%



12.0%



10.0%                           Males



8.0%


               Females
6.0%



4.0%



2.0%



0.0%
        1995    1995.5   1996   1996.5   1997   1997.5    1998   1998.5    1999   1999.5   2000   2000.5   2001     2001.5
                                                             Year




                                                                 35
   Table 1: Prescription Drugs Approved for Treatment of HIV Infection by 12/31/03
                                       FDA          First script in
  Class         Brand Name           Appr. Date     claims data                 Ingredients
  NRTI             Retrovir         3/19/1987        1/2/1993                    zidovudine
  NRTI              Videx           10/9/1991        1/4/1993                    didanosine
  NRTI              Hivid           6/19/1992        1/4/1993                    zalcitabine
  NRTI              Zerit           6/24/1994        8/6/1994                     stavudine
  NRTI              Epivir          11/17/1995      11/27/1995                   lamivudine
  NRTI            Combivir*         9/27/1997       10/17/1997             lamivudine, zidovudine
  NRTI             Ziagen           12/17/1998      12/18/1998                     abacavir
  NRTI            Trizivir**        11/14/2000      12/1/2000         abacavir, zidovudine, lamivudine
  NRTI             Viread           10/26/2001      11/1/2001           tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
  NRTI             Emtriva           7/2/2003        7/16/2003                  emtricitabine
    PI            Invirase          12/6/1995       12/11/1995              saquinavir mesylate
    PI             Norvir            3/1/1996        3/7/1996                      ritonavir
    PI            Crixivan          3/13/1996       3/26/1996                      indinavir
    PI            Viracept          3/14/1997       3/19/1997                nelfinavir mesylate
    PI           Fortovase          11/7/1997       11/18/1997                    saquinavir
    PI           Agenerase          4/15/1999       4/26/1999                    amprenavir
    PI             Kaletra          9/15/2000       9/20/2000              lopinavir and ritonavir
    PI             Lexiva           10/20/2003      11/11/2003            fosamprenavir calcium
  NNRTI          Viramune            6/21/1996       8/10/1996                  nevirapine
  NNRTI          Rescriptor          4/4/1997        4/25/1997                  delavirdine
  NNRTI           Sustiva            9/17/1998       9/23/1998                   efavirenz
    FI             Fuzeon            3/13/2003        4/8/2003                  enfuvirtide

Source for drug list and approval dates: US FDA at http://www.fda.gov/oashi/aids/virals.html
* Combivir is a combination of Epivir and Retrovir
** Trizivir is a combination of Epivir, Retrovir, and Ziagen
     Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Medicaid HIV/AIDS Sample
                                     1994              1997              2000              2003
      Average Age                    38.4              40.7              43.0              45.1
      % Ages 0-17                   2.5%              2.6%              2.5%              2.2%
     % Ages 18-29                   12.0%             8.5%              4.4%              3.8%
     % Ages 30-39                   44.1%             38.7%             32.0%             21.9%
     % Ages 40-49                   29.3%             33.1%             37.7%             41.8%
     % Ages 50-64                   10.0%             13.4%             19.2%             25.3%
      % Ages 65+                    2.1%              3.8%              4.3%               4.9%
         % Black                    21.1%             23.4%             24.5%             25.0%
        % Female                    15.2%             21.3%             21.8%             22.3%
   Inpatient Spending                7125              4309              3900              3510
  Outpatient Spending                5091              4870              5007              5455
      RX Spending                    4122              7769             11913             12120
     Total Spending                 16338             16948             20820             21084
      % Die in Year                 23.0%             7.5%              5.2%                 -
     % Any Inpatient                47.8%             39.8%             30.0%             27.9%
     Eligible Months                  8.9              10.1              10.4              10.8
      % Medicare                    28.0%             39.2%             43.3%             44.7%
      # in Sample                    3221              3687              4275              4976
Includes Medicaid-eligible individuals in the 24 percent CA sample with 1 or more HIV/AIDS claims in
current or previous year. Excludes those with one or more months in a Medicaid managed care plan
or in one of the eight counties with a county-organized health system. Expenditures are inflation-
adjusted to December 2001 dollars using the CPI for urban consumers.
                     Table 3: Determinants of Treatment Utilization Before and After the Entry of PI-Epivir
                               Die Next Quarter?               Any HIV Drug?                 Any PI or Epivir?              Any HIV Drug?
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
HIV Severity Percentile                     .1600***                       .2617***                       .5704***                      .6120***
                                             (.0108)                        (.0243)                        (.0206)                       (.0215)
        Female              -.0305***       -.0152**       -.0797***      -.0549***      -.1276***       -.0793***      -.1277***      -.0759***
                              (.0065)        (.0065)         (.0188)        (.0182)        (.0183)         (.0164)        (.0200)        (.0177)
         Black               -0.0005         0.0015           -.0283       -0.0249       -.1211***       -.1070***      -.0965***      -.0812***
                              (.0069)        (.0067)         (.0176)        (.0172)        (.0168)         (.0153)        (.0183)        (.0166)
       Age 15-24            -.0449***       -.0233**         -.0686*       -0.0332       -.2052***       -.1188***      -.2123***      -.1196***
                              (.0111)        (.0115)         (.0414)        (.0394)        (.0414)         (.0397)        (.0465)        (.0427)
       Age 25-34            -.0170***       -.0133**        -0.0052         0.0007         -.0322*        -0.0246        -.0363**        -.0280*
                              (.0066)        (.0064)         (.0180)        (.0177)        (.0176)         (.0161)        (.0184)        (.0168)
       Age 45-54              0.0109         0.0131          0.0201         0.0237        -0.0021          0.0027          -.0088       -0.0036
                              (.0088)        (.0087)         (.0220)        (.0216)        (.0216)         (.0195)        (.0222)        (.0200)
       Age 55-64              0.0125         0.0176          0.0615         .0697*        -.0757**          -.0439        -.0688*       -0.0346
                              (.0151)        (.0145)         (.0399)        (.0382)        (.0340)         (.0292)        (.0368)        (.0306)
        Age 65+                -.0196        0.0101        -.2456***      -.1969***      -.3071***       -.1876***      -.3618***      -.2336***
                              (.0135)        (.0136)         (.0324)        (.0304)        (.0412)         (.0351)        (.0416)        (.0348)
       Medicare              -.0151**        0.0010         .0698***       .0961***       .1140***        .1499***       .1055***       .1440***
                              (.0064)        (.0063)         (.0177)        (.0174)        (.0163)         (.0147)        (.0168)        (.0151)
   Quarters Included       95Q1-95Q3      95Q1-95Q3      95Q1-95Q3       95Q1-95Q3      96Q1-96Q4      96Q1-96Q4      96Q1-96Q4       96Q1-96Q4
    # Observations            7259           7259           7259            7259          10523          10523          10523           10523
   Quarter Effects?           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
      R-squared              0.0061         0.0398         0.0213          0.0471         0.0810         0.1865         0.0641          0.1823
   Mean of Dep Var           0.064          0.064          0.293           0.293          0.414           0.414          0.476           0.476
    # of Individuals          2951           2951           2951            2951           3280           3280           3280            3280

Sample includes all individuals with one or more HIV/AIDS claims in the quarter or in a previous quarter and who are eligible for Medicaid and
still alive at the end of the quarter. Unit of observation is the person-quarter. All specifications are estimated as linear probability models and
include quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by individual.
                        Table 4: The Heterogeneous Impact of PI-Epivir on Mortality
                                  (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
     Any PI or Epivir          -.0101***    -.0126***      -.0394***      -.0461***        .0102*
                                (.0035)      (.0036)         (.0039)        (.0039)        (.0061)
  HIV Severity Percentile                                   .1370***       .1026***       .1203***       .1185***
                                                             (.0062)        (.0063)        (.0073)        (.0070)
Any PI or Ep * HIV Severity                                                              -.0959***      -.0825***
                                                                                           (.0120)        (.0068)
         Female                             -.0218***      -.0112***      -.0156***      -.0141***      -.0144***
                                             (.0035)         (.0034)        (.0034)        (.0034)        (.0034)
          Black                              0.0015          0.0024         0.0028         0.0029         0.0028
                                             (.0038)         (.0036)        (.0036)        (.0036)        (.0036)
        Age 15-24                           -.0453***      -.0299***      -.0274***      -.0267***      -.0269***
                                             (.0066)         (.0068)        (.0078)        (.0079)        (.0079)
        Age 25-34                           -.0189***      -.0186***      -.0165***      -.0169***      -.0168***
                                             (.0048)         (.0047)        (.0046)        (.0046)        (.0046)
        Age 35-44                             -.0075        -.0091**         -.0067         -.0070       -0.0070
                                             (.0047)         (.0046)        (.0045)        (.0045)        (.0045)
        Age 55-64                             -.0080        -0.0038        -0.0061        -0.0055        -0.0057
                                             (.0080)         (.0078)        (.0077)        (.0077)        (.0077)
         Age 65+                              -.0092         0.0120         0.0104         0.0140         0.0132
                                             (.0090)         (.0090)        (.0088)        (.0088)        (.0088)
        Medicare                            -.0095***        0.0028        -0.0035        -0.0043        -0.0040
                                             (.0034)         (.0033)        (.0033)        (.0033)        (.0033)
    # Other RX Claims                                                      .0020***      0.0020***       .0020***
                                                                            (.0002)        (.0002)        (.0002)
# Other Outpatient Claims                                                  .0004***       .0004***       .0004***
                                                                            (.0001)        (.0001)        (.0001)
 # Other Inpatient Claims                                                   0.0008         0.0008         0.0008
                                                                            (.0008)        (.0008)        (.0008)

    Quarters Included         95Q1-96Q4    95Q1-96Q4      95Q1-96Q4      95Q1-96Q4      95Q1-96Q4      95Q1-96Q4
     # Observations             20235        20235          20235          20235          20235          20235
    Quarter Effects?             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
       R-squared                0.0060       0.0095         0.0393         0.0607         0.0630         0.0629
      # Individuals              4152         4152           4152           4152           4152           4152

Sample includes all individuals with one or more HIV/AIDS claims in the quarter or in a previous quarter and who
are eligible for Medicaid and still alive at the end of the quarter. Unit of observation is the person-quarter. All
specifications are estimated as linear probability models and include quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by individual.
           Table 5: The Heterogeneous Impact of PI-Epivir on Medicaid Expenditures
                                         All Patients                               Dual Eligibles Excluded
                                All        RX Only      IP-OP Only            All          RX Only     IP-OP Only
                                (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
     Any PI or Epivir         967***       1473***          -505*            381           1039***         -658
                              (377)         (225)           (306)           (705)            (365)        (608)
  HIV Severity Percentile    5224***         289*         4935***          5332***         451***        4881***
                              (596)         (150)           (564)           (675)            (157)        (635)
Any PI or Ep * HIV Severity -1287**          428         -1715***          -1770*              698      -2468***
                              (635)         (350)           (525)          (1074)            (541)        (917)
          Female             -676***       -432***           -244          -944***            -449         -495
                              (234)          (74)           (222)           (289)             (65)        (281)
           Black                124        -358***        483***             332              -398        730***
                              (200)          (74)           (186)           (258)             (61)        (252)
        Age 15-24             3205*           58           3147*            3718*              167        3551*
                             (1899)         (148)         (1840)           (2041)            (175)       (1969)
        Age 25-34               293           56              238           545*               133          412
                              (230)         (109)           (206)           (309)            (116)        (289)
        Age 35-44               242           26              216           484*               75           408
                              (207)         (101)           (183)           (284)            (104)        (265)
        Age 55-64               394        -325***            720            472             -218*          689
                              (515)         (111)           (520)           (554)            (124)        (555)
         Age 65+                234        -644***            410           2270            -300**         2569
                              (345)         (116)           (325)          (2988)            (134)       (2991)
         Medicare              -458          168           -626**
                              (324)         (119)           (302)
   Medicare * Percentile    -2544***         317         -2862***
                              (595)         (268)           (520)
    # Other RX Claims         148***        117***          31***           158***          110***       48***
                               (11)           (7)             (9)            (18)             (9)         (15)
# Other Outpatient Claims     63***            2            61***            69***             2          67***
                                (9)           (2)             (8)            (10)             (2)         (10)
 # Other Inpatient Claims     315***        -24***        339***            279***          -20***       300***
                               (75)           (8)            (80)            (71)             (7)         (76)
    Quarters Included      95Q1-96Q4 95Q1-96Q4 95Q1-96Q4                 95Q1-96Q4 95Q1-96Q4 95Q1-96Q4
     # Observations          19448     19448     19448                     12626     12626     12626
    Quarter Effects?          Yes       Yes       Yes                       Yes       Yes       Yes
       R-squared             0.2157    0.3680    0.1480                    0.1935    0.3587    0.1299
      # Individuals           4048      4048      4048                      3014      3014      3014

 The dependent variable in columns 1 and 4 is equal to Medicaid spending in the next quarter. The other
 columns differentiate between spending on prescription drugs and all other services. Sample in
 specifications 1, 2, and 3 includes all individuals with one or more HIV/AIDS claims in the quarter or in a
 previous quarter and who are eligible for Medicaid and still alive at the end of the quarter. The last three
 specifications exclude individuals with one or more months of Medicare enrollment. Unit of observation is
 the person-quarter. All specifications include quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by
 individual. Expenditures are adjusted to December 2001 dollars using the CPI-U.
       Table 6: Pre-Post Differences by Gender and Race in Utilization, Spending, and Mortality
                          (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                     Any HIV RX       Any PI-Epivir    Total Spending    RX Spending IP+OP Spending Die Next Qtr?
     Female             -.099***         -.012***          -775**           -523***            -253            -.034***
                         (.017)           (.004)            (359)            (117)             (299)            (.005)
      Black             -.036**          -.010**              80            -422***            502*             0.004
                         (.017)           (.004)            (320)            (102)             (286)            (.006)
      Post              .302***          .624***             -78             938***          -1015***          -.049***
                         (.013)           (.012)            (222)            (102)             (182)            (.005)
 Female * Post          -.107***         -.213***             62            -498***             559            .032***
                         (.024)           (.023)            (450)            (156)             (408)            (.008)
  Black * Post          -.088***         -.150***            189             -353**             542             0.003
                         (.025)           (.023)            (491)             (138)            (459)            (.009)
    Constant            .317***          0.014***           4792             1473              3320            .071***
                         (.009)           (.002)            (170)            (64)              (148)            (.003)


 # Observations        20235             20235            20235             20235            20235             20235
  # Individuals         4152              4152             4152              4152             4152              4152
   R-squared           0.059             0.261            0.001             0.023            0.003             0.007
Quarters Included    95Q1-96Q4         95Q1-96Q4        95Q1-96Q4         95Q1-96Q4        95Q1-96Q4         95Q1-96Q4

Sample includes all individuals with one or more HIV/AIDS claims in the quarter or in a previous quarter and who are
eligible for Medicaid and still alive at the end of the quarter. Unit of observation is the person-quarter. Specifications
1, 2, and 5 are estimated as linear probability models. All specifications include quarter fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by individual. Expenditures are adjusted to December 2001 dollars using the CPI-U.
