                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MONEY GROWTH AND INTEREST RATES

                                             Seok-Kyun Hur

                                         Working Paper 11102
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11102


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




This paper will be included in the forthcoming NBER-EASE Volume 15, "Monetary Policy under Very Low
Inflation Rates," edited by Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Seok-Kyun Hur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Money Growth and Interest Rates
Seok-Kyun Hur
NBER Working Paper No. 11102
February 2005
JEL No. E43, E44, E52

                                            ABSTRACT

Our paper explores a transmission mechanism of monetary policy through bond market. Based on

the assumption of delayed responses of economic agents to monetary shocks, we derive a system of

equations relating the term structure of interest rates with the past history of money growth rates and

test the equations with the US data. Our results confirm that the higher ordered moments of money

growth rate(converted from the past history of money growth rates) influence the yields of bonds

with various maturities in different timing as well as in different magnitudes and monetary policy

targeting a certain shape of the term structure of interest rates could be implemented with certain

time lags due to path-dependency of interest rates.

Seok-Kyun Hur
Research Fellow
Korea Development Institute
PO Box 113, Chongnyang
Seoul 130-012, Korea
shur@kdi.re.kr
                                        Contents



I. Introduction ..................................................................................1

II. Theoretical Framework ............................................................... 7

    II-1. Lagged transmission channel of monetary shocks
    II-2. Zero lower boundary and liquidity trap
    II-3. Consumption, investment, production and the term structure of interest rates

III. Empirical Analysis ................................................................24


    III-1. Data
    III-2. Test strategies and stationarity of variables
    III-3. Results
    III-3-1. Tests with monthly data
    III-3-2. Test with quarterly data

IV. Policy Implications ..................................................................35

    IV-1. Implementability and time lags
    IV-2. Determination of the short-time interest rate
    IV-3. Escape from zero short-term interest rate

V. Concluding Remarks ..............................................................40

 Reference......................................................................................48
    I. Introduction



  The primary purpose of our paper is to investigate the roles of monetary policy in

shaping the term structure of interest rates. The roles of money are defined in various ways.


Among the most critical ones are the roles of money as an accounting unit, a store of value,

and a medium of exchange. Due to these particular functions of money, monetary policy


governing the stock of money, influences the relative prices of money delivered at different


time and different states. In turn, the current relative prices of money to deliver at different


points of time in the future, which are, in other words, collectively called the term structure


of interest rates, influence economic decisions of private agents. Thus, a thorough


exposition of monetary policy would encompass the analysis of a monetary general


equilibrium model including all of the above mentioned processes. However, for

tractability, we narrow down the scope of this paper to demonstrating how the monetary


policy can manipulate diverse interest rates along the passage of time.


  Intuitively speaking, the term structure of interest rates is much more informative than

any set of economic variables and thus will be useful as a reference for monetary policy. So


far there have been continuous debates over what should be optimal targets of monetary




                                               1
policies. Mostly a combination of inflation and GDP gap is cited as a candidate for the


target of monetary policy (Taylor(1993)). Further developed models would allow

autoregressive formations in inflation and GDP gap (Clarida, Gali, and Gertler(2000)).


Based on such criteria, a certain level of short-term interest rate (e.g. call rate in Korea,

federal fund rate in the US) is prescribed that a central bank should maintain. Though such


concentration on the determination of the short-term interest rate is relatively easy to


implement in practice, it only sequentially cross-checks the level of inflation and GDP gap


with the current short-term interest rate. It neglects how the term structure of interest rates


as a whole reacts to the adjustment of the short-term interest rates, which might explain


why the same level of the short-term interest rate brings about different economic


performances at different time and states.


  Frequently we read numerous articles about predicting the future path of federal fund

rate from newspapers. All of them are written on the implicit belief that monetary policy

has influence on major aggregate economic activities, such as consumption, investment,


and production, though its influence on these economic activities may differ in terms of


directions, magnitudes, and timing. Unfortunately, a true transmission mechanism of

monetary policy has not yet been thoroughly explored. A true description for the economy



                                              2
would be that the transmission mechanism works through multi-channels, only a small


number of which so far have been highlighted. In our knowledge, very few economic

models have emphasized the differential time effects of monetary policy in the context of


analyzing the movements of the whole nominal bond market equilibrium1.

   Apart from the tradition, our paper argues that an effective monetary policy should


consider the whole term structure of interest rates rather than a yield rate of a bond with


specific maturity. Furthermore, though control over the short-term interest rate has


influence on the yields of bonds with longer maturities, it has not yet been clearly verified


in which direction a change in the short-term interest rate shifts the whole term structure of


the interest rates. Considered that different yield curves lead to different performances of an


economy, the monetary authority should perceive at least the impact of its current


short-term interest rate policy on the term structure of interest rates. However, an answer to



1 Most of the literature assumes that the shape of the term structure curve depends on the anticipation for the future, the
formation of which is hard to define or requires a somewhat arbitrary mechanism. For example, Ellingsen and
S derstr m (2004) explain how the yield curve responds to monetary policy. In their work, monetary policy is
determined by the central bank's preference parameters over the volatilities of inflation, output, and the short-term

interest rate. They claim variations in the preferences result in another yield curve by affecting people's expectation for
the future. In contrast, our paper focuses on verifying the relationship between the yield curve and the past money growth
rates.




                                                            3
this question would require thorough understanding of the whole economy as well as the


bond market itself.

  Most of economic activities are determined by the anticipation of the future, which is


well embedded in the term structure of interest rates. Furthermore, the shape of the yield

curve controlled by the money growth rates or the short-term interest rate does a crucial


role in determining the levels of the economic activities. Thus, we are interested in


exploring how money growth rate or short-term interest rate policy shifts the term structure


of interest rates.


  From the literature on durable consumption and investment, we understand that both of


them are quite sensitive to economic fluctuations in comparison with consumption on


non-durable goods and services. Intuitively speaking, since the flows of benefit from


durable goods and capital continue for a certain period of time, durable good consumption

and investment entail the feature of irreversibility or indivisibility of purchase, which

reduces durable goods consumption and investment decisions to optimal stopping problems.


Hence, it is absurd to expect that the monetary authority can raise aggregate demands for


durable goods and physical capital by merely changing the short-term interest rate. It is

because in reality the falling short-term interest rate is often accompanied by an increase in



                                              4
the long-term interest rate, which may discourage an agent from purchasing durable goods


and physical capital. Thus, the monetary authority should find a certain pattern of a yield

curve in order to reset the current yield curve to the pattern, which will boost the aggregate


demand in times of depression.

  On the other hand, supply side is also dependent on the term structure of interest rates.


Production requires a multi-period binding planning horizon in addition to a time-to-build


capital driven technology, in which the adjustments of production inputs are not completely


flexible across time. Thus, the assignment or the employment of production inputs, not only


capital but also labor, is perceived to be a function of the term structure of interest rates.


  Our paper proposes to (1) investigate how a monetary policy (not only quantity-easing


but also targeted at controlling the short-term interest rate) shifts the whole term structure


of interest rates, (2) discuss the implications of the observations that production as well as

durable consumption and investment are sensitive to changes in the term structure of

interest rates, and (3) arrange monetary policies of maintaining a certain shape of the term


structure of interest rates based on empirical results.


  The contents of the paper are organized as follows: Section 2 discusses a transmission

channel of monetary policy in the economy, which relies on the lagged adjustment



                                                5
processes of various interest rates in the bond market. The feature of lagged adjustments


resulting from delayed responses to monetary shocks is critical in that it relates the

dynamics of interest rates to the past history of money growth rates. Section 3 tests all the


hypotheses obtained from the models introduced in section 2 using the US data, both

monthly and quarterly. The relationship between the term structure of interest rates and the


money growth rates are estimated in presence of as well as in absence of endogenous


production fluctuations. Section 4 deduces the policy implications by discussing the time


lags of monetary policy in implementing a certain yield curve as well as considering the


impact of the current short-term interest rate targeting policy on the yield curve. Finally


section 5 concludes.




                                             6
     II. Theoretical Framework


  From a survey of the current literature on the optimal monetary policy, we identify two


common approaches from two distinctive traditions of thoughts-new classical and new


Keyensian. New classical approach2 admits that market incompleteness, such as market

segmentation, may cause the differential effects of monetary policy across time and across


agents in the short run whereas new Keynesian approach3 introduces sticky prices and

wages to refute the neutrality of money. Regardless of different appearances, these two


approaches have common in that they assume private agents respond to shocks in


heterogeneous ways.


  This section is purposed to provide a logical explanation about the delayed responses of


aggregate macro variables to monetary shocks and reveal the consequences of the delayed


responses on the dynamics of the term structure of interest rates induced by monetary

policy. From the perspective of new classical approach, we build a model, which allows a

path dependent dynamics of the interest rates governed by the past money growth rates.


  To begin with, we investigate a limited bond market participation model and show that

2 Refer to Alvarez, Lucas and Weber (2001) and Monnet and Weber (2001).
3 For more details, refer to Clarida et. al. (1999) and Yun (1996).




                                                              7
the higher order moments of money supply can influence the term structure of interest rates.


Extended from a traditional Cash-in-Advance model of Lucas and Stokey(1987), a general

m-period-ahead CIA condition is imposed. The adoption of CIA feature is critical because


it, combined with the assumption of limited bond market participation, brings about the

more persistent redistribution effects of monetary policy on the economy. Based on the


assumptions, the term structure of interest rates is approximated by a system of linear


equations of the lagged money growth rates. As is generally understood (Clarida, Gali, and


Gertler(2000) and Ellingsen and S derstr m(2004)), the expectation of the future money


growth rates (or the future monetary policy) has effect on the current term structure of


interest rates. However, we emphasize the importance of the past path of monetary


expansion in a sense that money shock would be realized in differential manners across


heterogeneous agents in the economy.

  Second, we explore the implications the non-negativity restriction of nominal bond yield

rates holds in financial market, while showing that the linear approximation of the term


structure of interest rates by the past money growth path does not necessarily satisfy the


non-negative condition. The non-negativity restriction of nominal bond rate is a critical




                                             8
barrier for the central bank to consider when it exercises open market operation policy.


Especially, in a very low inflation regime, the possibility of reaching zero short-term

interest rate often cast worries because zero rate is regarded as a natural lower boundary of


so called liquidity trap. It is commonly believed that the monetary policy without

coordination with the expansionary fiscal policy would be ineffective in such a situation.


However, the ineffectiveness of monetary expansion in case of falling into the zero nominal


interest rate trap may be supported when only one type of bond is available in the financial


market other than money. Such extreme absence of variety in bond market is not realistic at


all, and the plunge of the whole term structure into zero has not been observed in the


history, either. Hence, after complementing our term structure model with non-negativity


restrictions, we discuss the effectiveness of monetary policy near zero short-term interest


rate and explore a transitional path on which the bond market equilibrium retrieves the

positivity of interest rates.

  Third, we examine a claim that consumption, investment, and production decisions are


significantly affected by the term structure of interest rates while the demands for durable


goods and production factors are more sensitive to a change in the term structure of interest

rates than consumption of non-durable goods and services due to their (longer) duration of



                                             9
usage. All other things equal, a lower short-term interest rate is likely to induce more


current consumption. However, what if the lowered short-term interest rate is matched by

higher long-term interest rate? An answer without considering the dynamics of the term


structure would lead to the imprecise reasoning that lowering the short-term interest rate

encourages the consumption. Thus, we also aim to answer for a question why a monetary


policy targeting a certain level of the short-term interest rate leads to different economic


performances at different times and states.


  Nominal bonds, which guarantee the delivery of pre-defined amount of money at


maturities, are (gross) substitutes for money4. Private agents allocate their resources


between money and nominal bonds5. Hence, a change in money stock indicates that the

economy should move to another equilibrium sustaining different relative prices of bonds


with respect to money. This section focuses on analyzing a mechanism, through which

variations in monetary policy lead to different term structure of interest rates. A basic idea

that the past money growth path determine the current term structure of interest rates,


would explain why it leads to different outcomes to maintain the same level of the short


4 In other words, money is a kind of nominal bond, which expires and is renewed instantly.
5 In fact, nominal bonds vary not only by the length of maturities but also by the magnitude of default risk. However, for
 simplicity our paper deals with government issued bonds only. The status of the government as a sole provider of
 currency in the economy eliminates default risk premium on the government bonds.




                                                           10
term interest rate at different periods6

  Needless to say it would be another paper topic to verify whether and how the term

structure of interest rate can have real effects on the economy. The emphasis on the


relationship of the term structure of interest rates and real macro variables is originated

from our original intention to transform the issue of finding optimal monetary policy to that


of finding an appropriate term structure, which induces more consumption, investment and


production. However, in this paper, we do not delve into this issue further. Instead we


concentrate on revealing the relationship between money growth rates and the term


structure of interest rates.


II-1. Lagged transmission channel of monetary shocks


  In this section we derive an equation linking the term structure of interest rates with the


past history of money growth rates. We introduce an economy with limited bond market


participation in order to induce a situation in which a monetary shock has differential


6 Of course, it is reasonable that the yield curve is also influenced by the expectation of the future money growth rates

and we need a model where the term structure of interest rates depends on the future monetary policy as well as the past
history of monetary policies. However, we have no clear clue as to how the accumulation of the information on the past
history is reflected on the formation of the expectation for the future. Thus, instead of the future variables being separately
included, the expectation for the future can be understood as reflection of the past history. In this sense the persistent




                                                              11
impacts on heterogeneous agents across time (mainly redistribution effects). The impact


differentials are caused by the unsynchronous timing of money shock transmitted to or

perceived by the agents or by their different speed of reactions to the shock, and they lead


to a non-trivial change in the term structure of interest rates. On the other hand, in absence

of such impact differentials, the yield curve would shift up or down in parallel according to


the change of the present and the past money growth rates. A swing of the yield curve


would be possible only by the coordinated variations of the expectation for the future


monetary growth path and other real macro variables.


  Our model is an adapted version of Alvarez et al.(2001). Our model assumes the


following. First, there are two types of assets in the market-money and bond. Considered


that the assets are means of storing or growing values along the passage of time, the


nominal return on money is always zero by construction whereas the nominal return on

bond is positive nominal interest rate. Due to the yield difference in these two types of

assets, we need a mechanism guaranteeing the positive holding of money. Thus, we assign


a CIA restriction, which is modified from the original one in Lucas and Stokey (1987).


  Second, we assume limited bond market participation, under which not every consumer


effect of the past policy can be more substantial than we guess




                                                            12
can purchase bonds in the financial market due to transaction costs or information costs or


regulation. There are two groups of consumers in the market-bond market participants and


non-participants, whose shares in the total population are                                   and 1-              respectively7.

These two groups are homogeneous in all the other aspects than the bond market

participation.


  Third, the CIA condition to be introduced is defined on a multi-period time horizon as


follows. At the current period, nominal consumption is afforded by a certain portion from


the current nominal income, another certain portion from nominal income of the previous


period, another certain portion from income earned two period ago, and so on. A more


intuitive interpretation of the multi-period ahead CIA condition is that at the beginning of


period t the current income ( yt ) would be cashed instantly ( pt yt ) and it would be spent for
                                                                                                          m −1
the next        periods by certain fractions of             vt , t + j ,   j = 0 ,1 , 2 ,..., m − 1 , (          ν t ,t + j = 1) .
                                                                                                          j=0



   Based on the above model, we derive a system of equations of our concern as below8.

                                                Γt = Φ∆ t + R (v t , g t ) + ε t ,                                       (1)

7 It is assumed that all the bond market participants hold all kinds of bonds with various maturities. A more realistic setup
 would allow that the bonds market participants should be classified into several groups by the maturities of bonds they
 hold (for example, short-term, medium-term, and long-term investors). Then, then the equilibrium yield rate would
 display more dynamism.
8 For more details on the derivation of the equations, see Appendix A. In Appendix A, we derive the system of equations
 with additional simplifying assumptions , such as zero GDP growth rate ( g t =0 for all t ) and the absence of taxation
 (τ t = 0   for all t ). In contrast Equation (1) covers more general cases.




                                                               13
                                                            φ 1 ,1   φ 1, 2   φ1,3             φ1, m −1    φ1, m
             rt , t + 1                   µt
                                                            φ 2 ,1   φ 2 ,2                                φ 2 ,m
            rt , t + 2                   µ t −1
Γt ≡           ...          ,   ∆t ≡      ...       , Φ ≡ φ 3 ,1                     φ i, j                             ,
           rt , t + n − 1              µt−m+2                                                              φ n − 1, m
            rt , t + n                 µ t − m +1
                                                            φ n ,1   φ n ,2                    φ n ,m −1   φ n ,m


where Γ t is a ×1 vector of yield rates with different maturities,                            ∆t a ×1 vector of

money growth rates up to date for the last                      1 periods, R a ×1 vector, and              Φ       a
matrix. R (v t , g t ) is the term evaluating the effects of other variables on the term structure
of interest rates, such as a vector of the current and the past GDP growth rates ( g ) and is                  t




closely related to the current and the past velocities of money circulation ( v t )9. The
importance of R (v t , g t ) is highlighted later in empirical analysis.
  The above equations show path dependency in that the present term structure of interest
rates is affected not only by the money growth rate of the current period but also by those
of the past ( 1) periods10. Theoretically, path dependency is a common phenomenon and
may arise from various sources. First, it can come from the learning process. All the
economic decisions in a dynamic context should involve the formation of expectation for
the future, which is in turn based on the learning process from the past experience. This is
also an excuse for not including the expectation for the future in the model. Second, path
dependency can arise from some sort of market frictions, which prevent economic agents
from responding to shocks in a uniform manner and with simultaneous timing. Such
inevitably heterogeneous responses of the agents may lead to persistent and lagging effects
of monetary policy. There are many other sources of path dependency, but here we are
particularly interested in these two sources. Our paper introduces frictions in


9 For formal definitions of g t and v t , see Appendix A.
10 Money growth rates for the past m-1 periods can be replaced by the higher order moments of the money growth
 rate( µ ) up to m-1 th order.
       t




                                                           14
consumer/investor side in order to derive a path dependent relation of interest rates and
money growth.

  Another notable point from Equation (1) is that the lagged adjustments of interest rates in


response to monetary policy vary across different types of bonds in terms of directions as

well as magnitudes of changes. This implies that the monetary authority can adjust the


shape of the term structure by using the dynamic or path dependent relation of the term

structure with monetary policy. As earlier mentioned, understanding the dynamics of the


term structure is very important because most major economic activities, such as durable


consumption and investment, are significantly influenced by the shape of the term structure.


However, to find an optimal term structure is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead we


focus on how a certain term structure of interest rates could be implemented with the


accommodation of monetary policy.



II-2. Zero lower boundary and liquidity trap

  The term structure of interest rates described in Equation (1) provides static information

evaluated at a point of time on the dynamics of various interest rates. Considered that


Equation (1) is obtained from the first order log-linear approximation of Equation (A-2),

the interest rate dynamics may violate the non-negativity of nominal interest rates and the




                                             15
non-negativity restrictions should be additionally levied on the yields of all maturities.


  A nominal interest rate is the rate of return on holding nominal bonds. Due to the

definition and the existence of money, zero is a natural lower boundary for the nominal


interest. So far the probability of hitting zero interest rate has been evaluated extremely low

and the consideration of non-negativity yields has not been strongly enforced. However, the


recent low interest rate regime in a few economies including US and Japan has caused


worries that the nominal interest rate might hit zero and the economy might fall into the


natural lower bound of the liquidity trap.


  In this section, we analyze the propagation mechanism of the monetary policy in case of


hitting the zero short-term interest rate by levying the non-negativity restriction on


Equation (1). In addition, we distinguish the liquidity trap from the state of zero nominal


interest rate and discuss an escape strategy from each of them using monetary policy.

There may be various ways of assigning the non-negative condition to Equation (1).

Among them, the most intuitive one is to introduce shadow processes, which are equivalent


with the yield rates when they are positive and diverges (become negative) when the yield


rates are zero. In consideration of the non-negativity condition as above, Equation (1)

should be modified to



                                              16
                                                        m
                                   max                        φ   1, j    µ   t − j
                                                                                       E
                                                                                           + R1 (v t , g             t
                                                                                                                          ) + ε          1t ,    0
                                                       j=1
                                                       m

     rt ,t + 1                     max                       φ    2 , j   µ   t − j
                                                                                       E
                                                                                           + R       2    (v t , g    t
                                                                                                                          ) + ε          2 t ,   0
                                                       j=1
     rt ,t + 2                                                                                                                                                (2)
                    ≡
    rt ,t + n − 1
                                             m
     rt ,t + n              max                        φ              µ            E
                                                                                           + R             (v t , g       t
                                                                                                                               ) + ε                  0
                                                            n −1, j       t − j                  n −1                                      n −1t ,
                                             j=1
                                                       m
                                   max                       φ    n , j   µ   t − j
                                                                                       E
                                                                                           + R       n    (v t , g    t
                                                                                                                          ) + ε           nt ,   0
                                                       j=1



                        R 1 (v t , g t )                                                         ε   1t
                                    t         t
                        R   2
                                (v , g )                                                         ε   2t


R (v , g ) ≡
      t       t                                                    and             εt ≡
                                                                                                 ε n −1 t
                                         t         t
                        R          (v , g )
                            n −1                                                                 ε nt
                        R   n
                                (v t , g t )



  Looking at Equation (2), we may wonder what difference it makes from Equation (1)

except the additions of an operator max [ x,0] to each row. A more critical difference culd


be found in the movement of a newly defined money growth rate                                                                 µ tE   .   µtE         is defined to

be the effective money growth rate and is equal to the pre-defined money growth rate

µ in absence of a zero rate bond. The divergence of µ tE                                                   from µ t arises when the yield
 t


rate of a bond hits, or stays at, or escapes from the zero boundary. It is because a bond,


once its yield rate hits zero, would be treated as an equal for money. Accordingly, the

money growth rate should be modified to account for a sudden change in the categories of



                                                                              17
money stock. Likewise, when the bond yield escapes from the zero rate, the exactly


opposite movement in the money growth rate as well as in the money stock would be

observed.


  So far we haven't clarified how the zero short-term interest rate is different from the

liquidity trap. The liquidity trap is a state in which monetary expansion through open


market operations or helicopter money drops cannot encourage economic agents to increase


bond holdings and lower the interest rate further. In other words, the liquidity trap is a


mental phenomenon, in which the substitution between money and bonds is extremely


sensitive to the interest rate change. Accordingly, the level of the short-term interest rate, at


which the liquidity trap arises, doesn't have to be zero.


  On the other hand, the zero short-term interest rate does not necessarily imply the advent


of the liquidity trap. There has never been a period in which the whole term structure

collapsed into the zero line, though there were some cases in which a point on the term

structure curve hit zero. Hence, even in the (near) zero short-term interest rate environment,


the monetary authority can carry out expansionary monetary policy through open market


operation by using other bonds with positive yield11.


11 Orphanides(2003) appreciates the usefulness of the open market operation policy, which is to "implement additional




                                                        18
  Comprehension of the differences between the liquidity trap and the zero interest rate


gives a clue to finding escape strategies from the liquidity trap. One of them is to use the

increment of money stock neither for tax reduction, nor for the purchase of bonds, but for


the purchase of goods. This can be regarded as a fiscal policy in that it increases the

government expenditure. On the other hand, it still holds a feature of a monetary policy in


that there is no additional fiscal burden in the government account. The inflationary effect


of the government expenditure expansion funded by printing money would induce private


agents to consume more and faster. In other words, the inflationary policy raises the

velocity of money       (
                               1
                                       ).   The faster velocity is exactly opposite to the common belief
                            1 − v t ,t


that monetary expansion through the open market operation reduces the velocity of money


in a liquidity trap. A more detailed description of the escape strategy is available in


Appendix A.



II-3. Consumption, investment, production and the term structure of interest rates

  In this section we discuss the relationships of the term structure of interest rates with


consumption, investment and production. The term structure of interest rates matters



monetary expansion by shifting the targeted interest rates to that on successively longer-term instruments, when
additional monetary policy easing is warranted at near zero interest rates".




                                                          19
because most intertemporal decisions are the functions of the term structure of interest rates.


Among the various intertemporal decisions made by economic agents, we are particularly

interested in consumption on durable goods and capital investment as well as production


because all of them take substantial portion in the economy and they are more volatile than


other economic decisions12

  Unlike consumption on non-durable goods and services, capital investment and durable


good consumption show more fluctuations in response to economic shocks including


interest rate changes. By nature, decisions on durable good consumption and physical


capital investment are very close to discrete choice or optimal exercises of real options in


presence of indivisibility and irreversibility13. To rephrase, durable good consumption and

capital investment are simply reduced to optimal stopping models, in which the term


structure of interest rates is a critical determinant.

  Hong(1996) and Hong(1997) compare the sensitivities of durable good consumption and

fixed capital investment to price and interest rate changes using the US data and shows that

12 Consumption on durable goods and capital investment constitute aggregate demand whereas production determines
 the aggregate supply of an economy.
13 Due to concavity of instantaneous utility functions, an agent prefers to smooth cross-time allocation of consumption.
 Thus, he prefers to schedule consumption on both durable and non-durable goods evenly across time. On the other hand,
 consumption of durable goods is measured by the stock of the durable goods accumulated up to date and the change in
 the consumption on durable goods is net purchase of durable goods at the current period. Accordingly, the net purchase of
 durable goods is more volatile than consumption of durable goods in order to guarantee the smoothing of durable good
 consumption. This is another reason that the purchase of durable goods draws more attention in diagnosing a business




                                                           20
durable good consumption and investment react sensitively to the price change but not so


sensitively to the variations in the interest rate. He interprets that the price, which reflects

the longer horizon forecast of an economy, is more influential in determining durable goods


consumption than the short-term interest rate. The linkage of his idea to this paper is in that

the price of durable good is the discounted sum of the future benefit flows by the term


structure of interest rates. In addition, Breitung, Chrinko, and Kalckreuth (2003), using


German firm data, reach a similar conclusion that business investment is responsive to the


user cost of capital.


  Summing up, the private agents make decision based on both the future cash flows and


the interest rate movement. The future path of interest rates, anticipated from the yield rates


of bonds with different maturities, is linked with consumption and investment decisions.


Channels, through which monetary policy affects the economy, may be numerous.

However, the channel through the bond market is the most direct but the least mentioned

one.


  Weakness of our model is that it doesn't consider the effect of monetary policy on


production. Description of the production sector and its interactions with monetary policy


cycle.




                                              21
are omitted because the introduction of a production function in the economy would require


the calculation of a steady state and discussions on transitional paths. True that the

interactions of monetary policy with production is crucial, we do not pursue in the direction


further14. Instead we represent a supply condition by linking the real sector production

growth with the term structure of interest rates. In reality, most production inputs, not only


physical capital but also labor employment, are more or less irreversible in a sense that


commonly the contracts for hiring these production factors are made for a few years in


advance. Thus, the current production growth should reflect the past anticipation for the


long-run economic forecasts, which is recorded in the past term structure of interest rates.


Hence, we accept the supply condition as below:



                      y t − yt −1
              gt ≡                            = f (rt − q , t − q +1 , rt − q ,t − q + 2 ,     , rt − q ,t − q + n ) + η t        (3)
                             y t −1

                      n
              gt =          si rt − q,t − q +i + s0 + η t
                     i =1




14 As a further extension or a generalization of our model, we may consider the supply side restriction jointly with

Equation (1). For a more general setup allowing for delayed repsonses of producers, an aggregate supply function could
                                                u                           z                       k
be represented as follows: π              =           kiE          xt +          ς iπ          +         γ iE          π
                                      t                     t− i                        t− i                    t− d       t +1
                                               i= 0                        i=1                     i=1


where x t   is a real GDP gap at time t (refer to Woodford (2003)).




                                                                                22
   Equation (3) is different from a usual Phillips curve type supply condition, which


describes the relationship between the inflation rate and the real GDP gap. However, the

differences are acceptable on the following grounds. First, the concept of potential GDP


used in the Phillips curve is ambiguous and it is estimated merely by filtering the real GDP

data. Second, the information on the future inflation rates is already embedded in the term


structure of (nominal) interest rates. Third, labor supply, a determinant of real GDP gap, is


chosen simultaneously with household consumption and it is also influenced by the term


structure of interest rates. In the following section, Equation (3) is jointly estimated with


Equation (1) in order to eliminate possible endogeneity of interest rate determination


arising from running Equation (1) only15.




III. Empirical Analysis


This section verifies the validity of the claims deduced in the previous section. Equation (1)


implies that the term structure of interest rates is governed by the past money growth rates.

In this section, mainly we use several modifications of (1) and (3) for empirical analysis.




15 Intuitively, Equation (1) is a demand condition and Equation (3) is a supply condition for bond market.




                                                           23
III-1. Data

  Our analysis is based on the US data from July 1959 to February 2000. We use the US

data because the US government bond market is the most developed one and the maturities


as well as the volume of the bonds traded in the market are diverse and huge enough to plot

a reliable yield curve.


  The variables of our concern are money stock, price and income variables in addition to


five key interest rates16. For the key interest rates, we select federal fund rate, 3-month

treasury bill, 6-month treasury bill, 1-year treasury bill, and a composite of long-term U.S.


government securities17. For the macro variables, we use M1 for an index of money stock,


GDP deflator for price index, and real and potential GDP18 for income measures.

  The data frequencies differ from a category to another. For example, all the interest rates


and M1 are recorded monthly whereas GDP deflator and GDP19 are recorded quarterly.

To reconcile the conflicts of the data frequencies at the same time exploiting the benefit of


using monthly data, we run models separately with monthly and quarterly data.



16 Interest rates are measured in annum whereas M1, GDP deflator, and GDP measures are on a quarterly basis.
17 The composite of the long-term treasury bonds is specifically defined to be an unweighted average on all outstanding
 bonds neither due nor callable in less than 10 years.
18 H-P filtered real GDP is used for potential real GDP.
19 As for the monthly data, an index of industrial production may be used as a proxy for nominal GDP. In that case, since
 the monthly GDP deflator is unavailable, CPI or PPI index can be substituted for the GDP deflator.




                                                          24
  As a variable for money stock, we use seasonally adjusted M1 for a couple of reasons.


First, we choose M1 because it is a money stock indicator closest to high powered money.

Other money stock indicators, such as M2 and M3, are under the less direct control of the


monetary authority and are more likely affected by money demand fluctuations. M1, like

other money stock variables, are still susceptible to money demand fluctuations. Admitted


that it is hard to distinguish money demand shock from supply shocks, we still maintain the


use of M1 because M1 fits much better than the high powered money with the real data.


  Second, the data for M1 are seasonally adjusted, considering that the asset prices tend to


have no seasonality due to the prevalence of no-arbitrage condition. Accordingly, in order


to couple the interest rates with the money growth rates, it is recommendable to use the


seasonally detrended M1.



III-2. Test strategies and stationarity of variables

  Before running regressions on Equation (1) with or without Equation (3), we test the


stationarity of each variable included in the equations by DF-GLS method. The result

shows that real GDP growth rate, potential GDP growth rate, and M1 growth rate are


stationary with the significance of 1%-10% for the varying lags from 1 to 10. On the other




                                            25
hand, the velocity of money circulation( vt ,t ), the inflation rate ( π t ,measured by GDP

deflator) and the yield rates ( Γt ) turn out to be non-stationary.


  The stationarity test results indicate that Equation (1) is not testable with the yield rates

and the money growth rate only. The remainder R (v t , g t ) should be a non-stationary


process by construction. Hence a test strategy for Equation (1) is either to take the

difference for the elimination of non-stationarity or to use R (v t , g t ) in the estimation


procedure by representing it in a linear function of (v t , g t ) .


  Given that the GDP data is not available monthly, only the first strategy is applicable to


the monthly data whereas the quarterly data can implement even the second one. Thus,


depending on the frequency of the data, we adopt different testable equations. For the


monthly data, we use the difference method as below

         Γt − Γt −1 = Φ∆ t − Φ∆ t −1 + R ( v t , g t ) − R ( v t −1 , g t −1 ) + ε t − ε t −1    (4)


                   = Φ ( ∆ t − ∆ t −1 ) + R (v t , g t ) − R (v t −1 , g t −1 ) + ε t − ε t −1


                   = Φ * ∆ *t + R ( v t , g t ) − R ( v t − 1 , g t − 1 ) + ε t − ε t − 1


                   = Φ*∆*t + ηt ,

where




                                                           26
        φ1,1    φ1, 2 − φ1,1      φ1,3 − φ1, 2                          φ1,m − φ1,m −1        − φ1,m                 µ   t


        φ 2 ,1 φ 2 , 2 − φ 2 ,1                                                               − φ 2 ,m               µ   t −1



Φ * ≡ φ3,1                                         φi , j − φi , j −1                                      , ∆*t ≡

                                                                                              − φ n −1,m             µ   t − m +1


        φ n ,1 φ n , 2 − φ n ,1                                         φ n ,m − φ n ,m −1    − φ n ,m               µ   t−m




η t ≡ R ( v t , g t ) − R ( v t −1 , g    t −1
                                                 ) + ε t − ε t −1


On the other hand, for the quarterly data, we use a fully linearized version of Equation (1)
as below:

                          Γt = Φ∆ t + Ψv v t + Ψg g t + ε t ,                                                        (5)


where Ψv and Ψg are vectors of the same dimension with                                 vt    and   gt    respectively.



III-3. Results

  Equation (4) and (5) consist of several equations and they are to be estimated by


seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) in principle. However, in practice SUR usually

underestimates the standard errors of estimates. Hence, we run regressions equation by


equation with Newey-West estimates of standard deviations instead of SUR.

  Equations (4) and (5) are tested with the monthly and the quarterly US data respectively.


Especially, with the quarterly data, we include GDP deflator, real GDP growth, real GDP




                                                            27
and money stock(M1) for the estimation of Equation (5). In addition, a short-term interest


rate policy function of a monetary authority as well as a supply condition (Equation (3)) are

jointly estimated with Equation (5).


  [Figure 1] displays the historical patterns of the yield rates of our concern. Overall the

five key interest rates commove but with apparent idiosyncratic fluctuations. Our paper


distinguishes itself from other literature in that it represents such term structure dynamics


by a common factor of the current and the past money growth rates.



III-3-1. Tests with Monthly Data

  We test Equation (4) with a little modification of Φ * ∆*t . Since the lagged money

growth rates in ∆ t are hard to interpret intuitively, they are replaced by a vector θt ,
                 *




which contains the information on the current money growth rate and its higher order


moments20 21.




20 The first order moment of the money growth rate is to be called "slope" and the second one is "curvature". Higher
 order moments than the second one are to be denoted as their matching ordnial numbers.
21 The contents of information in
                                    θ t is equalized to those of ∆*t by including higher order moments of money
growth up to m.




                                                        28
                                                                 µ   t

                                             µ −µ            t           t −1

                                           µ − 2µ + µ
                               θt ≡                   t          t −1            t −2

                                       µ − 3µ + 3µ − µ
                                               t          t −1             t−2             t −3

                                    µ − 4 µ + 6µ − 4 µ + µ
                                          t        t −1          t −2               t −3          t −4




The adoption of θt 22 changes Equation (4) to

                                          Γt − Γt −1 = Φ **θ t + ηt ,                                              (6)


where Φ ** is modified from Φ * so that it can match with θt . We estimate Equation

(6) by running regressions equation by equation. The variances of the coefficient estimates

are estimated by the Newey-West method.

  Results from Equation (6) are displayed in [Table 1]. Money growth rate ( µ t ) is


excluded from the list of explanatory variables due to very low significance. Instead the


next three higher order moments, slope, curvature, and the third order moment of money


growth rate, are used in the estimation of Equation (6). Our findings include a couple of


notable patterns. First, the signs of coefficients change alternatively from negative to

positive and positive to negative. Second, the longer the maturity is, the less likely it is to

be influenced by the changes in the higher order moments of money growth.



22 On a quarterly basis, [Figure 2] shows how different order moments of money growth rate move in a heterogeneous
 way, which is also observable on a monthly basis. Another notable point is that the volatilities of the n-th order moments
 tend to increase with n as is shown in [Table 6].




                                                                 29
  Reminded that [Table 1] summarizes the linear relation between the first order


differences of yield rates and the higher order moments of money growth rate, we need to

convert the results of Equation (6) and evaluate directly the impact of money growth rate


on the yield rates. [Table 2] shows the liquidity effect is prevalent in the beginning and the

Fisher effect shows up at later periods for all of the five key interest rates. Additionally,


[Figure 3], a graphical exposition of [Table 2], discovers a couple of interesting points.


First, the longer the maturity is, the less responsive the yield rate is to the changes in money


growth rate. Second, the longer the maturity is, the shorter time it would take to get out of


the liquidity effect. Third, the bonds with different maturities move in the different


directions (at period 1) as well as with different magnitudes.



III-3-2. Test with Quarterly Data

As in the case of the monthly data, we modify Equation (5) to

                                   Γt = Φ θ t + ψ v vt ,t + ψ g g t + ε t ,                 (7)


where Φ is modified from Φ so that it can match with θt . All the components except

the current velocity of money (v t ,t ) are omitted due to unobservability. In addition, for

                                                                                   t
simplicity, only the current growth rate( g        t   ) is used from the vector( g ) Furthermore,




                                                   30
v          is not directly observable. However, from the money equation of m t                  1       = Pt yt ,
    t ,t
                                                                                             1 − v t ,t

we see that v t ,t is a function of money stock, price level and real GDP. Accordingly, a


linear combination of money stock, GDP deflator and the real GDP is substituted for v t ,t .


    Results from running Equation (7) are displayed in [Table 3]23. As in the case of the

monthly data, we run regressions equation by equation with Newey-West estimates of


standard errors. However, Equation (7) differs from Equation (6) in that money stock, as a


determinant of money velocity, is included and the yield rates, not their first order


differences, are used as dependent variables. Compared with Equation (6), Equation (7) has


greater explanatory power.


    In [Table 3], most higher order moments of money growth rate as well as all of the macro


variables are significant at a 5% significance level. The negative signs of money stock and


money growth rate reveal the presence of the short-term liquidity effect at least in the

short-run. Especially, the negative sign of money stock implies that there even exists a scale


of economy in monetary policy and a certain money growth rate may lead to a greater

change of the interest rates depending on the size of money stock.


    Converting the high order moments of money growth into the lagged money growth rates

23 The results are mostly the same even when a Taylor type short-term rate policy function and /or a supply side




                                                      31
as in [Table 4], we find that in the short run the signs of the estimated coefficients mostly


coincide with our theoretical predictions and they supports the short-term liquidity effect at

95% confidence intervals. In contrast, the long-term Fisher effect is not conspicuous. Since


the effect from M1 is not included, the negative sign of its coefficient implies that the

cross-time and the cross-sectional persistence of the liquidity effect should be longer than it


is shown in [Table 4]


  [Figure 4] graphically exposes the cross-sectional variations in the term structure of


interest rates along the passage of time in response to 1% increase in money growth rates.


[Figure 4] shows that the bonds with different maturities move in the same direction but


with varying magnitudes. As seen in the monthly data, the longer the maturity is, the less


responsive the yield change is.


  [Table 5] is a result from running Equation (3) with q=124. Five different yield rates are

used in the estimation procedure-federal fund rate, three and six month treasury bills, 1 year

treasury bonds and the unweighted average of yields rates of the long-term government


bonds (over 10 years). Alternatively changing signs of the coefficients imply that the


rising(slope) and concave(curvature) yield curve accompanied by the low short-term

condition like Equation (3) are/is included. Thus, the results from running only Equation (7) are reported.




                                                           32
interest rate(location) spurs production growth.




IV. Policy Implications


  From the previous sections, it is demonstrated theoretically and empirically that the


impulse response functions of the yield rates with respect to money shocks determine the

shape of the term structure of interest rates. Using this property, the monetary authority can


implement a certain shape of the term structure of interest rates when there is no exogenous


shocks other than changes in money growth rate. Then, what the monetary authority has to


concern about are the representability of a certain term structure of interest rates as well as


the time lags to take for the implementation.



IV-1. Implementability and time lags

  In a type of Equation (5), the dimension of the n×m matrix Φ determines the


representability of the term structure25. If dim Φ is no less than the number of bond

types available in the market (n), then a certain money growth rate path can lead to an

arbitrary term structure of interest rates within m periods. Otherwise, complete

24 Equation (3) fits best at q=1.
25 Representing a certain term structure of interest rates doesn't necessarily guarantee the system would stay at the level




                                                           33
representability is not achievable26

  An easier criterion for the representability and the time lags of the implementation

process is to check an impulse response matrix, which is defined to be a stack of impulse


response function values with respect to maturities and time horizon. Define the impulse

response matrix Ξ                    to be a              T matrix, where T is an arbitrarily set time horizon (before


all the impulse responses completely phase out) and n is the types of bond maturities

available in the market. If                         >T, then the representability of the system is limited to dim


( Ξ ) < . If                T       and dim               ( Ξ ) > , then the composite effect of the money growth


rates during the last n quarters can represent any arbitrary term structure of interest rates.


Thus, we see that at least the horizons of impulse response functions should be longer than


the kinds of assets available in the market in order to guarantee the representability. The


time lags of implementation, is not easy to answer due to the presence of multiple solutions.

However, the higher dimension of Ξ is more likely to raise the likelihood of attaining at

a certain term structure of interest rates within a shorter time horizon.




 continuously. Stability is another issue to tackle but will be not be dealt with further in the paper.
26 In that case, Gaussian least square method would provide a minimum ∆ * from solving
                                                                                   t
                                                    '
min     ε t' ε t = Γ t − Φ∆ t − Ψ v v t − Ψ g g t       Γ t − Φ∆ t − Ψ v v t − Ψ g g t   , where   Γt   is a targeted level of the yield curve.
  ∆t




                                                                             34
IV-2. Determination of the short-term interest rate

  In reality, it is more often the case that monetary authorities use the short-term interest


rate rather than the money stock M127 for a control variable of monetary policy.

Especially in the US, it seems that the federal reserve sets the short-term interest rate based


on the deviations of inflation and GDP from certain levels28.

                                        rt , t + 1 = r + φ π (π t − π ) + φ x ( y t − y tp )


The effect of such monetary policy of the short-term interest rate determination on the yield


curve can be analyzed as a brief extension of our model.


  Suppose that the short-term interest rate is prescribed by the federal reserve at period t as


in the above Taylor type rule. Then, by combining it with Equation (1) and (7), we obtain

an autoregressive equation of money growth rate µ t as follows.


                           1     m
                   µt =                φ1,i+1µt−i, +ψv,vt,t +ψg,gt −φπ (π −π ) −φx(y − ytp) −r +εt                      (8)
                          φ1,1   i=1
                                                                      t                 t




The impulse response functions of the yield rates in regard to such federal fund rate policy

can be obtained by representing the series of {µ                            t− j
                                                                                   , j = 0 ,1,   ,m   }   by Equation (8) and


27 Throughout the whole paper, we implcitly assume that M1 is under the control of monetary authority. However, in
 reality, M1 is not directly controlled by the monetary authority because variations in the demand side are hardly
 predictable and the magnitude of the demand side effect is greater than our anticipation. Despite such problems, we do
 not use monetary base instead of M1 because the money equation does not hold for the monetary base.
28 Taylor (1993) estimates
                             rt,t+1 =0.04+1.5(πt −0.02) +0.5(yt − ytp) using the US data of 1980s.




                                                                35
plugging them to Equation (7).


    [Table 7] provides results from running simultaneously all the equations of Equation (7)

with the Taylor rule. Compared with [Table 3], there are some changes in the size of


estimates but the qualitative results remain mostly the same. On the other hand, [Table 8],

which provides the results from running a simplified version of Equation (8), shows that the


Taylor type short-term interest rate rule causes µ t to move in an autoregressive way. The


first and the second lags of µ t are positive at 1% significance while M1 holds negative


sign at the same significance level. The size of lags is chosen from Bayesian Information


Criteria(BIC).




IV-3. Escape from zero short-term interest rate

    Suppose that the yield rate of n-period bond, rt , t + n , hits(or escapes from) zero at

period t. Then the effective money growth rate and money stock would be

     E                        B t ,t + n
µ           ≡ µ           +                                                                                B t ,t + n
    t             t            M t              and        M tE ≡ M t + B t , t + n ,   (or   µ tE ≡ µ t −              and
                                                                                                               M t

        E
M       t
            ≡ M       t   ), where         B t ,t + n   is the amount of n-period bond available in the market and

µt          is the ordinary money growth rate. It is noticeable that µ tE                         would jump (drop) in a




                                                                        36
more volatile way when a yield of a certain bond hits (escapes from) the zero level.

  Given that the effect of increased µ t     is negative in the short- run (the liquidity effect)


and positive in the long run (the Fisher effect), then a monetary system itself has a


automatic mechanism of returning to a positive interest rate as follows: Once a type of bond

hits zero, then the total nominal value of the bond issue is added to the effective money


stock, which in turn gives downward pressure on the interest rates of bonds with near


maturities. Such a tendency of the yield curve approaching the zero line would continue


until the short-run negative liquidity effect coming from new entrants to the category of the

effective money stock ( M 1E ) dominates the long-run Fisher effect arising from the

                       E
accumulation of    M   1   . So far we have assumed that the monetary authority keeps the

money growth rate µ t        constant. Considering that the monetary authority is able to speed


up the money growth rate µ t , then the time required to return to the positive yield curve

will be shorter.



V. Concluding Remarks


  Our paper explores a transmission mechanism of monetary policy through bond market.


Based on the assumption of delayed responses of economic agents to monetary shocks, we



                                               37
derive a system of equations relating the term structure of interest rates with the past history


of money growth. The equations are empirically tested with the US data after some

modifications. Impulse response functions of various yield rates with respect to monetary


shocks as well as to the short-term interest rate (such as federal fund rate in the US) reveal

that the reactions of the yield rates may vary across the bonds with different maturities in


terms of directions as well as in terms of magnitudes. From this observation, we find that


the policy of maintaining a certain level of the short-term interest rate may lead to different


economic consequences depending on the differences of the past monetary policy. Such


path-dependency of monetary policy induces that monetary policy targeting a certain shape


of the term structure of interest rates could be implemented with a certain time lags.


  So far the effects from other omitted exogenous variables are neglected. For example,


seemingly significant parameters or variables, such as the variability of money velocity and

a shift in consumers' preference, are not fully considered. Such an omission problem would

not cause a significant trouble in practice only if omitted variables are deterministic. On the


contrary, when the omitted variables are stochastic and are not observable, an algorithm for


implementing an optimal monetary policy becomes a usual Kalman filtering setup. This

issue is very critical at the stage of application and is expected to be dealt in the following



                                              38
works.




         39
A.    An m-Period Extension of Alvarez, Lucas, and Weber (2001)

  Our model is an adapted version of Alvarez, Lucas and Weber (2001). Consider an

economy where exist two types of agents-bond-market participant and non-participant.


Regardless of the type, both group have the same intertemporal utility function.

                   ∞
                             1 t                                C t1 − γ
                        (        ) U ( C t ),
                            1+ ρ              where U ( C t ) = 1 − γ
                  t=0



     portion of the population participates in bond trading and the (1- ) portion does not.


The aggregate production of this economy is                     yt .

                                                                            Tt
                                 y t = λ C tT + (1 − λ ) C tN +                ,
                                                                            Pt

where C tT      and C tN         are consumption of the trader and the non-trader each and T t

is the nominal value for lump-sum tax payment. The budget constraint for the non-trader is

                                m                                       m
                Pt C tN =            v t − j , t Pt − j y t , where           v t,t + j =1 .
                               j=0                                     j=0


  At each period he sells his product in the market and receives cash in return ( Pt y ). He

allocates this proceeds across m+1 periods on consumption with the proportion of

v t , t + j , j = 0 ,1 ,        , m . Another more realistic interpretation of this m-period-ahead


CIA feature is that v t , t + j , j = 0 ,1 ,               ,m         is the proportion of consumers who need

j period time lag in responding to monetary shocks.



                                                           40
  On the other hand, the trader spends his money not only on consumption but also on bond


trading.

                                      m
                           T                                             1                     1
                    Pt C       =            vt−    j ,t   Pt − j y t +        ( Bt − (              ) B t +1 − T t )
                           t
                                      j=0                                λ                   1 + rt


                                   m
                                                                         M t −M            t −1
                               =            vt−   j ,t   Pt − j y t +
                                   j=0                                                λ


Bond and money supplies satisfy

                                     1
                       Bt − (             ) B t +1 − Tt = M                               − M            ,
                                   1 + rt                                         t               t −1



where the government levies the lump-sum tax                             Tt       on the trader only. The effect of money


stock increment would be used either in purchasing bonds or in reducing tax burden.

The goods market equilibrium is attained when the next equation holds:


                           Pt C t = (1 − λ ) Pt C tN + λ Pt C tT = Pt y t


Combining the above equations, we obtain

                               m
                  Pt y t =            v t − j , t ( Pt − j y t − j ) + M t − M t − 1
                               j=0


                       =M      t −1
                                       + v t , t Pt y t + M                   t
                                                                                      − M         t −1



                       = V t ,t Pt y t + M                t


Accordingly, the equation of exchange is written as




                                                                41
                                                 1
                                      Mt                = Pt y t .
                                              1− v t ,t


Thus, v t ,t   can be understood as the money velocity.

  From the above equations, we represent the consumption of the trader in the function of


money growth rates. Here it is noteworthy that we are interested in the consumption of the

trader because in the bond market only the marginal utility of the trader matters for the


determination of a yield curve.




                        1          (1 − λ )              1            (1 − λ ) m
               C tT =       yt −               C tN =         yt −                v t − j , t Pt − j y t − j
                        λ              λ                 λ             λ Pt j = 0
           t                                             t
where µ        = (µ t ,      , µ t − m ) , and v              = ( v t ,t           , v t − m , t ) . Then, the equilibrium


nominal interest rate must satisfy the following marginal condition




                                              k
                                  1                                                 ( 1 − v t ,t )
                             1 + rt , t + k                  U ′ ( C tT+ k )   (1 − v t + k ,t + k )
                                                  = Et
                                  1                          U ′ ( C tT )      Π   k
                                                                                   i=0   (1 + µ t + i )
                               1+ ρ




  Notably, the consumption plugged in the above equation is the consumption of trader's,


neither that of non-trader's nor the aggregate consumption. This is a way of inducing


distributional effect between the trader and the non-trader groups, which in turn leads to the




                                                              42
short-term liquidity effect.

For simplicity, we assume y t = y                                      and τ t = 0 for all t. Then,


                                        1                      m                    Pt − j
                       C tT =               y 1 − (1 − λ )             vt − j,t
                                        λ                      j=0                   Pt


                                                               m −1
                                        1                                                              1                   ( 1 −ν t , t )
                                =           y 1 − (1 − λ )             vt −   j +1,t
                                        λ                                               Π    j
                                                                                                   ( 1 + µ t − i + 1 ) ( 1 −ν t − j , t − j )
                                                               j =1                         i =1


                                                                                                                                       t              t
                                ≡ c(µ t ,                , µ   t−m
                                                                           , v t ,t ,         , v t − m ,t ) y ≡ c ( µ                      , v ) y,

                                    k
                    1
               1 + rt , t + k                     U ′ ( c ( µ t + k ,ν t + k ) y )                             1               (1 −ν       t ,t   )
                                        =    Et                                                                                                               (A-1)
                    1                               U ′ ( c ( µ t ,ν t ) y ) Π                      k
                                                                                                    i=0    (1 + µ t + i   ) (1 −ν   t + k ,t + k          )
                 1+ ρ



                                                      c ( µ t + k ,ν   t+ k
                                                                               )y                          1                ( 1 −ν t ,t )
                                        = Et      (                                 ) −γ
                                                                t
                                                         c ( µ ,ν ) y  t
                                                                                             Π     k
                                                                                                   i=0   ( 1 + µ t + i ) ( 1 −ν t + k ,t + k )




    We assume that the velocity of money (ν t ,t )                                                  is constant or exogenously given and the


money increase is directed towards the purchase of bonds in the financial market. On the


other hand, the last line of (A-1) enables us to briefly analyze the effect of a change in

ν   t ,t   on the term structure of interest rates.

    Consider the liquidity trap as an extreme case, in which any interest rates would not be


affected by an increase in money stock. This phenomenon can arise in the economy of




                                                                                        43
(A-1) exactly when the increase of µ t is cancelled out by the decrease of v t , t . Under

the situation like this, the only policy option the government can take is to increase

expenditure by speeding up the money growth rate. Then, the market interest rates would


go higher following the money increase. It is notable that such a way of monetary

expansion transmits a stimulus not through the bond market but through the goods market.


The shift of the term structure of interest rates following the monetary expansion is


attributed to a new equilibrium in the goods market, which works in an opposite direction


to the usual propagation mechanism of open market operation. Anyway, this suggests a


way of escaping from the liquidity trap with monetary policy29


Taking the first order approximation of log c ( µ , ν ) around the point ( 0 , ν ), we
                                                                         t         t




obtain

                                                                         j
                                              1− λ          m
                       log c ( µ t ,ν t ) ≅ (      )              ν (         µ t − i ) + f (ν t )
                                                λ           j=0         i=0




                                                            1− λ             m          j                               −γ
                  U ′ ( c ( µ t ,ν t ) y ) = exp     −γ (
                                                                λ
                                                                    )            ν (         µ t − i ) + f (ν t )   y        (A-2)
                                                                             j=0       i=0




Substituting (A-2) into (A-1) and taking log by both sides, then we obtain




29 Though the arguments in this paragraph consider neither Ricardian equivalence nor crowding-out effect explicitly, the




                                                            44
                            φ 1 ,1      φ 1, 2     φ 1,3                    φ 1,m −1    φ 1, m
   rt , t + 1                                                                                           µt
                            φ 2 ,1      φ 2,2                                           φ 2,m
   rt , t + 2                                                                                          µ t −1
      ...              =    φ 3 ,1                             φ i, j                                   ...       + R ( v t ) (A-3)
 rt , t + n − 1
                                                                                        φ n − 1, m   µ t−m +2
   rt , t + n                                                                                        µ t − m +1
                            φ n ,1      φ n ,2                              φ n ,m −1   φ n ,m


or simply


                                                  Γt = Φ t ∆ t + R (ν t ) ,


where           Rt   is a   1 vector, and           ∆t     a ×1 vector, and             Φt       a     matrix.


The coefficients of the matrix in (A-3) are derived from (A-1) and (A-2). For

1≤ j < m − i +1 ,


                                                                      1 − λ
                                                 φ i, j = − γ (                )ν
                                                                        λ

For m           m ≥ j ≥ m − i +1≥1 ,


                                                        1− λ            m − j+1
                                         φ i, j = γ (            )ν                      > 0
                                                           λ               i

  Neglecting that the expectation for the future monetary policies does not change, then the

coefficients of             Φ        indicates that cross-sectionally an increase in µ t lowers the yield

rates of bonds with shorter maturities than m+1 periods while the yield rates of the bonds


with maturities longer than m are raised. Combining these two, we can deduce that there is


a slope change in the yield curve between m and m+1. Accordingly, the liquidity effect

equations from our model can test their validity.



                                                                        45
view is supported for bonds with maturities shorter than m and the Fisher's view is valid for


bonds with maturities longer than m+1. In addition, the cross-time effect of µ t changes

signs from negative to positive, which also confirms that in the long run Fisher effect


prevails.




                                             46
                                      Reference


   Alvarez, F., R. Lucas, and W. Weber, 2001, Interest rates and inflation, American

Economic Review 91, 219-225.

   Bernanke, B. and J. Boivin, 2003, Measuring the effects of monetary policy: a

factor-augmented vector auto-regressive(FAVAR) approach, FRB working paper.

   Bils, M, P. Klenow, and O. Kryvsov, 2003, Sticky prices and money policy shocks,

FRB Minneapolis Quarterly Review 27, 2-9.

   Bordo, M. and Haubrich, 2004, The yield curve, recessions and the credibility of the

monetary regime: long run evidence 1875-1997, NBER working paper 10431.

   Breitung J., R. Chrinko, and U. Kalckreuth, 2003, A vector autoregressive investment

model (VIM) and monetary policy transmission: panel evidence from German firms,

Deutsche Bundesbank discussion paper 06/03.

   Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler, 1999, The science of monetary policy: a new

Keynesian Perspective, Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661-1707.

   Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler, 2000, Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic

stability: evidence and some theory, Quarterly Journal of Economic Literature 115,

147-180.

   Dixit, A. and J. Stiglitz, 1977, Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity,

American Economic Review 67, 297-308.

   Eichenbaum, M. and J. Fisher, 2004, Fiscal policy in the aftermath of 9/11, NBER

working paper 10430.




                                            47
   Ellingsen, T. and U. S ndestr m, 2004, Why are long rates sensitive to monetary

policy?, IGIER working paper 256.

   Hendry, S., W. Ho., and K. Moran, 2003, Simple monetary policy rules in an open

economy, limited participation model, Bank of Canada working paper 2003-38.

   Hong, K., 1997, Fluctuations in consumer durables expenditure and fixed investment in

Korea, International Economic Journal, 1997.

   Hong, K., 1996, A comment on durable goods consumption, Journal of Monetary

Economics, 1996

   Lucas, R., 2000, Inflation and welfare, Econometrica 68, 247-274.

   Lucas, R. and N. Stokey, 1987, Money and interest in a cash-in-advance economy,

Econometrica 55, 491-513.

   Monnet, C and W. Weber, 2001, Money and interest rates, FRB Minneapolis Quarterly

Review 25, 2-11.

   Orphanides, A., 2003, Monetary policy in deflation: the liquidity trap in history and

practice, FRB working paper.

   Taylor, J., 1993, Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester

Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

   Thomas, J., 2002, Is lumpy investment relevant for the business cycle?, FRB

Minneapolis research department staff report 302

   Woodford, M., 2003, Inflation and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,

Princeton University Press.

   Yun, T., 2996, Nominal rigidity, money supply endogeneity, and business cycles,

Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.




                                           48
                                            Appendix B. Tables


                           [Table 1] RegressionB1 results of Eq (6) (monthly)

                  d_fedfundr        d_tb3mon           d_tb6mon          D_tb1yr         d_longbd
    slope          -127.9254 **      -94.39297 **       -85.78889 **      -73.42162 **    -30.08043 **
                   (27.96452)B2          (20.4626)          (18.60477)     (15.1847)       (8.06099)
        curv       110.9467 **          63.6107 **      53.95926 **       44.23584 **      12.22965
                    (24.56312)          (19.44036)          (17.83941)     (15.38967)      (9.06536)
        third      -29.04991 **         -9.744747           -7.625036      -5.851174      -0.8182089
                     (7.56772)           (6.55566)          (6.007119)     (5.438865)      (3.474307)
  R-square            0.1701              0.1994             0.1947         0.1795          0.1091
    ** P-value < 0.01
    *     P-value < 0.05




           [Table 2] Cross-sectional variations in yield rates in response to 1% increase
                                       in money growth rate (monthly)

                            fedfundr         tb3mon            tb6mon         tb1yr        ltgovtbd
      Estimates
          0                 -46.0286         -40.527          -39.4547       -35.037       -18.669
          1                 -6.81832        -3.59419          0.745467      2.503457      8.075756
          2                 23.79699        34.37646          31.08415      26.68232      9.775025
     Lower (95%)
          0                 -67.9137        -56.9441          -54.4702      -47.6539      -25.8992
          1                 -24.7057        -19.6211          -12.7498      -9.68692      0.594773
          2                 -2.21603        13.99041          13.67072      12.30465       2.59023
     Upper(95%)
          0                 -24.1434        -24.1099          -24.4391       -22.42       -11.4388
          1                 11.06904        12.43267          14.24075      14.69383      15.55674
          2                 49.81001         54.7625          48.49759      41.05999      16.95982




B1 We run regression equation by equation with Newey-West estimates of variances. The same method is
applied in the estimation of Eq (7), the output from which is summarized in [Table 3].
B2 All the numbers in parentheses are estimates of standard errors




                                                       49
                [Table 3] Regression results of Eq (7) (quarterly)

          fedfundr        tb3mon            Tb6mon          tb1yr         ltgovtbd
m1sl_g   -76.99609 *    -63.07492 *     -64.10236 **    -62.75473 **     -17.39448
          (31.5835)      (25.66712)      (23.21046)       (19.82346)     (13.17486)
slope    -128.2924       -100.8881       -101.4461 *     -95.13843 *    -99.38094 **
         (70.01885)       (56.9168)      (51.87965)       (44.61863)     (30.2464)
 curv    238.1501 **    176.1443 **     183.5877 **      183.3664 **    171.3927 **
         (60.87203)      (51.02896)      (48.52384)       (42.76306)     (29.70285)

 third   -174.7073 *    -127.8155 *      -135.675 **    -139.2755 **    -130.5185 **
         (68.19693)      (56.05653)      (50.81901)       (43.75916)     (28.82497)
fourth    51.36435       36.92932        39.26172 *      40.61439 *     37.68054 **
         (31.71773)       (25.7025)      (22.95705)       (19.4546)      (12.26265)
 M1sl    -0.03379 **    -0.028509 **    -0.028257 **    -0.026989 **    -0.021644 **
         (0.0026121)    (0 .0021817)     (0.0020829)      (0.001892)    (0.0013401)
gdpdef   0.325513 **    0.2956538 **    0.2923121 **    0.2854734 **    0.3406851 **
         (0.0372945)    (0 .0295202)     (0.0275346)     (0 .0245559)   (0.0179704)

 rgdp    0.001349 **    0.0008278 *     0.0008153 *      0.0006974 *    -0.000806 **
         (0.0004773)    (0.0003734)      (0.0003648)      (0.000346)    (0 .0002619)
rgdp_g   -78.2219 **    -47.51647 **    -45.50964 **    -38.88831 **    -18.04747 *
         (18.48785)      (13.47141)      (12.74745)       (11.56509)     (8.427331)
_cons    -0.615336       0.1695507       0.4198887       0.7155139       2.70567 **
         (1.053493)     (0.8676736)      (0 .8527895)    (0.8149884)    (0 .6244242)

           0.6753         0.6953            0.7083         0.7264         0.8399




                                       50
[Table 4] Cross-sectional variations* in yield rates in response to 1% increase in money
                                    growth rate (quarterly)

                         Fedfundr         tb3mon          tb6mon      tb1yr      ltgovtbd
     Estimates
          0              -90.4813        -78.7049         -78.3741   -73.1878   -38.22073
          1              -29.3433        -15.6714         -15.7512   -16.2255   -2.571018
          2              22.21436        14.27385         12.13303   9.226298   5.920387
          3              -30.7501        -19.9018         -21.3719   -23.1821   -20.20366
   Lower (95%)
          0              -129.246        -110.433         -107.024   -97.8495   -56.89042
          1              -75.2743        -53.2482         -50.7906   -47.0053   -23.88314
          2              -35.2496        -31.3383         -30.6236   -27.8615   -18.46947
          3              -166.433        -128.475         -118.122   -104.288   -69.49829
   Uppper(95%)
          0              -51.7168        -46.9771         -49.7239   -48.5261   -19.55103
          1              16.58761        21.90539         19.28824   14.55418   18.7411
          2              79.67828        59.88599         54.8897    46.31408   30.31025
          3              104.9329        88.67106         75.37808   57.92365   29.09098

  * The effect from money stock (m1sl) is not included.




                                                  51
                   [Table 5] Regression result of Equation (3)


                                           (Quarterly, 163 observations)
                                           real GDP growth rate (t+1)
                 fedfundr (t)                    -0.0058828 **
                                                   (0.001273)
                 tb3mon (t)                        0.0177324*
                                                   (0.0060302)
                 tb6mon (t)                       -0.0250236 *
                                                   (0.0120913)
                  tb1yr (t)                         0.01445
                                                    (0.00737)
                 ltgovtbd (t)                      -0.0007248
                                                   (0.0007363)
                  constant                        0.0106001 **
                                                   (0.0021766)
                                                     0.2610
             ** P-value < 0.01

             *    P-value < 0.05




     [Table 6] Covariances of different ordered moments of money growth

                                                                       (Monthly, 487 observations)
             m1sl_g                Slope           curv             Fourth             fifth
m1sl_g      0.000025
slope       0.000011            0.000022
 curv        6.3e-06            0.000028         0.000057
fourth       1.3e-06             0.00003         0.000087          0.000173
 fifth      -6.2e-06            0.000031         0.000089           0.00018        -0.000212


                                                                      (Quarterly, 159 observations)
             m1sl_g                Slope           curv              third           Fourth
m1sl_g    0.00012
slope     0.000039            0.000076
 curv     0.000025            0.000101        0.000202
 third    0.000018            0.000119        0.000322           0.000645
fourth    0.000068            0.000123        0.000461           0.001081        0.002076




                                            52
         [Table 7] Results from running simultaneously a system of equations in Eq (7)
                         with a Taylor type federal fund rate determination rule


                                                                            (Quarterly, 159 observations)
                  fedfundr          tb3mon        Tb6mon           tb1yr           ltgovtbd         Fedfundr

    m1sl_g       -45.3135 *       -39.0019 *     -42.0153 **   -43.7244 **        -8.28862
                 (20.7154)         (16.4791)     (15.95189)     (14.77506)       (11.58109)
    slope       -119.533 **       -94.2325 **    -95.3396 **   -89.8770 **       -96.8634 **
                 (46.1740)         (36.7196)     (35.5328)      (32.89808)       (25.74425)
     Curv        193.915 **       142.5335 **   152.7499 **    156.7963 **       158.6791 **
                 (49.3225)         (39.2193)     (37.94754)     (35.12915)       (27.47552)
     third      -135.256 **       -97.8397 **    -108.172 **    -115.579 **      -119.180 **
                 (44.7487)         (35.5918)     (34.44723)     (31.89939)       (24.98296)
    fourth       38.5775 *         27.2136 *     30.34752 *    32.93385 **       34.00546 **
                 (16.8957)        (13.43996)     (13.0092)      (12.0487)         (9.44168)
     m1sl       -0.02637 **       -0.02287 **    -0.02309 **   -0.02254 **       -0.01951 **
                (0.001948)       (0.0015466)    (0.0014939)    (0.0013801)      (0.0010704)
    gdpdef      0.239849 **       0.230565 **    0.232593**    0.234019 **       0.316065 **
                (0.029514)       (0.0234024)     (0.022576)    (0.0208244)      (0.0160479)
     rgdp       0.001205 **      0.0007184 *    0.0007149 *    0.0006109 *       -0.00085 **
                (0.000413)        (0.000327)    (0.0003151)    (0.0002903)      (0.0002225)
    rgdp_g       -72.903 **      -43.47517 **    -41.8018 **   -35.6936 **       -16.51881
                 (15.3313)        (12.18547)     (11.78481)     (10.90345)       (8.508546)


    _cons        0.957174          1.364377      1.516141 *    1.660053 **       3.157624 **      4.046584 **
                (0.882548)       (0.7004436)    (0.6763709)    (0.6246324)      (0.4837461)       (0.3323494)
                                                                                                  253.7386 **
                                                                                                  (27.99782)
lgdp_ gap                                                                                         -18.9074 **
                                                                                                  (6.682002)
                      0.6413        0.6657         0.6823         0.7049           0.8347            0.4410
** P-value < 0.01

*    P-value < 0.05




                                                   53
[Table 8] Autoregressive movements of money growth rate induced by a Taylor type
                               short-term interest rate policy function



(1) Lag length selection order criteria (quarterly, 159 observations)


                       Lag 0             Lag 1           Lag2              Lag3               Lag4
                      510.685           551.373         555.103          557.026             557.036
   LR                                   81.376           7.459            3.846 *             0.019
  FPE                0.0001038         0.000063        0.0000609        0.0000602 *         0.0000609
  AIC                -6.33566          -6.83488        -6.86922         -6.88083 *          -6.86837
  HQIC               -6.28079          -6.77218        -6.79868         -6.80245 *          -6.78215
  SBIC               -6.20055          -6.68047        -6.69551 *        -6.68782           -6.65606




        (2) Estimation results


                                 Coefficient             Std. Err                    Z
                                  0.4928921            0.0751039                  6.56 **
              L2                  0.2061028            0.0738131                  2.79 **
         Lgdp_gap                -0.0341836            0.0347653                    -0.98
         Gdpdef_g                 -0.281095            0.1318882                  -2.13 *
             rgdp_g              -0.1517057            0.0712509                  -2.13 *
             gdpdef               0.0002253             0.000173                    1.30
             Rgdp                  2.17e-06             2.57e-06                    0.84
              M1sl               -0.0000343             9.78e-06               -3.51 **
             _cons                0.0014172            0.0041283                    0.34

         ** P-value < 0.01

         *    P-value < 0.05




                                                  54
  [Figure1] The movements of yield rates in the US during 1960-2000 (quarterly)
          20
          15
   yield rates
       10 5
          0




                 1960    1970             1980            1990            2000
                                          time

                                   fedfundr           tb3mon
                                   tb6mon             tb1yr
                                   ltgovtbd




[Figure 2] The movements in the higher order moments of M1 growth rate (quarterly)
    .2
    .1
    0
    -.1
    -.2




            1960        1970             1980             1990             2000
                                         date

                                   m1sl_g            slope
                                   curv              third
                                   fourth




                                        55
[Figure 3] Cross-sectional variations in the term structure of interest rates in response to 1%
                       increase in the money growth rate (monthly)




[Figure 4] Cross-sectional variations in the term structure of interest rates in response to 1%
                        increase in the money growth rate (quarterly)




                                              56
