                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SOCIAL SECURITY PRIVATIZATION WITH ELASTIC
                        LABOR SUPPLY AND SECOND-BEST TAXES

                                              Kent Smetters

                                          Working Paper 11101
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11101


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security Privatization with Elastic Labor Supply and Second-Best Taxes
Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 11101
February 2005
JEL No. H0, H2

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper shows that many common methods of privatizing social security fail to reduce labor

market distortions when taxes are second best, challenging a key reason to privatize. Ironically,

providing "transition relief" to workers alive at the time of the reform, in an effort to protect their

previous contributions, undercuts potential efficiency gains. Chile's reform -- the first major

privatization that also served as a model for other countries -- actually increased labor market

distortions. It is then shown that privatization with limited transition relief can reduce labor market

distortions and produce gains to current and future generations without hurting initial retirees, i.e.,

a Pareto gain, even with second-best taxes.

Kent Smetters
The Wharton School
3302 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
smetters@wharton.upenn.edu
                     SOCIAL SECURITY PRIVATIZATION WITH
                 ELASTIC LABOR SUPPLY AND SECOND-BEST TAXES
                                          By Kent Smetters1
                                           January 1, 2005

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper shows that many common methods of privatizing social
        security fail to reduce labor market distortions when taxes are second best,
        challenging a key reason to privatize. Ironically, providing “transition
        relief” to workers alive at the time of the reform, in an effort to protect
        their previous contributions, undercuts potential efficiency gains. Chile’s
        reform -- the first major privatization that also served as a model for other
        countries -- actually increased labor market distortions. It is then shown
        that privatization with limited transition relief can reduce labor market
        distortions and produce gains to current and future generations without
        hurting initial retirees, i.e., a Pareto gain, even with second-best taxes.

                                          1. INTRODUCTION

        While privatizing a pay-as-you-go social security system could increase saving, it

involves a zero-sum reallocation of resources between generations inside the standard

neoclassical model with inelastic labor supply.2 Intuitively, social security does not

distort the relative price of consumption between calendar dates -- the only margin for

distortions in this setting. Any gains to future generations, therefore, must be offset in

present value with losses to at least one earlier generation. Discussions about social

security reform in this context, therefore, are limited to normative debates about different

inter-generational resource distributions within the set of Pareto-efficient allocations.

1
  The Wharton School and NBER (smetters@wharton.upenn.edu). This research was supported by the
U.S. Social Security Administration through a grant to the Michigan Retirement Research Consortium as
part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those
of the author and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA or any agency of the Federal Government.
I benefited from several discussions with Alan Auerbach while visiting the Robert D. Burch Center at the
Department of Economics at Berkeley in the summer of 2003. I also received helpful comments from
David Cutler, Martin Feldstein, Roger Gordon, Caroline Hoxby and other seminar participants at Harvard.
2
  See Breyer (1989); Feldstein (1995); Geanakoplos, Mitchell and Zeldes (1998); Murphy and Welch
(1998); Mariger (1999); Shiller (1999). An exception is if privatization can exploit a wedge between the
social and private marginal cost of capital in the presence of capital income taxes (Feldstein and Liebman,
2002). Since these gains could also be achieved by simply switching to a labor income tax (i.e., without
privatization), it is also interesting to know if a Pareto improvement were possible with only labor taxes.


                                                    1
       When labor supply is elastic, social security payroll taxes distort labor supply

choices relative to first-best taxation. This distortion stems from the pay-as-you-go

financing itself. If the economy is dynamic efficiency (i.e., does not grow at a rate faster

than interest), workers born into a mature pay-as-you-go social security system receive a

rate of return on their contributions from social security that is lower than the return that

they could have earned in the capital market. This lower yield produces an effective net

tax rate on earnings that, although less than the statutory tax rate, is positive and

potentially large, especially for younger workers who face the compound effects of

foregone interest over their remaining work life (Feldstein and Samwick, 1992).

       Privatizing social security when labor supply is elastic could increase economic

efficiency if the government had access to first-best taxes (Breyer and Straub, 1993;

Feldstein, 1996; Feldstein and Liebman, 2002). In other words, existing pay-as-you-go

social security systems create excess burden in the traditional sense of Hicks (1943,

1944-5) and Harberger (1974). However, if the government had access to first-best taxes,

then these efficiency gains could be achieved even without privatization.

       It is also interesting to know, therefore, if privatization could produce efficiency

gains if the government’s policy instruments are restricted to second-best labor income

taxes. As Brunner (1996) demonstrates, such a gain is not possible in a standard two-

period overlapping-generations model where agents work for the first period and retire

the second period. Allowing workers to divert their pay-as-you-go payroll taxes to

private accounts would require levying a new labor income tax on workers in order to

continue to pay the social security benefits of those retired at the time of this reform.




                                             2
This reform would simply substitute one distorting tax for another, producing no gains.3

This result, therefore, seriously challenges a key rational for privatization.

           The current paper demonstrates that, in a model with three or more periods,

privatization can produce efficiency gains in the presence of elastic labor supply even

when only second-best labor income taxes are available.                      With multiple periods, a

household’s accrued benefit (which is observable by the government) becomes a source

for an efficient implicit lump sum tax that can be used to replace the future revenue that

would have been collected using a distorting labor income tax. Equivalently, this implicit

wealth levy can afford participants a higher return on their future contributions, thereby

reducing the effective tax rate on their labor supply.

           To understand this result intuitively, consider the following experiment. Suppose

that households work for two periods and retire the third period.                       The government

suddenly decides that it no longer recognizes the Social Security benefits that the second-

period period workers accrued during their first period of life. In exchange for this

implicit wealth levy, however, the government gives these workers the capital market rate

of return on a portion of their second-period contributions (i.e., privatizes a portion of

their second-period contributions). The portion of second-period contributions invested in

the capital market is set to produce a revenue loss equal in present value to the implicit

wealth levy at the pre-reform level of labor supply.

           Workers are clearly better off under this experiment because they are fully

compensated for their losses in present value but they now face better labor supply

incentives. The government'
                          s inter-temporal budget constraint is also improved because

labor supply unambiguously increases, which helps future generations by lowering taxes.
3
    Brunner’s equivalent approach shows that lump-sum taxes do not respect intra-generational heterogeneity.


                                                      3
        To capture these gains, however, the privatization experiment must be designed

correctly. This paper shows that several common privatization plans fail to produce

efficiency gains since they provide “transition relief” to workers alive at the time of the

reform in order to protect their previous contributions. This outcome is somewhat ironic

since the relief is typically given in an attempt to avoid generating losers. It is then

shown that a privatization with limited transition relief can reduce labor market

distortions and produce gains to current and future generations without hurting initial

retirees (i.e., a Pareto gain) even if the government’s taxes are second best.

        Section 2 outlines the pre-reform economy with a pay-as-you-go social security

system.     Section 3 shows how several standard privatization plans fail to produce

efficiency gains. Section 4 shows how privatization with limited transition relief can

produce efficiency gains while respecting worker heterogeneity. Section 5 concludes.

                                     2. THE PRE-REFORM ECONOMY

        This section describes the economy before social security is reformed.

2.1.    Demographics and Factor Prices

        There are N t first-period agents alive at time t. Population grows at time t grows

               Nt
at rate nt ≡                 . The total wage base time t grows at a gross rate Gt ≡ (1 + gt ) ≡
                    N t −1

(1 + nt )(1 + x )   , where x is the exogenous and constant rate of technological change

between time periods. We assume that the population is stationary and so we drop the

time subscripts for N and G in the subsequent discussion. The gross rate of return to risk-

less capital is R = (1 + r ) , where r is the net rate of return. The wage rate at time t is wt ,




                                                    4
which grows at rate x, i.e., wt +1 = (1 + x ) wt . These factor prices are stationary (or, in the

case of wages, trend stationary) as in a small open economy or with linear technology.

2.2.     Households

         Agent j is born at time t and lives for three periods. The agent has exogenous

levels of productivity of α1j and α2j in the first and second periods, respectively, which

are indexed by j to allow for heterogeneity. Productivity in the third period is zero.

                                                                3
         Lifetime utility is given by                                 βk u ( ckj,t ,1 − lkj,t ) , where ckj,t is the level of
                                                               k =1



consumption at age k and lkj,t is the level of labor supply where the total time endowment

each period is normalized to unity. The function u(,) is increasing and concave in both

arguments. Our focus on “compensated” reforms below does not require restrictions on

the cross-partial derivatives of u(,). Lifetime utility is maximized subject to:

(1)      c1,j t + a1,j t = α1j wt l1,jt (1 − τ )

(2)      c2,j t +1 + a2,j t +1 = α 2j wt +1l2,j t +1 (1 − τ ) + Ra1,jt

(3)      c3,j t + 2 = Ra2,j t +1 + bt j+ 2

where b is the pay-as-you-go social security benefit received in the third period financed

on a pay-as-you-go basis with a proportional tax, τ , on labor earnings.4 By construction,

this tax is second-best since, as in the original optimal tax problem of Mirrlees, the

government can observe labor earnings but not productivity (or hours worked).




4
 The rest of the government’s operations outside of social security are ignored in this paper for simplicity.
Including them would not impact the results herein. Indeed, if capital income taxes were also in place,
additional gains from privatization could be obtained, as shown in Feldstein and Liebman (2002).


                                                                       5
2.3.       Social Security

           Over 150 countries have defined-benefit social security systems that are mostly

pay-as-you-go financed. In most cases, benefits are proportional to the average of past

earnings; in a few countries like the United States, benefits paid relative to previous

earnings are decreasing in the value of average past earnings, although some of this

redistribution might be offset by differences in mortality and spousal qualifications.5

2.3.1. Proportional Benefits

           We initially, therefore, focus on a social security system where benefits are

proportional to previous contributions. In this system, every agent gets the same gross

“internal” rate of return to their social security contributions. In a mature and stationary

pay-as-you-go system, this internal rate of return is equal to the growth rate of the wage

tax base, that is, G. Agent j’s social security benefit in the third year, therefore, equals6

(4)         bt j+ 2 = G 2 τα1j wt l1,jt + Gτα 2j wt +1l2,j t +1

2.3.2. Age-Specific Marginal Net Tax Rates

           The net social security tax paid by agent j at a given age equals the value of taxes

paid at that age less the present value of future benefits received from that tax. For agents

born into a mature pay-as-you-g social security system, these taxes are as follows:


                                    ( R)                                 ( R)
                                              2                                   2
(5)        T1,jt ≡ τα1j wt l1,jt − G              τα1j wt l1,jt = 1 − G               τα1j wt l1,jt


(6)                                         ( R ) τα w
           T2,jt +1 ≡ τα 2j wt +1l2,j t +1 − G            j
                                                          2       l j
                                                              t +1 2,t +1   = 1− G    ( R)     τα 2j wt +1l2,j t +1


(7)        T3,jt + 2 = 0

5
    See, for example, Gustman and Steinmeier (2001).
6
    I.e., In a stationary economy with a single type of household (to reduce notation), equation (4) can be
rewritten as the standard pay-as-you-go constraint,                   N t bt + 2 = N t + 2 τα1wt + 2l1,t + 2 + N t +1τα 2 wt + 2l2,t + 2 .


                                                                       6
         In other words, the budget constraints (1) – (4) could be rewritten as

(1’)     c1,j t + a1,jt = α1j wt l1,jt − T1,jt

(2’)     c2,j t +1 + a2,j t +1 = α 2j wt +1l2,j t +1 + Ra1,j t − T2,jt +1

(3’)     c3,j t + 2 = Ra2,j t +1

Agent j is indifferent between constraints (1) – (4) and constraints (1’) – (3’). We will

use this fact in some of the results shown in Section 3.

         The implicit effective marginal net tax rates on wages indicate how much the net

taxes increase with wage income earned at a particular age in life:

                      ∂T1,jt
                                                                ( R)
                                                                       2
(8)      τ ≡j
                                                            = 1− G         τ
           1,t
                                (
                               ∂ α wl  1
                                        j          j
                                                t 1,t   )

(9)      τ   j
             2,t +1   ≡
                          ∂T2,jt +1
                                            (
                                      ∂ α 2j wt +1l2,j t +1    )       ( R)
                                                                   = 1− G          τ   .


(10)     τ3,j t+ 2 ≡ 0

         We focus on a dynamically efficient economy, which implies R > G;7 otherwise,

expanding pay-as-you-go financing would be Pareto improving (Samuelson, 1958). The

marginal tax rates faced by agent j at ages 1 and 2, therefore, are positive but below the

statutory tax rate, τ . Also notice that τ2,j t +1 < τ1,j t , i.e., the net marginal tax rate decreases


in the agent j’s age as the “compound effect” of the G                                 ( R ) wedge is reduced.



7
  See Abel, Mankiw, Summers and Zeckhauser (1989) for evidence of dynamic efficiency. With a capital
income tax, however, it is possible that R > G while the after-tax return to capital is equal to or less than G.
Still, social security distorts labor supply relative to first-best taxes where workers could save at rate R.


                                                                               7
2.4.   Government’s Budget Constraint

       Let Γtj ≡ T1,jt + 1         ( R)T      j
                                             2,t +1   , the present value of the net lifetime Social Security

taxes paid by the j agent born at time t. The aggregate net lifetime taxes paid by people

born at time t is N t                    Γtj dX ( j ) . The government’s inter-temporal budget constraint
                                   j∈E



requires that the present value of net lifetime transfers across all generations sum to zero,

         ∞
              Nt
(11)            t
                          Γtj dX ( j ) = 0 ,
        t =−2 R     j∈E



where Social Security is assumed to have begun at time 0. (X is a stationary cumulative

measure of households corresponding to the set, E, of potential age-productivity vectors.)

To reduce notation and without much loss in generality, we ignore the other types of

(non-social security) goods and services that are typically provided by the government.

       Constraint (11) is quite general and incorporates both pay-as-you-go and funded

social security systems. It can be shown that constraint (11) is implied by the more-

restrictive pay-as-you-go constraint (4) when R > G (but the converse is not true).

       Under the pay-as-you-go constraint (4), equation (11) has the interpretation that

the windfalls to retirees and older workers alive at time 0 are financed by the sum of net

taxes paid by future generations in present value. In particular, rewrite equation (11) as

                                                                             Net Taxes Paid by Generations t ≥ 0
             Windfall to Generation -2           Windfall to Generation -1
                                                                                ∞
                                                                                      Nt
(12)    − N −2         R Γ dX ( j ) − N −1
                          2   j
                              −2                             RΓ dX ( j ) =
                                                                j
                                                                −1                               Γtj dX ( j ) ,
                 j∈E                                   j∈E                     t =0   Rt   j∈E



where generation “-2” represents the third-period agents (retirees) alive when the social

security system began at time 0, and generation “-1” represents the second-period agents

(older workers) alive at time 0. The present value (as of time 0) of the windfall to agent j



                                                                       8
of generation -2 is − R 2 Γ −j 2 = − R 2T1,j−2 − RT2,j−1 = G 2 τα1j w−2l1,j−2 + Gτα 2j w−1l2,j −1 , which by

equation (4) is equal to b0j .8 The present value windfall to agent j of generation -1,

though, is more complicated. Like generation -2, generation -1 receives benefits based

on their entire lifetime of wages. But, unlike generation -2, generation -1 pays taxes

                                                                                                    G 2 τα1j w−1l1,j−1
during their second period. Hence, − RΓ                       j
                                                              −1   = − RT        j
                                                                               1, −1   −Tj
                                                                                        2,0   =                                 - τα 2j w0l2,0
                                                                                                                                            j

                                                                                                             R


+ G  ( R ) τα w l j
                  2
                         j
                      0 2,0   =
                                b1j
                                R
                                    − τα 2j w0l2,0
                                                j
                                                   . We can, therefore, rewrite (12) as

          Benefits Paid to Generations -2 and -1                                                    Net Taxes Paid by Generations t ≥ 0
                                                       Taxes Paid in 2nd Period by Generation -1
                                            j                                                          ∞
                                        b                                                                    Nt
N −2         b0j dX ( j ) + N −1          dX ( j ) = N −1 τα 2j w0l2,0
                                           1                        j
                                                                       dX ( j ) +                                       Γtj dX ( j )
       j∈E                          j∈E
                                        R                j∈E                                          t =0   Rt   j∈E



2.4.1. “Actuarially-Fair” Reforms

             Since this paper focuses on efficiency gains, we consider “actuarially-fair”

reforms, that is, reforms that do not change the present value of net lifetime taxes of any

household at pre-reform levels of labor income, i.e., reforms for which the value of Γtj

remains unchanged at pre-reform levels of labor supply.

             It is important to distinguish between fair reforms and a fair initial social security

system. When R > G, a pay-as-you-go social security system is actuarially unfair to

generations born into it since they must pay for the windfall gain to previous generations

who received more in benefits in present value than they paid in taxes. However, the

reforms we consider herein are actuarially fair when judge against the market rate, R, in

that they do not change the resource allocation either inter- or intra-generationally.

8
    Recall that equations (5) and (6) apply to agents who are born into a mature pay-as-you-go social security

                                                   ( R ) τα w                                      ( R ) τα w l
                                                       2
system. For generation -2,            T1,j−2 ≡ − G           1
                                                              j
                                                                     l j
                                                                   −2 1, −2   and   T2,j−1 ≡ − G              j
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                   −1 2, −1 .




                                                                    9
          The focus on actuarially-fair reforms does not constrain the analysis in the current

deterministic-wage setting because the efficiency gains we derive herein come from

reducing the distortions of those alive at the time of the reform, not from reducing

distortions (or completing missing markets) either within or between generations. In a

model with uninsurable idiosyncratic wage uncertainty but no aggregate risk, it may be

possible to create a Pareto improving reform that does not change the inter-generational

allocation of resources but improves intra-generational risk sharing.9 In a model with

aggregate uncertainty and incomplete trading markets between generations, state-

contingent reallocations of resources across generations might improve risk sharing.10

The deterministic framework herein rules out these additional potential margins.11



                               3. TWO COMMON PRIVATIZATION PROPOSALS

          This section shows that two common proposals to privatize social security fail to

produce efficiency gains; Chile’s privatization, in fact, reduced efficiency.

3.1.      The “Carve Out”

          One way of introducing personal accounts is to “carve out” a portion of an agent’s

social security payroll tax and to deposit the money into a personal account. Since an

agent pays less money into the traditional defined-benefit social security system, her

future social security benefit is reduced by an equal amount in present value. Carve out


9
    Mathematically,         Γtj dX ( j ) is unchanged for all t but the values of Γtj could change.
                      j∈E
10
     See, for example, Bohn (2003), Krueger and Kubler (2002) and Diamond and Geanakoplos (2003).
11
  In so doing, however, we also ignore the possible risk sharing advantages of the pre-reform social
security system relative to a privatized system. Nishiyama and Smetters (2004) consider these competing
effects using a large-scale lifecycle simulation model. The current paper focuses on demonstrating the
potential source of efficiency gains from privatization, which is not widely understood.


                                                           10
plans are the most common type of reforms being discussed for the U.S. system,

including by the recent 2001 President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security.

            Suppose that a portion π of the payroll tax, τ , is carved out and placed into a

personal account while the remaining (1 − π ) of τ continues to be paid to social security.

Dropping time subscripts to reduce clutter, the new budget constraints are

(13)        c1j + a1j = α1j wl1j (1 − τπ − τ [1 − π]) = α1j wl1j (1 − τ )

(14)        c2j + a2j = α2j (1 + x ) wl2j (1 − τπ − τ [1 − π]) + Ra1j = α 2j (1 + x ) wl2j (1 − τ ) + Ra1j

(15)        c3j = Ra2j + b j ,

where b j is now the third-period assets that are in the new carve-out personal account

plus the reduced benefit that is received from the social security system:

              1st-Period Accrued Benefit less Reduction                  2nd-Period Accrued Benefit less Reduction

       b = G α wl τ − R α wl τπ + Gα (1 + x ) wl2j τ − Rα 2j (1 + x ) wl2j τπ
        j         2
                      1
                       j
                           1
                            j             2
                                              1
                                               j
                                                   1
                                                    j                j
                                                                     2
                                    Assets in new Carve-Out Personal Account

(16)                  + R α1j wl1j τπ + Rα 2j (1 + x ) wl2j τπ
                                2


            = G 2α1j wl1j τ + Gα 2j (1 + x ) wl2j τ

            Notice that after the algebraic reductions shown in equations (13) – (16), these

constraints are identical to the original budget constraints (1) – (4). As a result, the

marginal net tax rates are unaffected by the introduction of an actuarially-fair carve out.

In other words, this reform is economically neutral, thereby proving the following result:



Proposition 1. The actuarially-fair “carve out,” where a household’s future social

security benefit is reduced equal in present value to the payroll taxes they divert to their

private account, is neutral. In particular, labor supply incentives are not improved.




                                                                          11
       Intuitively, on one hand, lowering the tax rate paid into the traditional pay-as-you-

go social security system reduces marginal tax rates across all ages. On the other hand,

the concomitant benefit reduction has the effect of increasing the marginal tax rate on

contributions, raising the effective marginal tax rates back to their pre-reform levels.

3.2.   The “Shutdown” with Recognition Bonds

       Another reform would “shut down” the social security system altogether and

avoid harming workers in the transition by depositing recognition bonds into their

personal accounts; retirees at the time of the reform continue to receive the same benefits

as under social security. The recognition bonds plus the benefits paid to the initial

retirees are financed in present value by a set of new labor income taxes described below.

3.2.1. Second-Period Workers at the Time of the Reform

       Consider middle-age (second-period) workers alive at the start of the reform who

accrued benefits under social security. Their new budget constraints are as follows:

(17)    c1j + a1j = α1j wl1j (1 − τ )

(18)    c2j + a2j = α 2j (1 + x ) wl2j + Ra1j + B2j − T2j

(19)    c3j = Ra2j ,

where the budget constraint, (17), during the first period of life under social security in

included for completeness. The recognition bond, B2j , is equal to accrued liability,

                τα1j wl1j G 2
(20)    B2j =                 ,
                     R

which is calculated by grossing up previous contributions by the internal rate of return

that agent j would have received under social security during the third year of life and

then discounting it back in time to the second period of life.


                                                     12
        The pure tax T2j , shown in equation (18), which is levied after the reform takes

place in the second period of life, is defined in equation (6).                        It represents this

generation’s share of taxes that are needed to support the benefits paid to initial retirees.

        Substituting the values of B2j and T2j into equation (18) leaves the following set

of budget constraints

(17’)   c1j + a1j = α1j wl1j (1 − τ )

                                                     τα1j wl1j G 2 + τα 2j w (1 + x ) l2j G
(18’)   c + a = α (1 + x ) wl (1 − τ ) + Ra +
         2
          j
               2
                j      j
                       2            2
                                     j
                                           1
                                            j

                                                                       R

(19’)   c3j = Ra2j ,

Notice that the value in the [ ] brackets is equal to the present value (as of the second

period) of the social security benefit shown in equation (4). Notice that this set of budget

constraints is identical to the original budget constraints (1) – (4), thereby leading to no

reductions in labor supply distortions.

3.2.2. Young and Future Generations at the Time of the Reform

        After the shutdown, young and future generations do not pay social security taxes

or receive any social security benefits. They also do not receive any recognition bonds

since they have not accrued any benefits by the time of the reform. However, they must

help finance the social security benefits that were paid to the initial retirees at the time of

the privatization plus the value of recognition bonds.

        Given the revenue from the pure labor tax, T2j , that is paid by second-period

workers alive at the time of the privatization (shown above), the remaining unfunded

liabilities can be financed exactly in present value if all future workers pay a pure labor




                                                13
tax equal to T1 j during the first period and T2j during the second period, as shown in

budget constraints (1’) – (3’).12          The equivalence of these budget constraints with

constraints (1) – (4) implies that young workers and future workers are indifferent to the

shutdown as well. We have, therefore, proven the following result:



Proposition 2. The actuarially-fair “shut down,” where social security is eliminated

(except for current retirees) and recognition bonds are given to workers in lieu of their

accrued benefits, is neutral. In particular, labor supply incentives are not improved.



3.3.    Remark on Rational Expectations

        Propositions 1 and 2 assume that people know the marginal tax-benefit linkage

under the pre-reform system, i.e., they have rational expectations. This calculation is

difficult in practice, and so these two privatizations could increase efficiency indirectly

by distinguishing between the effective (pure) tax rates and the statutory tax rate. This

type of gain has been explored in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, Chapter 10). The

current paper instead explores whether gains are possible even with rational expectations.

3.4.    Chile’s Reform

        When Chile privatized its social security system during the early 1980s, it used a

slightly different calculation of the recognition bonds relative to the actuarially-fair

method that was shown above. In particular, the Chilean government simply grossed up

previous contributions by the market interest rate, R, instead of by the internal rate of



12
  In practice, the government would presumably issue new debt to finance the benefits of the initial
retirees. The new pure taxes for middle-aged and future workers shown in the text can then be interpreted
as the interest payments on the rollover of this new debt plus recognition bonds into perpetuity.


                                                   14
return under the previous system, G. In effect, the government calculated the bond as

Bˆ 2j = τα1j wl1j R , which is more-than actuarially fair when R > G since Bˆ 2j > B2j .

       The difference, Bˆ 2j − B2j , represents a windfall to second-period households that

had to be financed with distorting labor income taxes. As will be clear from the analysis

presented in the next section, this windfall effectively increases the value of accrued

benefits and, therefore, works exactly in the opposite direction that is needed to reduce

labor supply distortions. In the current model, therefore, the Chilean reform produced a

Pareto inferior outcome. Of course, in reality, the Chilean reform potentially had many

political-economy outcomes that are not captured in the standard model herein.

       In contrast, the President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security proposed

two plans that included voluntary “carve outs” that were more-than actuarially fair in the

sense that these plans proposed reducing the present value of future Social Security

benefits by less than the amount of dollars that workers carve out into their own personal

accounts. This windfall is intended to entice workers to choose the accounts. Unlike the

overpayment in the case of recognition bonds, however, it is easy to show that this

“windfall” is not a source of inefficiency since it is only applied to new contributions. On

one hand, this subsidy reduces the effective tax rate on contributions. On the other hand,

the windfall must be financed with new distorting pure taxes. The net effect is a wash.

                        4. REDUCING LABOR MARKET DISTORTIONS

       This section shows how privatization can be structured in way that reduces labor

supply distortions and potentially produces a Pareto gain.

4.1.   Privatization with Limited Transition Relief

       Consider the following privatization plan:



                                                15
•    Retirees at time of reform get paid benefits under current law.

•    Workers in the second period at the time of the reform lose their accrued benefits,

     which has a value equal to B2j during the second period. In exchange, their labor

     taxes are reduced the same amount in present value.                        These two steps can be

     accomplished in at least two different ways (or a combination of both):

     o An “accrued carve out”: Decrease the traditional benefits received the following

         period by RB2j and decrease traditional second-period payroll taxes by the amount

         of benefits previously accrued, B2j .

     o A “shut down” without recognition bonds: Eliminate social security benefits and

         collect T2j - B2j in taxes during the second period to help service the benefits paid

         to initial retirees.

•    First-period workers and all future generations pay nothing into social security and

     receive no benefits. Instead, they pay a pure tax T1 j during the first period of life and

     T2j during the second period of life to help service the benefits paid to initial retirees.



         Notice that taxes do not go to zero even in the long run under this policy change

because benefits must still be paid to retirees at the time of the reform; these tax

payments are of equal value in present value.13 However, the accrued benefits owed to

second period workers alive at the time of the reform do not have to be paid. As shown

below, this lump-sum wealth levy is a source of efficiency gains.




13
  In practice, the government would issue debt to finance the benefits of the initial retirees. In this case,
the tax payments on subsequent generations in the text would exactly service the debt into perpetuity.


                                                      16
4.2.    Efficiency Gains

        This privatization plan holds harmless the retirees at the time of the reform.

Young and future workers are also directly held harmless since they face the same

effective budget constraints after privatization, (1’) – (3’), as they did before the reform,

(1) – (4). We show below, however, that future workers gain indirectly from this

privatization plan due to improvements in the government’s budget constraint.

4.2.1. Middle-Aged Workers

        Any direct reductions in labor supply distortions, therefore, must stem from

second-period workers alive when privatization is introduced who accrued benefits under

the former social security system. We now demonstrate these gains.

        Recall, that as shown in Section 3, agent j in their second period of life when

privatization is introduced is indifferent between the initial social security system, shown

in constraints (1) – (4), versus a privatized system where he or she receives their accrued

liability, B2j , and where they pay the tax labor tax, T2j , as shown in constraints (17) –

(19). That was the reason the actuarially-fair shutdown discussed in Section 3 is neutral.

        In the privatization plan just outlined above, however, the accrued benefit, B2j , is

“defaulted” upon, i.e., not paid. Instead the pure tax, T2j , paid during the second period is

lowered by the amount, B2j . Specifically, the proportional pure tax rate paid on second-


period labor income decreases from                ( R)
                                               1− G       τ   shown in equation (6) to


 1− G  ( )
        R
          τ− j
                   B2j
            α 2 w (1 + x ) l2j*
                                , where α j
                                          2 w (1 + x ) l 2
                                                          j*
                                                             is the deterministic amount of


second-period labor income (observable to the government in the second best setting)



                                             17
before privatization.14 Since this tax reduction is “compensated” with an implicit levy on

accrued benefits, it follows that agent j supplies more labor and achieves more utility.

           These results are illustrated in Figure 1. The level of leisure is shown on the

vertical axis while the present value of remaining consumption is on the horizontal axis.

The line A–X corresponds to the original budget constraint under the original social

security program where a second-period agent faces the tax rate 1 − G                 ( R)   τ on labor


income during the second period of life and has accrued a social security benefit of B2j

and private savings, a1 . The optimal choice between leisure and consumption is point O.

                                                      Figure 1

               1- l2



                           I1   I2
                 X

                 Y

                                O




                                                 A                      C             B   c2 + c3/R

           Privatization produces two effects. First, the reduction in the proportional labor

income tax rate creates a new budget set B–X in Figure 1 as the relative price of

consumption decreases, increasing the maximum amount of consumption from Point A to



14
     The new tax rate comes from solving   ˆ 2j w (1 + x ) l2j = T2j − B2j for τ̂ .
                                           τα


                                                        18
B.       Second, the loss in the accrued benefit B2j shifts the budget constraint B–X

downward to C–Y. Line C–Y intersects with the original budget constraint A–X at the

original optimum, O, since agent j can still afford the optimal bundle of consumption and

leisure before privatization. However, the new budget constraint C–Y affords a higher

level of utility, as shown by the outward shift of the indifference curve from I1 to I 2 .

           Notice that agent j also supplies more labor. The government’s budget constraint,

therefore, also improves by this policy change since more revenue is collected from the

taxes that remain on the second-period workers. In general equilibrium, therefore, young

and future workers also gain indirectly from privatization since their tax rates must be

lowered in order to satisfy the government’s inter-temporal budget constraint, (11).15



Proposition 3. Privatization with limited transition relief, as outlined above, increases

the utility of current and future workers without decreasing the utility of current retirees,

i.e., a Pareto improvement even with second-best labor income taxes.



4.3.       Implementation Issues

           A few practical issues emerge in the implementation of privatization. First, notice

that the financial institution of “personal accounts” is not explicitly modeled. The reason

is that agents are rational in the current model and so they don’t need to be told to save.

Suppose, though, that policymakers believe that households’ place a weight on future

utility, β , that is “too low,” thereby generating too little saving after reform.16 To address

this problem, the contribution rate in the new system could be set at the same rate as

15
     Of course, these gains could also be shared with current retirees by increasing their benefits.
16
     This behavior could be irrational (i.e., myopia) or rational (i.e., the Samaritan’s dilemma / moral hazard).


                                                        19
under the pre-reform program; the difference between the new contribution rate and the

new pure taxes that are needed to service the benefits of the initial retirees would then be

deposited into mandatory personal accounts. The efficiency gains derived earlier would

still materialize because second-period workers would get a higher rate of return on their

contributions into personal accounts when the economy is dynamically efficient (R > G).

          Second, notice that the net taxes for young and future workers in the new system

decrease by age, τ2j < τ1j . As shown in Section 2, effective tax rates also decrease in the

traditional system; the pure tax rates simply become more explicit in the new system. In

practice, however, if the personal accounts were mandatory (for reasons just discussed),

the pure taxes could be implemented indirectly by depositing less into personal accounts

for young workers relative to older workers with the same labor income.

          Third, the new pure tax rate on some second-period households alive immediately

after privatization could go negative (a wage subsidy), especially for those households

that accumulated enough benefits under social security.17 A negative wage tax, though, is

not itself a problem: a wage subsidy will also produce a higher level of labor supply and

utility, as shown in Figure 1, if it is financed with a reduction in accrued benefits. If

contributions to personal accounts were mandatory, this subsidy could take the form of a

government match of personal contributions that is phased out over time. Alternatively,

the government could instead set tax rates to zero and give the household the remainder

as a partial recognition bond. But, relative to the contribution match, this bond would

reduce the implicit lump-sum tax on accrued assets, thereby mitigating some of the gains.



17
             ( )
     I.e., 1 − G
                   R
                     τ− j
                              B2j
                       α 2 w (1 + x ) l2j*
                                                            j
                                           is negative if B2 is sufficiently large.



                                                       20
         Fourth, in the few countries where social security benefits are progressive (e.g.,

the United States), the accrued value of social security benefits at the time of the reform

also depend on future labor income. In the deterministic second-best setting herein, the

government can forecast future labor income (although not wages) with perfect foresight,

and so incorporating a progressive benefit schedule is not a problem. In the presence of

wage and longevity uncertainty, though, a reasonable projection would have to be made.

But the incorporation of uncertainty leads to several risk sharing issues that require the

use of simulation analysis to determine efficiency gains (Nishiyama and Smetters, 2004).

The current paper simply focuses on demonstrating the source of potential gains from

privatization in the second-best setting, which not well understood in the literature.

4.4.     A Back-of-the Envelope Calculation

         It is interesting to get a sense of the potential gains from privatization. In the U.S.

Social Security system, the value of accrued liabilities for current participants is to equal

about $12 trillion. About $3 trillion worth belong to retirees no longer in the labor force.

That leaves about $9 trillion available for reductions in labor supply distortions.

         Somewhat, conservatively, suppose that workers above age about 55 were exempt

from reform and so only about $5 trillion of accrued benefits would be subject to a wealth

levy. If the excess burden of the U.S. payroll were about 20% (consistent with estimates

in Feldstein, 1996), then privatization could induce about $1000 billion in efficiency

gains.18 Recent estimates by Prescott (2004) of the labor supply elasticity suggest that

even larger marginal excess burdens are possible.



18
  For the U.S. system, Feldstein (1996) estimates the excess burden equal to 2.35 percent of the payroll tax
base, or about 20% of the payroll tax revenue. In that same article, he estimates even larger gains from
privatization relative to first-best taxes.


                                                    21
         These calculations, though, should be interpreted with caution. For example, they

ignore the administrative costs of personal accounts relative to social security (Diamond,

1996). They also ignore how a social security system shares various types of risk over

the lifecycle that might be hard to insure in the private sector (Diamond, 1977).

4.5.     Comparison with the Standard “Carve Out” and “Shutdown”

         It is now quite straightforward to see that the reason that the standard “carve out”

and “shutdown” privatizations considered earlier failed to produce efficiency gains is that

neither approach imposes an implicit lump-sum levy on accrued liabilities. The “carve

out” implicitly preserves accrued liabilities by only reducing benefits made on new

contributions; the “shut down” explicitly preserves accrued liabilities with recognition

bonds.    Ironically, attempting to provide relief to workers in the transition actually

undermines the potential source of efficiency gains. In the case of Chile and some other

countries, these workers were actually over protected, which induced losses.

4.6.     Can the Same Efficiency Gains be achieved with Other Reforms?

         The privatization with limited transition relief considered in Section 4 imposes an

implicit lump-sum wealth levy that is used to reduce future distorting taxes. This policy

change is similar in spirit to replacing a wage tax with a consumption tax: a consumption

tax is equivalent to a wage tax plus a lump-sum tax on existing assets.

         A legitimate question, therefore, is whether the same efficiency gains derived

herein could be obtained by simply adopting a consumption tax. The answer is no. The

switch to a consumption tax redistributes resources across generations by implicitly

imposing a lump-sum tax on non-social security wealth held by households alive at the

time of the reform, thereby reducing the tax rates on subsequent generations. Accrued




                                             22
social security wealth in many countries, including the U.S., would not be taxed because

benefits are protected in real after-tax terms (including price increases due to a retail sales

tax or a value-added tax). Moreover, even if inflation protection rules were removed, a

consumption tax could not isolate the benefits accrued under social security and,

therefore, could not confiscate them altogether in a revenue-neutral fashion. Hence,

some efficiency gains would still remain.          Finally, as a practical matter, protecting

retirees from the losses of a consumption tax requires detailed transition rules; in contrast,

the privatization herein avoids negative inter-generational transfers.

       A related question is whether the same gains from privatization could be achieved

within the traditional social security system. Suppose, for example, the government

effectively defaulted on accrued benefits and reduced payroll taxes. That approach,

though, would be no different than the privatized experiment considered earlier. Instead,

therefore, the government would have to default on accrued benefits and used this

implicit lump-sum tax to produce a larger internal rate of return on future contributions

for current workers without lowering tax rates. With this approach, though, younger

workers would continue to accrue benefits under the traditional social security system

and so, in a dynamic context, they should expect future wealth levies as well, which

produces a new set of marginal tax rates. In contrast, the wealth levy on accrued benefits

in the privatization experiment considered herein can be done only once because the

social security system is eventually abandoned. Instead, future wealth levies would

require a new tax on the assets in the private accounts, which might be more difficult.




                                              23
                                     5. CONCLUSIONS


       It is generally believed that privatization of social security does not produce

efficiency gains when the government’s tax instruments are second best. Much of this

conventional wisdom, though, has been developed within the standard two-period

lifecycle model where agents work the first period and retire the second period. In this

context, privatization simply swaps one distorting tax for another.

       This paper demonstrates that a Pareto improvement is possible in a lifecycle

model with three or more periods where older workers have accrued benefits under the

traditional system. Accrued benefits become a source for an efficient wealth levy used to

afford a larger (capital market) rate of return on future contributions, thereby reducing the

effective tax rate on labor at the margin. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests

that the efficiency gains for the U.S. could exceed $1 trillion, although, as explained in

Section 4, this calculation should be interpreted with some caution.




                                             24
                                    REFERENCES


Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard J.
Zeckhauser, "Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence," Review of Economic
Studies 56 (January 1989): 1-20.

Auerbach, Alan and Laurence Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge University
Press, 1987.

Breyer, F. “On the Intergenerational Pareto Efficiency on Pay-as-you-go Financed
Pension Systems.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 1989, 145: 643-
58.

Breyer, F. and M. Straub. “Welfare effects of unfunded pension systems when labor
supply is endogenous,” Journal of Public Economics, 1993, 50: 77-91.

Bohn, Henning. “Intergenerational Risk Sharing and Fiscal Policy.” Mimeo, UC Santa
Barbara, 2003.

Brunner, Johann. “Transition from a Pay-as-you-go to a Fully Funded Pension System:
The Case of Differing Individuals and Intragenerational Fairness.” Journal of Public
Economics, 1996 (60): 131 – 146.

Diamond, Peter. “A framework for Social Security Analysis,” Journal of Public
Economics, 1977, 8: 275-298.

Diamond, Peter. “Proposals to Restructure Social Security,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 1996, 10 (3): 67-88.

Diamond, Peter and John Geanakoplos. “Social Security Investment in Equities.”
American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 4, September 2003, pp. 1047-74.

Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick. “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax
Rates.” National Tax Journal, 45 (1), 1992: 1 – 22.

Feldstein, Martin. “Would Privatizing Social Security Raise Economic Welfare?” NBER
Working Paper #5281, 1995.

Feldstein, Martin. “The Missing Piece in Policy Analysis: Social Security Reform.” The
Richard T. Ely Lecture, in American Economic Review, 86, No.2, May 1996: 1 – 14.

Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey Liebman, “Social Security.” in Alan J. Auerbach and
Martin Feldstein, editors, Handbook of Public Economics, volume 4, (Amsterdam:
Elsevier), 2002.




                                         25
Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Zeldes, “Would a Privatized Social
Security System Really Pay a Higher Rate of Return?” In Framing the Social Security
Debate: Values, Politics and Economics. Eds. D. Arnold, M. Graetz, and A. Munnell.
Brookings Institution, 1998: 137-157.

Gustman, Alan L; Steinmeier, Thomas L. “How Effective Is Redistribution under the
Social Security Benefit Formula?'
                                'Journal of Public Economics, vol. 82, no. 1, October
2001, pp. 1-28

Krueger, Dirk and Felix Kubler. “Intergenerational Risk Sharing via Social Security
when Markets are Incomplete” American Economic Review, 2002, Vol. 92(2), 407 - 410.

Laitner, John. “Social Security Reform and National Wealth.” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 102 (3), 2000: 349 – 371.

Mariger, Randall P. "Social Security Privatization: What Are the Issues?" National Tax
Journal, vol. 52, no. 4, December 1999, pp. 783-802

Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch, “Perspectives on the Social Security Crisis and
Proposed Solutions,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88: 142 – 150.

Nishiyama, Shinichi and Kent Smetters. “Does Social Security Privatization Produce
Efficiency Gains?” Mimeo, CBO and The Wharton School.

Prescott, Edward. “Why Do Americans Work More than Europeans?” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, vol. 28, no. 1, July 2004: 2-13

Samuelson, Paul. “An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without the
social contrivance of money” Journal of Political Economy, 1958.

Shiller, Robert. “Social Security and Institutions for Intergenerational, Intragenerational
and International Risk Sharing.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 1999, 50, 165-204.




                                            26
