                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE SYSTEM OF NATIONAL ACCOUNTS:
                      A THREE-WAY COUNTRY COMPARISON,
                   CANADA, AUSTRALIA, AND UNITED KINGDOM

                                               Karen Wilson

                                          Working Paper 11106
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11106


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Karen Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Architecture of the System of National Accounts: A Three Country Comparison, Canada,
Australia, and United Kingdom
Karen Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 11106
February 2005
JEL No. C82, E20

                                           ABSTRACT

         This paper summarizes the characteristics of the System of National Accounts as outlined
in SNA93. It outlines the elements of infrastructure used to build the accounts and then describes
the flow of accounts and supply and use framework used to construct integrated macro economic
statistics. Three countries are then compared in the use of this standard; Australia, Canada and the
United Kingdom.
         Each of the three countries uses the Supply and Use framework (variant of Input Output
tables) as the key integrating tool for building the system of accounts and GDP benchmarks are
determined using the “production” approach inherent in the Supply and Use framework. In Australia
and United Kingdom, the supply and use framework is used to balance and benchmark the flow of
accounts up to and including the measures of net lending/borrowing across the institutional sectors
of the economy. In Canada the supply and use framework is used to determine the level of GDP but
not all of the components of the flow of accounts are benchmarked to it, leaving statistical
discrepancies between incomes and final expenditures and net lending/borrowing across sectors.
This allows Canada to track the statistical system which provides independent estimates form
establishment or kind of activity unit data (industry statistics) and institutional unit (savings and
investment decision unit – enterprise in the case of businesses) data used to build accounts by
institutional sector. In particular, it allows coherence and coverage analysis of the data system.
        In all three countries, the financial accounts and balance sheets are integrated with the flow
of accounts. Statistical discrepancies are shown in all countries between net lending/borrowing and
net financial investment by institutional sector. None of the three countries publishes regular “other
volume changes in assets” accounts although all recognize it as a part of the system which is more
and more important to explaining wealth changes.
         Finally the paper ends with some summary comparisons of the three countries’ systems of
accounts and recognizes that while they all follow international standards to high degree, differences
still exist which may or may not effect international comparability. International coordination is the
key to making the standard meet this purpose. The United Kingdom system, as an example of the
European system, best meets the standard for international comparison purposes.


Karen Wilson
Statistics Canada
                                                    Table of Contents


A. The Development of a “System of Accounts” .............................................................2
     1.     Table 1: Analytic underpinnings of the System of Accounts ....................3

B. The Architecture of SNA93 – A Basis for comparison ...............................................4
      1.     The Central Framework of SNA93 .............................................................4
      2.     The Infrastructure of SNA93 ......................................................................5
      3.     The Integrated Data Systems of SNA93 .....................................................7
             3.a     The Sequence Economic Accounts .................................................7
             3.b     Table 2: The sequence of Economic Accounts of SNA93 ............8
             3.c     Table 3: The Identities of the Sequence of Accounts ....................9
             3.d     The Supply and Use Tables and Input Output ..............................11
             3.e     Table 4: Simplified Supply and Use Tables ................................11
      4.     Functional Breakdown of Expenditures and Employment
             and Population Data ..................................................................................13

C. A Three Country Comparison: Australia, Canada and the United
   Kingdom ....................................................................................................................13
      1.    Australia ....................................................................................................13
            1.a        The Production and Asset Boundaries ..........................................13
            1.b        Valuation Methods ........................................................................13
            1.c        The ASNA Sequence of Accounts ................................................14
            1.d        Supply and Use tables and Input Output Tables ...........................15
            1.e        Other features of the ASNA ..........................................................16
      2.    United Kingdom ........................................................................................17
            2.a        The Production and Asset Boundaries ..........................................17
            2.b        Valuation Methods ........................................................................17
            2.c        The UK Sequence of Accounts .....................................................18
            2.d        The Input Output and Supply/Use Tables .....................................19
            2.e        Other Features of the UK SNA .....................................................19
      3.    Canada .......................................................................................................20
            3.a        The Production and Asset Boundaries ..........................................20
            3.b        Valuation Methods ........................................................................21
            3.c        The CSNA Sequence of Accounts ................................................21
            3.d        Supply/Use and Input Output Tables ............................................22
            3.e        Other Features of the CSNA .........................................................23

D. Summary and Conclusions .........................................................................................24

References .........................................................................................................................25
  The Architecture of the System of National Accounts:
    A three-way international Comparison Canada,
          Australia and the United Kingdom
                                      Karen Wilson




    Since the publication of “System of National Accounts 1993” or SNA93 more than a
decade ago there has been considerable convergence internationally in the use of the
structure, scope of accounts and measurement methods suggested in those standards. The
paper begins with a brief overview of the architecture of the SNA93 standard by relating
the elements of the system to their analytic roots. Based on this description of the
system, three countries’ application of that standard is compared. The comparison is
done from two perspectives – Scope: – what elements of the flow of accounts are covered
and how are they structured, and Integration: - how are the various accounts tied together
when there are discrepancies and the identities do not hold.

A.     The Development of a “System of Accounts”
     The SNA is an economic accounting structure derived from macroeconomic analysis.
Its architecture is drawn from many areas of macroeconomic study. Work in the 20th
century Richard Stone led to the development of the concept of National Income which
was the earliest aggregate measure at the root of the System of accounts. Early economics
was also concerned with production of commodities and the productivity concept of
turning inputs into outputs and the contributions of the factors of production to changes in
output. This area of analysis eventually led to development of Input-Output Tables by
Leontief which has heavily influenced the adoption of Gross Domestic Product as a
central variable of macro-economic analysis. And finally, Keynes work in developing an
analytic framework to explain the dynamics of the macro economy following the Great
Depression of the 1930’s introduced many of the key macro economic variables like
consumption, investment, savings and wealth that are now focal variables in today’s
system of accounts. Keynes introduced the concept pf “sectors” or the major decision
centers and therefore transactors of the economy – households, businesses, governments
and foreign economies and their dynamic effects on the economy through their
propensities to consume, save or invest out of income which flows from the productive
activity. Sometime in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s the idea of an integrated set of
accounts pulling together all of these analytic underpinnings into a system of accounts


                                             2
           became a focus of work at the international level. By 1968, the idea came together with
           the publication of “The System of Accounts” with major contributions by a group of
           experts from around the world chaired by Richard Stone of Cambridge University.
               This first “system of accounts” was designed and described for its analytic content
           and potential uses. The need for consistent accounts was described as follows: “by
           providing a consistent picture of the development of an economic system, a series of
           national accounts are useful, indeed indispensable, in describing and analyzing economic
           change and so contribute to many forms of economic decision making.”1In addition to its
           analytic use, the system was also described as a “scheme for collection of economic
           statistics”.
               The system articulated the major transactions of the macro economy by examining
           activity in the economy through to the production and use of incomes, the accumulation
           of fixed and financial assets to arrive at a closing balance for net national wealth. The
           fully integrated system was designed around the key macroeconomic variables,
           production, consumption, investment and wealth accumulation. The various accounts
           were related to specific types of analysis related to research or policy management as
           illustrated in table 1 below.

                 1.       Table 1: Analytic underpinnings of the System of Accounts
                USE     Opening         Production           Consumption             Accumulation        The rest of the Revaluations         Closing
 SUPPLY                  assets                                                                              world                             assets
                          1    2          3           4         5        6       7      8    9      10     11       12     13      14         15      16


1 1 Financial claims                                                          Studies of national
                                                                              wealth; analysis of
 2 Net assets                                                                 productivity
 3 Commercial                      Input-output analysis;   Consumers’        Models of stock            Export demand
 Production                        analysis of              demand            building and fixed         analysis,
                                   productivity; business   analysis; studies capital formation;         studies of the
 4 Non Commercial                  cycle studies            of govt.          investment policy          “globalization”
 Production                                                 spending                                     phenomenon
 5 Final consumption               Production functions;    Distribution and Depreciation analysis;      Studies of the                   Studies of the
                                   analysis of              redistribution of investment allowances      return on                        “wealth effect”
  6 Income and outlay              productivity; analysis   income; fiscal                               foreign                          on
                                   of factor shares         policy                                       investment;                      consumption
                                                                                                         double taxation
                                                                                                         policy
  7 Change in stocks    Studies                             Analysis of      Monetary policy and         International      Studies of    Studies of net
  8 Fixed investment    of net                              saving behaviour liquidity preference        finance and        capital gains worth
                        worth                                                                            liquidity; long-   and losses;
  9 Financial claims                                                                                     term foreign aid   capital gains
                                                                                                         policy             tax policy
 10 Capital finance
 11 Current                        Import demand            Short-term         International finance    Analysis of
 transactions                      analysis                 foreign aid policy and liquidity; long-term balance of
                                                                               foreign aid policy       trade payments
 12 Capital
 transactions
 13 Financial claims                                                          Capital revaluations

 14 Net assets
 15 Financial claims                                                          Studies of national
                                                                              wealth; analysis of
 16 Net assets                                                                productivity



           1
               A System of National Accounts, United Nations, 1968, page 12.


                                                                          3
    While the 1968 system was rich in its analytic underpinnings, the statistical
infrastructure was not well developed. Since it was the early basis for a system of
accounts it did not articulate the true “architecture” of the statistical system. The
production boundary (the delineation between market and non-market production), the
classification systems (industries, products, functional breakdowns), the statistical units
(establishments, enterprises, institutions), the definition of the asset boundary (produced,
natural, tangible, intangible etc) were not fully developed.
    This early system served as the foundation for the current architecture. As countries
developed and applied the “system” and as users fed back on their experiences in analytic
use of it, the statistical community began to refine and articulate the statistical
underpinnings of the system. An international effort in the mid to late 1980’s profited
from the many experiences of countries in building economic accounts, and resulted in
the set of accounts known today as SNA93.

B.      The Architecture of SNA93 - A Basis for comparison
    In this section of the paper the SNA93 architecture is described by first explaining the
framework as is relates to its analytic underpinnings outlined above. The architecture of
SNA93 can be described in three parts:
             • The Central Framework which translates the analytic view of a “system of
                 accounts” into the basic accounting structure
             • The Infrastructure which defines the building blocks needed to construct a
                 fully consistent set of economic accounts, and,
             • The Integrated Data System which is the set of accounts and tables which
                 are central to describing the economic process.

1.      The Central Framework of SNA93 consists of:

     1. Integrated economic accounts by institutional sector tracing production of
        income through to wealth accumulation for each institutional sector
     2. Supply and Use of goods and services which traces production of commodities
        by industries through their use as intermediate inputs or final demand by
        institutional sectors
     3. Three dimensional analysis of transactions, which articulates all the transactions
        of the system from both the “real” side of the accounts (Production, consumption
        and investment) and the “financial” side of the same transactions (creation and
        deletion of financial claims and fixed assets), all by institutional sector (from
        whom, to whom). This feature forces consistency on the system,
     4. Functional analysis of the purposes of spending by institutional sector : for
        example: spending by governments (health, education, defense etc),
        consumers(accommodation, food, transportation, health etc) and business
        (intermediate use and investment),
     5. Population and employment data consistent with SNA concepts for analysis of
        the labor variables of the system and per capita analysis.




                                             4
    These five elements of the framework reflect the analytic requirements of a
macroeconomic data system as outlined in the earlier version of the SNA as reflected in
table 1 above.

2.     The Infrastructure of SNA93

    In order to build this consistent data set for analysis, the architectural building blocks
of the data system need to be well defined as do the structure of the “accounts” or
datasets included in the system. The important architectural elements which are the
infrastructure of the system for each of the five elements of the central framework are:
    1. The institutional sectors and the institutional units which are aggregated to
        measure them are the building blocks of the integrated sequence of accounts.
        There are two basic institutional units; households and legal entities. Legal
        entities are units which are created to perform some economic function like
        production, in the case of enterprises, and governance and provision of public
        goods and services, in the case of government units. Each unit is capable of
        engaging in transactions with other units, of owning assets and of incurring
        liabilities. The units reflect the decision centers in the economy for financing,
        saving and investment. The units are grouped together into mutually exclusive
        sectors based on their economic objectives, functions and behaviors. Carrying
        through on the examples of the units mentioned above, corporations’ economic
        function is the production of goods and services for sale on the market with an
        objective of gaining profit for its owners. Government institutional units are quite
        distinct in their function and objective. They engage in non-market production
        and also have as an economic objective the redistribution of income and wealth
        among institutional sectors through taxation and transfers. The main institutional
        sectors of the system are:
            a. Non-financial corporations
            b. Financial corporations
            c. General governments
            d. Households
            e. Non-profit institutions serving households
            f. Rest of the World
        Sectors a through e cover the domestic economy and f covers the transactions of
        the rest of the world with the domestic economy. The main sectors can be broken
        down into sub-sectors such as general government into the relevant levels of
        government or financial corporations into banking, insurance and other financial
        institutions.
    2. The Supply and Use analysis articulates the production of goods and services by
        production units. Two important elements of the system play an important role in
        this part of the system: the production and asset boundaries and the valuation
        principles.
            a. The production boundary includes the production of all individual or
                 collective goods and services that are supplied to institutional units other
                 than their producer. It also includes own account production of goods that
                 are retained by the individual unit for consumption or fixed capital



                                              5
           formation. In the case of household units this own account production
           includes production of housing services as well as own account
           construction of dwellings. Any other goods produced by households for
           own consumption are only counted when significant. This usually means
           agricultural products produced and used on the farm.
       b. The asset boundary defines real wealth in the system. An asset is
           something that is owned by a unit or units and from which economic
           benefits are derived over a period of time greater than one year. The
           benefits are often derived from use in the production process but also from
           holding the asset as a store of value. Financial assets and real assets which
           have been produced by a unit and used repeatedly in future period clearly
           meet the criterion. Assets which are naturally occurring ( mineral deposits,
           forests, etc) must be owned by an institutional unit which can exercise
           effective ownership rights, to be included. Valuables are included as
           assets, but not as capital formation.
       c. Valuation of production in the Supply/Use framework is at basic prices,
           which are the prices receivable by the producer unit before taxes on those
           products are added, including any subsidies received. Non-market
           production is valued at cost when there is no market price valuation
           equivalent available. When production is carried forward to the sequence
           of accounts, the taxes on products are added in and subsidies netted out to
           arrive at GDP at market prices.
       d. Two classification systems are at the base of this measurement: an
           industrial classification system - the one suggested in SNA93 is ISIC rev 3
           the International Standard Industrial Classification at the two digit level of
           aggregation or approximately 120 industries, and a classification of
           commodities- the CPC or the Central Product Classification is
           recommended at the 3-digiet level, about 300 products. The relevant
           statistical unit in the case of measuring output is the producer unit. This is
           the unit of the economy which can report on the output of products and the
           inputs used. The selection of the unit of statistical measure is based on
           homogenous production technology or in SNA93 parlance a “kind of
           activity unit”. There are many producer units in an economy. The
           majority are small units producing one type of commodity. Others are
           part of large complex enterprises which produce many different types of
           products and services and participate in many industries. These
           enterprises are broken down into sub units called establishments, for the
           statistical purpose of articulating supply and use of homogeneous products
           made using homogeneous production technology.
3. The three dimensional aspect of the infrastructure is also referred to as quadruple
   entry book keeping. Transactions across sectors are recorded in four counterpart
   transactions. This ensures consistency in measuring variables across sectors, and
   across accounts. For example, when a corporation pays income tax to the central
   government, the transaction is recorded simultaneously as a transfer of income
   from the payer, the corporate sector, and as a receipt of income by the receiver
   sector, the government. It is also recorded as a decrease in cash on the financial



                                          6
         account of the corporate sector and an increase in cash by the government sector.
         This ensures that the closing balance on the balance sheet of each sector also
         reflects the transfer of income from one sector to another, thereby imposing stock-
         flow consistency on the system as well. This is very important for analysing and
         understanding the economic process. This feature is key to ensuring that many of
         the types of analyses outlined in table one provide consistent results such as
         multifactor productivity analysis which relates the production activity to the
         service flow from the stock of fixed assets.
      4. Functional analyses are designed to articulate the purpose of expenditures by
         sector. They are designed to aid in the analysis of the objectives and functions of
         the institutional sectors. There are four key classifications suggested by SNA93.
             a. The Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG) articulates
                 14 key purposes of government expenditure like health, education and
                 social security.
             b. The classification of Individual Consumption by Purpose (COICOP)
                 which breaks household expenditures down into 10 main purposes (with
                 sub categories) such as housing, transportation, health, education, leisure
                 etc..
             c. The classification of Outlays of Non-Profit Institutions by Purpose
                 (COPNI) articulates 8 categories of NPI outlays such as health, education,
                 religious services, welfare services etc...
             d. Classification of Outlays of Producers by Purpose (COPP) breaks down
                 the outlays of production units into classes such as research and
                 development, repair and maintenance, employee training and welfare, etc..
      5. Employment and population data aligned with SNA concepts means having
         population data aligned with the “national” boundaries of the accounting system
         and definitions of the households sector. It also means aligning employment
         measures with the production boundary and labor input definition of the product
         account – key for the purposes of calculating and analyzing productivity trends.
         The definitions and classifications are outlined in chapter 17 of SNA93.

3.       The Integrated Data System of SNA93

3.a      The Sequence Economic Accounts

    The accounting model of the 1993 standard traces the transmission of income to
wealth using a “sequence of accounts”. The building blocks of the sequence of accounts
are six major institutional sectors: Households and unincorporated businesses2, Non-
profit institutions serving households, financial corporations, non-financial corporations,
governments and non-residents. The whole economic process from production of
income, through redistribution of income, consumption and saving, through to
accumulation of fixed assets and financial assets, to the position of net worth is recorded

2
  Unincorporated businesses are grouped with households due to the difficulty of splitting some
transactions between the household and business portion. For some accounts, like the production account,
it is preferable to separate the sector in two to arrive at a pure “business” sector. But for income generation
and distribution accounts it is hard to delineate between the two institutional units.


                                                       7
for each institutional sector. The major macro economic variables are recorded or
calculated as balancing items in the following “sequence of accounts”:

3.b     Table 2(a): The Sequence of Economic Accounts of SNA93

Production Accounts: For each institutional sector (except the non-resident sector) the value of
output is recorded, intermediate consumption (goods and services used up in the transformation
of inputs to outputs) are subtracted to arrive at the balancing entry for this account – Value
Added. The sum of value added across institutional sectors is equal to the Gross Domestic
Product for the economy.
Production of Income: In the course of production, the primary inputs, labor and capital,
produce income. Wages, salaries and supplementary income and gross operating surplus are
recorded for each sector. The sum of the primary incomes equals value added for each sector
and the sum of all primary incomes across sectors equals Gross Domestic Product
Primary Distribution of Income: Property income is income from lending real and financial
capital. Primary income is redistributed from one sector to another in this account resulting from
payment of interest through financial claims or rents and royalties on use of real property. Total
sector income is the sum of primary income plus net property income received. Summation
across sectors (including the non-resident sector) of total primary income equals Gross National
Income after subtraction of capital consumption allowances equals Net National Income. This is
where the flow of accounts transitions from income generated by domestic production (the
domestic concept) to income accruing to residents of the national territory (the national concept).
Secondary Distribution of Income: In this account pure transfer of incomes across sectors are
recorded. . Total sector income is the sum of primary income plus net property income received.
After deduction of direct taxes paid and social contributions the balancing item on primary
distribution account is Disposable Income. In the Use of Income account, current expenditures
are also recorded on this account as uses of income. The balancing item on this account is
savings; the sum of savings across sectors is National Savings and after accounting for capital
consumption allowances equals Net National Savings.
Capital Accumulation Accounts: Net savings from the secondary distribution of income
accounts are the starting point of this account as a source of funds for capital accumulation.
Depreciation and net capital transfers are added to arrive at total funds available for investment.
Fixed capital formation on tangible and intangible assets is recorded as the use of funds to arrive
at the Net Lending/Borrowing position of the sector. The sum of net lending/borrowing across
sectors balances to zero. Also, the sum of current expenditures from the secondary distribution of
income account and capital expenditures on the capital accumulation accounts less imports
equals Gross Domestic Product calculated as the sum of final expenditures.
Financial Accumulation Accounts: Transactions in financial assets and liabilities are recorded
for each of the institutional sectors. The balance of net changes in financial assets less changes
in net financial liabilities is net changes in financial assets and is equal to net lending/borrowing of
the capital accumulation accounts.
Other Changes in Volume of Assets Account: This account records holding gains and losses
on financial and non-financial assets by Institutional Sectors. It also records destruction of assets
due to extraordinary events. Depletion and new discoveries of non-produced assets are also part
of this account. It basically records any change in asset which is not due to a “transaction”.
Balance Sheet Accounts: Closing stocks are recorded here for financial assets and liabilities as
well as tangible and intangible non-financial assets. Net Worth is calculated as the balancing
entry for the balance sheet of each institutional sector summing to National Net Worth across the
sectors. National Net Worth is equal to National Net Wealth – the sum of the stock of all tangible
and intangible fixed assets at market price.




                                                   8
       Table 2(b): Summary of Accounts and Variables

Account                      Key Variables                   Balancing Entry
Production Accounts          Gross Domestic Product,         Value Added
                             Output
Production of Income         Labour Income, Gross       Gross Domestic
                             Operating Surplus          Product
Primary Distribution of      Labour Income, Proprietor’sGross National
Income                       Income                     Income, National
                                                        Disposable Income
Secondary Distribution of Transfer Income,              Net Disposable
Income                    Consumption Expenditures, Income
                          Transfers Paid                Net Saving
Capital Accumulation      Gross Fixed Capital           Net
Accounts                  Formation, Capital Transfers, Lending/Borrowing
                          Capital Consumption
                          Allowances
Financial Accumulation Acquisitions of Financial        Net Financial
Accounts                  Assets,  Incurrence of        Investment
                          Financial Liabilities
Other Changes in Volume Revaluations of Assets and Net other changes in
of Assets Account         Liabilities, Discoveries and volume of Assets
                          Destruction of Assets
Balance Sheet Accounts Gross and Net Capital Stocks, National Net Worth
                          Net Financial Position


    The economic process, of production of income, consumption, investment and
creation of wealth are reflected by the structure and the order of the sequence of accounts.
In describing the economic process through a sequence of accounts consistency is
imposed on the data through the series of identities inherent in the system The following
table presents the main identities of the sequence of accounts.


3.c    Table 3: The Identities of the Sequence of Accounts

The Production Identities

GDP = Output – taxes less subsidies on products – intermediate consumption

GDP = Final consumption expenditures + changes in inventories + gross fixed capital formation +
acquisitions less disposals of valuables + exports of goods and services – imports of goods and
services

GDP = Compensation of employees + gross operating surplus of corporations + gross mixed
Income + taxes less subsidies on products



                                               9
Income and Saving Identities

Gross National Income (GNI) = GDP + taxes less subsidies on production and imports (net
receivable from abroad) + compensation of employees (net receivable from abroad) + property
income (net receivable from abroad).

Net National Income (NNI) = GNI less consumption of fixed capital

Net National Disposable income (NNDI) = NNI + net taxes on income and wealth receivable
from abroad + net social contributions and benefits receivable form abroad.

Net Saving = NNDI – final consumption expenditure + net equity of households on pension funds
receivable from abroad + net capital transfers receivable.

Net saving + net capital transfers = changes in net worth due to savings and capital transfers

The income and savings identities apply to each institutional sector as well as to national
estimates by changing the identities to net amounts receivable from other sectors.

Savings and Investment Identities

Net saving + net capital transfers receivable = Gross fixed capital formation + changes in
inventories + acquisitions less disposals of valuables and non-produced non-financial assets +
net lending/borrowing

Net lending (+)/borrowing (-) = net acquisitions of financial assets les net incurrence of financial
liabilities

Wealth Identities

Opening net worth = Opening Assets – opening liabilities

Changes in net worth = changes in net worth due to savings and capital transfers + changes in
net worth due to other volume change in assets + changes in net worth due to holding gains or
losses

Closing Net Worth = closing assets - closing liabilities.



     There are three different views of the GDP aggregate, sum of value added, sum of
factor incomes and sum of final expenditures. There are two views of measuring net
lending by sector, the difference of total incomes and total outlays and the difference in
transactions on assets and liabilities. The imposed consistency on the system also allows
some variables to be calculated residually rather than directly, for example, savings is the
residual of current incomes less consumption or current expenditure, government deficit
is the difference of total incomes and outlays of the government sector, or even detailed
variables which are difficult to measure directly from administrative records or by the use
of surveys can be derived. For example, inventory investment as measured by national
accounting conventions is difficult to measure directly, but in a consistent set of accounts,
can be arrived at residually as the difference of supply and use of a commodity. Many
aspects of household wealth are also difficult to measure directly as households do not
generally keep balance sheet records, but for example, by exploiting the fundamental


                                                10
balance sheet identity, mortgage lending by financial institutions can be used to measure
mortgage borrowing of households.
    Macroeconomic analysis is greatly enhanced by the consistency of the integrated
system. For example, the labor input variables can be compared to value-added to
analyze labor-productivity trends. Debt burden of households, governments or business
can be measured by their debt levels from the balance sheet accounts as a ratio of their
total sector income as measured in the distribution of income accounts and at the same
time interest burden ratios can be calculated as the ratio of interest paid to total income
recorded in the distribution of income. The return to capital can be measuring as a ratio
of net operating surplus to the stock real assets. The imposition of common infrastructure
(classifications and measurement principles) across all of the sequence of accounts adds
explanatory power to the derived aggregates. These ratios are important in the
understanding the sustainability of the economic functioning of the various sectors.
    The integrated system is also an audit and planning tool for the statistical system at its
roots. Since the system is put together using a variety of data, both survey and
administrative record based, all with varying levels of quality, aggregates derived from
more than one approach will never be equal. But a high quality statistical system will
produce results that are within an acceptable range and the inconsistency can be resolved
through a balancing method. SNA93 recommends for example that the level of GDP be
derived using the value added method or the so called “production approach” and the
other measures be reconciled by allocating any statistical discrepancy to the lower quality
sub aggregates of the income and expenditure methods. The allocation method used will
depend on the relative quality of the elements of the statistical base. If the statistical
discrepancies are not random but indicate bias, they are often used to identify gaps or
emerging measurement issues in the statistical process. Later in the paper examples of
different balancing approaches and how the system has helped identify gaps and
measurement problems will be given in the cross country comparison.
    The Other Changes in the Volume of assets account plays a big role in the stock flow
consistency of the system. It can be broken down into revaluation accounts and other
volume changes in assets. The revaluation account records the holding gains and losses
on real and financial assets. Separating the change in wealth into components due to
savings and due to holding gains and losses is central to the study of the wealth effect on
the behavior of the sectors. In addition, articulating other volume changes in assets like
the discovery of unknown mineral reserves or the destruction of an asset due to some
catastrophic event are extremely important in the measurement of net worth and its
driving factors. As will be seen later in the paper, this account is under valued in many
National Accounts systems and represents an important data gap.

3.d    The Supply and Use Tables and Input Output

    In addition to the sequence if accounts outlined above, the system includes goods and
services accounts, supply and use tables and symmetric input output tables providing
detailed analysis of industries and products. The tables are in fact, a breakdown of the
production and generation of income accounts. This is the part of the system that reflects
‘the production function’ at the core of structural and productivity analysis. Table 4




                                             11
below is a simplified Supply and Use table which demonstrates the use of identities to
balance the production and the use of products in the system.

The three way identity of arriving at GDP is tested in the table:
 Sum of value added by industry (5-1) equal to sum of incomes of primary factors
of production (6) equals sum of final expenditures on domestic production
(2+3+4-7).

 The Supply and Use identity:
Outputs + Imports (Supply 5 + 7 ) = Intermediate consumption (by industries) +
final consumption + gross fixed capital formation +exports (Demand 1+2+3+4)

3.e     Table 4. Simplified Supply and Use Tables

                Products    Industries     Rest of   Final          Gross        Total
                                           World     Consumption    Capital
                                                                    Formation
Products                    1.             2.        3.Final        4.Gross      Total
                            Intermediate   Exports   Consumption    Capital      Use by
                            Consumption              Expenditure    Formation    Product
Industries      5.Output                                                         Total
                                                                                 Output
                                                                                 by
                                                                                 Industry
Components                  6.Value
of Value                    Added
Added
Rest of World   7.Imports
Total           Total       Total Inputs
                Supply      by Industry



    The dimensionality of the supply and use table is usually rectangular with many more
products than industries. The SNA93 recommends the use of the CPC classification
which has 1,800 commodities at its 5 digit level, but for countries where less detail is
collected, the three digit level could be used (about 300 product groups). ISIC rev 3 is
recommended for the industry classification. Again the level of detail will depend on the
countries’ statistical system but a reasonable breakdown is considered to be the 2 digit
level or more (about 20 industries).
    The supply and Use tables are important statistical tools in the SNA. They are used
to test and monitor the quality of the data system used to feed the sequence of accounts.
For example they can be used to:
         1. Identify gaps, inconsistencies and valuation problems in the data system.
         2. Calculate weights for the calculation of price and volume index numbers, and
         3. Estimate variables residually which are not captured in the statistical system
            for reasons of response burden or expense
         4. Benchmark infra annual data and projection systems to add consistency to
            short term indicators



                                            12
    The supply and use tables are also used to calculate symmetric input output tables,
either product by product or industry by industry. These tables convert the supply and
use tables from a statistical tool to an analytic tool. Input Output tables are used to do all
sorts of structural analysis and when combined with the rest of the SNA Framework are
used to do many types of the analyses outlined in the table which showed the analytic
underpinnings of the System of Accounts. These include:
        1. Analysis of production, input structures and multifactor productivity
        2. Analysis of the structural change of components of final demand like
             consumer spending and investment in fixed capital
        3. Analysis of impact of changes in tax rates or tax regimes on products and
             production
        4. Analysis of impacts of changes in regulation in the economy
        5. Analysis of impact of changes in technology and/or relative price change
        6. And the list goes on....
    The other major advantage of a set of supply and use tables and input output tables
integrated with the rest of the system is that it provides a basis for many analytic data by-
products such as satellite accounts. These are usually aggregations or classifications not
readily available in either a standard product or industry classification system but are of
great analytic importance. These by-products often relate to activities which cross
industry and product boundaries such as tourism, transportation, communication or
health. They also form a basis for super imposing other related data on the system such
as environmental flows to measure the impact of economy on the environment.
    While supply and use data systems are the most data intensive part of the system, they
are the thread that ties the system together and have a big impact on the quality of the
system both in terms of statistical integrity and analytic usefulness.

4.     Functional Breakdown of Expenditures and Employment and Population
       Data

    The last two elements of the central framework will not be described in detail here.
Their purpose is described in the infrastructure section above. Functional Breakdowns
add analytic depth to the purpose of expenditures in the system. For example the purpose
classification of household expenditures allows for analysis of the consumption function
in the context of joint consumption (expenditures on cars and repairs grouped together)
and of substitution (different modes of transportation grouped together). The alignment
of population and employment data with SNA concepts facilitates many types of
analysis. The employment data are essential for productivity analysis. While these data
elements seem straightforward, in many statistical systems there are more than one
estimate of employment – from a household survey and a business survey. Most often
neither is aligned with the SNA view of hours worked or the production boundary and
work is required to create one consistent measure.




                                             13
C.     A Three Country Comparison: Australia, Canada and the United
       Kingdom
    Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom are examples of countries where the fully-
integrated SNA93 system has been implemented. In this section, each country’s system
is described to show how the system has been applied, showing to some extent, how the
supporting statistical system has influenced the dimensions and detail of each system.

1.     Australia

    The Australian System of National Accounts (ASNA) is a prime example of a system
that has be designed and implemented on an integrated basis in line with SNA93 – but
with some differences based on what is most important to user needs, and on data
availability. The data system is available from 1994/95 forward on a fully integrated
SNA93 basis. Many parts of the system exist for longer time series.

1.a    The Production and Asset Boundaries

     For the ASNA these boundaries are closely aligned with SNA93. The production
boundary includes estimates of financial services for which no explicit charge is made,
the value of service of owner occupied housing and the service provided by homeowners
in building or renovating the housing stock. No explicit estimates are made for illegal
activity. This is the only exception to the SNA production boundary. The asset boundary
is also largely SNA93 compliant with the exception of the treatment of valuables which
are not as yet included as fixed assets.

1.b    Valuation Methods

   The valuation methods in the ASNA are those suggested in SNA93. The sequence of
accounts transactions are measured at market prices including the balance sheets. The
input output and supply and use tables use the basic price valuation as suggested in
SNA93.

1.c    The ASNA Sequence of Accounts

  The ASNA publishes a full sequence of accounts annually, which is a slightly
modified version of the international standard. The accounts of the ASNA are as follows:
          • The gross domestic product account records the value of production
              (GDP), the income from production and the final expenditures on goods
              and services produced. This is a combination of the Production account
              and Production of Income accounts of SNA93. These accounts are
              published by industry for GDP, by factor income type and by final
              expenditure category but not by institutional sector. This is based on the
              users’ key demands for the three breakdowns of GDP but less of an
              interest in sectoral analysis of the production account data. Volume and



                                          14
                Price measures are published based on the Final Expenditure approach of
                GDP using Annual Chain-Laspeyres index formula method.
            • The Income Accounts show primary and secondary income transactions,
                final consumption expenditures and consumption of fixed capital. Net
                saving is the balancing item on this account. The ASNA income account
                joins the primary and secondary distribution of income accounts of
                SNA93 into one. These accounts are produced for four major domestic
                sectors, Households (including non-profit institutions serving households),
                financial corporations, non-financial corporations and governments.
            • The capital accounts record the net accumulation of non-financial assets
                and the financing by way of saving and capital transfers. Net
                lending/borrowing is the balancing item of this account. It is produced for
                the four domestic sectors outlined above.
            • The financial accounts show the net acquisition of financial assets and
                net incurrence of financial liabilities. The balancing item is net financial
                position which is equivalent to net lending/borrowing measured in the
                capital accounts. This account is also recorded for the four domestic
                sectors of the economy.
            • The balance sheets record the stock of assets (financial and non-financial)
                and liabilities at a point in time and Net worth is the balancing item. This
                account is recorded for the four domestic sectors.
            • The external account is recorded separately from the sequence of
                accounts and is published according to the Balance of Payments manual
                published by the IMF. It is fully integrated with the SNA in that common
                variables such as imports, exports or interest and other income flows are
                equivalent in both accounts.
    This sequence of accounts (missing only the Other Changes in Volume of Assets
Accounts) is published on a fiscal year basis annually with about a 150 day lag on the
reference period. These are preliminary estimates until the data system matures with all
final data sources available about 36 months after the reference period. There are
approximately 24 tables published which refer to the sequence of accounts, but at the
same time about 80 additional tables are published which include detailed dis-
aggregations of the many variables of the system. These include for example, gross fixed
capital formation and capital stocks by type of asset, capital consumption allowances by
industry and institutional sector, household expenditure detail, breakout of government
accounts by level of government, just to name a few.
    A summary version of the sequence of accounts is also published on a quarterly basis
with a 60 day lag. The quarterly sequence of accounts includes national GDP by
expenditure component, projections of value added by industry and GDP by income type.
The constant price estimate of GDP is the expenditure based GDP using an annually
linked chain-Laspeyres measure. The sector accounts include a national account for
current and capital accounts and income accounts for the household sector and summary
income/capital accounts for the external and government sectors. The quarterly data base
also includes many detailed breakdowns of expenditures. The data are published on a
seasonally adjusted and trend basis in addition to the original unadjusted estimates.



                                            15
1.d    Supply and Use tables and Input Output tables

    The ASNA compiles both rectangular Supply and Use Tables used for balancing the
system and symmetrical or square industry by industry Input Output tables. The
industrial classification used is ANZIC (Australian and New Zealand Industrial
Classification system) which can be concorded to ISIC rev 3. The commodity
classification used is one designed solely for the purpose of compiling Input Output and
Supply/Use Tables. The Input Output and Supply Use tables are closely linked. They are
produced as follows:
            1. The first Supply and Use Tables for any given year are compiled about 12
                months after the reference period. The dimensions are some 100
                industries by 150 commodity groups. This projected annual supply and
                use table is used to balance the production accounts of the “sequence of
                accounts” and no statistical discrepancy is ever shown between the three
                measures of GDP.
            2. The “Preliminary” Supply/Use Table is compiled within 24 months of the
                reference period and is based on partial benchmark data. The rest of the
                system is benchmarked to these preliminary data and therefore the
                quarterly system is never projected for more than seven quarters.
            3. The “Final” Supply/Use Tables are produced within 36 months of the
                reference period. This is based on “final” survey and administrative data,
                as complete as the statistical system can provide. The dimensions are some
                109 industries by 1100 commodity groups. The “final” version of the
                sequence of accounts is benchmarked to this.
            4. When and only when the Supply/Use tables are “final”, the industry by
                industry Input Output Tables are compiled and published. These are
                symmetrical tables with 109 industries. These are available about 4
                months after the final Supply and Use tables or about 40 months after the
                reference period. The particular form, industry by industry, and the
                dimensions have been chosen as the best compromise between response
                burden and analytic use to the tables. These include effects of changes in
                factor costs, productivity, and incidence of taxes on production and
                imports and primary input content of demand.
    This particular production cycle of Supply and Use Tables for balancing the ASNA
with IO tables available when the data becomes “final” takes advantage of the fully
integrated design of the SNA architecture. It provides users with a consistent set of
accounts, balanced with no statistical discrepancies, from the production accounts
through to the capital accumulation accounts. Preliminary versions based on projected or
incomplete data take advantage of input-output ratios to fill in data gaps.
    The final Supply/Use tables are the most data intensive part of the system, requiring
respondents to fill in outputs and inputs by commodity. The input structure is collected
by “establishment” which is the statistical unit based on homogeneous production
technology but where full data can still be collected. This means there is primary,
secondary and ancillary production in some units, but data cannot be collected to split
inputs by all types of production within an establishment. To minimize response burden
and to optimize the usefulness of the data, the Australian Bureau of Statistics has



                                           16
designed a collection strategy which rotates industries in and out of collection on a three
or five year basis depending on the stability of the input structure. The more rapidly
evolving sectors are on the three year cycle. For each year, about 25 per cent of inputs are
based on collected data as opposed to imputed or allocated input data. Since the
Australian statistical system is centralized, the economic data collection is organized and
oriented around the compilation of the accounts both in structure and detail and in
timeliness.

1.e    Other features of the ASNA

    The integration of Supply/Use tables with the sequence of accounts provides a
balancing tool for the sequence of accounts down to the balancing item Net
lending/borrowing of the capital accumulation account. Thus, the net lending/borrowing
sums to zero across sectors when the external account is added in. But net
lending/borrowing (net financial requirements) is also calculated from the financial
accounts. Here a statistical discrepancy is shown in the financial account to equate the
two balancing items. For the Balance sheet, the Household sector is used to balance
across sectors for most instrument types due to the fact that direct balance sheet data is
not generally available for households but is for the corporate and government sectors
and is collected for the external account.
    In addition to the sequence of accounts, the functional breakdowns of the SNA93
architecture are available in the detailed expenditure tables of both the annual and
quarterly sequence of accounts. Also, Productivity Accounts are compiled as part of the
ASNA database – including the labour input as specified in SNA93.
    Finally, regional or state level production accounts are also a feature of the ASNA
with some other key variables, like household and some government sector income
accounts available at the state level.

2.     United Kingdom

    The accounts of the UK are another example of a complete and fully integrated set of
accounts. The design and form of the UK accounts conform to the ESA95, which is a
version of SNA93 written specifically for the member countries of the European Union.
The ESA95 is fully consistent with SNA93. It does however, add more precision to some
aspects of SNA93 which take the form of recommendations with alternative solutions.
ESA95 attempts to standardize the measurement of the SNA aggregates because they are
used for the calculation of contributions to the Union and for the monitoring of the
complete European Union economy. In 1998 the UK completed a set of accounts based
on the ESA95. This included completion of a longer project whereby the distributed
statistical system was centralized over a 10 year period. This has meant that some parts
of the SNA were previously published by other institutions are now all the responsibility
of the Office of National Statistics (ONS). For example financial accounts and balance
sheets and balance of payment statistics were previously published by the Bank of
England.




                                            17
2.a    The Production and Asset Boundaries

    These boundaries are closely aligned with SNA93/ESA95 for the UK. The
production boundary includes estimates of financial services for which no explicit charge
is made, the value of service of owner occupied housing. No explicit estimates are made
for illegal activity but there is extensive work done on “exhaustiveness” to account for
under-reporting and data gaps. Valuation of illegal activities is being worked on at the
European level by Eurostat. In employing the production boundary for households
producing goods for own use – by convention, only own-account construction of housing
and production of agricultural goods is included. Anything else is deemed to be
insignificant.
    The asset boundary is also largely SNA93 compliant including treatment of valuables
as fixed assets. The ESA95 rule for “small tools” is employed excluding any transactions
on purchases less than 500 Euros even though it may be used in production process for
more than one year.

2.b    Valuation Methods

    The valuation methods in the UK SNA are those suggested in SNA93 and ESA95.
The sequence of accounts transactions are measured at market prices including the
balance sheets. The input output and supply and use tables use the basic price valuation
.
2.c    The UK Sequence of Accounts

    The UK publishes a full sequence of accounts annually, which is a slightly modified
version of the international standard but compliant with ESA95. The sequence of
accounts as follows is produced for the four domestic sectors, non-financial corporations,
financial corporations, governments and households and non-profit institutions and the
external sector wherever relevant:
            • The goods and services account, which is an aggregate supply and
                demand table but by institutional sector. It records the value of output at
                basic prices by sector plus imports as resources intermediate use and net
                exports as uses to arrive at GDP at basic prices by sector and by adding
                net taxes on products and imports to arrive at total GDP at market prices.
                Volume and Price measures are published based on the Final Expenditure
                approach of GDP using Annual Chain-Laspeyres index formula method
            • The Generation of Income Accounts record the uses of GDP at market
                prices by type of factor income.
            • The Allocation of Primary Income Accounts, which show primary
                incomes by type as resources for each sector.
            • The Secondary Distribution of Income Account shows the redistribution
                of income through transfers across sectors as sources and payments of
                taxes and social contributions as uses to arrive at disposable income by
                sector.




                                            18
           •    The Redistribution of Income in Kind Account shows the income in kind
                produced by each sector and who it is used by sector added to the
                disposable income of each sector
            • The Use of Income Account shows consumption spending by sector out
                of disposable income and the adjustment for net equity of pension funds.
                Net saving is the balancing item on this account.
            • The Acquisition of Non-financial Capital Accounts, which record the net
                accumulation of non-financial assets and the financing by way of saving
                and capital transfers. Net lending/borrowing is the balancing item of this
                account. It is produced for the four domestic sectors outlined above and
                net lending for the external sector.
            • The Financial Accounts, which show the net acquisition of financial
                assets and net incurrence of financial liabilities. The balancing item is net
                financial position which is equivalent to net lending/borrowing measured
                in the capital accounts. This account is also recorded for the four domestic
                sectors of the economy.
            • The Balance Sheets, which record the stock of assets (financial and non-
                financial) and liabilities at a point in time and Net worth, is the balancing
                item. This account is recorded for the four domestic sectors.
    This particular view of the sequence of accounts – shown for both resources and uses
view of each account, is the ESA95 suggested presentation. Although ESA95 suggests
splitting the Non-profit institutions serving households out as a sector unto itself, this is
not currently done for the UK accounts. The sequence of accounts is first published
about 6 months after the reference period based on preliminary data. The accounts are
revised every year for the subsequent three years.
    A summary version of the sequence of accounts, with the main macro variables and
sector balances with sector detail for households, governments and the external account
is published quarterly with about a 55 day lag after the reference quarter. In addition, a
flash estimate of GDP is published about 40 days after the reference quarter.
    Detailed expenditures of households by purpose (COICOP based) and government
expenditure by function (COFOG) are also available as well as expenditure by asset type.

2.d    The Input Output and Supply/Use Tables

    For the United Kingdom the Supply and Use tables and the Input Output tables are
square with the same dimensionality. The Supply/Use tables balance the production
account for 123 industries based on the NACE rev 1 classification system (European
industry classification system equivalent to about ISIC level 2 industries) and 123
products based on the CPA the European product classification system. The Symmetrical
Input Output Tables are published on a product by product basis for the 123 products.
This dimensionality and format (product by product Input Output tables) is based on the
ESA95 recommendation of using NACE at the 2 digit level and CPA at the 3 digit level.
Most of the published Supply/Use and Input Output Tables for European countries have
roughly the same dimensionality slightly over 100 industries and commodities –
following the ESA95 recommendation.



                                             19
    The supply and use tables are used to balance the production account. They are
produced at the time of the first full annual, about 18 months after the reference year.
This means that there are no statistical discrepancies in the sequence of accounts for all of
the years for which Supply/Use and Input Output are available. The data for the supply
and Use tables are based on the Annual Business Enquiry which builds estimates for all
industries while using a sub sample of each industry to collect data on inputs. The data
collected is summary (not full commodity detail therefore double deflation technique is
not used to calculate deflated value added by industry), but the summary detail is
available for all industries.

2.e    Other Features of the UK SNA

    The full sequence of accounts is published annually in a publication called “The Blue
Book” covering about 10 years of data (available on the internet and in a printed version).
The fully integrated database exists back to 1994 but many important variables such as
constant price GDP are available for longer time series.
    In the Blue Book, the sequence of accounts is published for sub sector detail as well
for the financial corporate sector and for the government sector. Transparency is a key
factor in the UK approach to balancing and publishing of data. For the Supply/Use tables
a series of Coherence Adjustments are published to show how the equality of supply and
demand was achieved. When the sequence of accounts is published, these adjustments
are split out by sector and published as statistical adjustments necessary to offset the
balancing adjustments of the production account. This process means that no statistical
discrepancies exist up to the balancing item of Net Lending/Borrowing in the sequence of
accounts – but statistical discrepancies still exist between Net Lending/Borrowing and
Net financial requirements on the financial account. The whole balancing approach for
the UK accounts is described in detail in the Concepts, Sources and Methods also
published on the NSO web site.
    As part of the publication of the Supply and Use tables, employment and capital
stocks consistent with the UK accounts are also published on a by industry basis used for
productivity analysis.

3.     Canada

    The Canadian System of National Accounts (CSNA) is another example of a highly
integrated system of accounts based on the SNA93 standard. The Canadian approach has
a quarterly emphasis – the sequence of accounts being published on a quarterly basis.
The Supply/Use and Input Output tables have an important regional dimension which is
motivated in part by administrative use of the Supply Use system to allocate a value
added tax system which is administered at the Canada level but harmonized with regional
indirect taxes in specific regions. This administrative use means that the Supply Use
tables are produced on a regional basis to arrive at National Supply Use tables. This
imposes a cost in the form of a loss of timeliness and increased cost of data collection as
surveys are designed to produce consistent quality of value added across all regions of
Canada. The Canadian System is also based on a highly centralized statistical system.
The economics data system, surveys and national accounts were designed based on the



                                             20
integrated framework of the 1968 “System of Accounts”. The economic survey and
administrative data collection systems have been designed and modified over the years to
feed the CSNA. The CSNA is used as a quality check tool on the data collection system.
The data sources are constantly monitored and changes are applied in concert with the
CSNA.

3.a    The Production and Asset Boundaries

    These boundaries are closely aligned with SNA93 for Canada. The production
boundary includes estimates of financial services for which there is no explicit charge
and the value of service of owner occupied housing. No imputation is made for the labor
portion of own account fixed investment by households (renovation and self home
construction). Only the material portion is capitalized at present. No explicit estimates are
made for illegal activity other than tobacco smuggling. Work on valuation of illegal
activities is currently under review. In employing the production boundary for
households producing goods for own use – by convention, only own-account construction
of housing and production of agricultural goods is included. Anything else is deemed to
be insignificant.
    The asset boundary is also largely SNA93 compliant except for treatment of valuables
as fixed assets. No thresholds are applied in the capitalization of fixed assets. Anything
used in the production process over one year is included.

3.b    Valuation Methods

    The valuation methods in the CSNA are slightly different from those suggested in
SNA93. The sequence of accounts transactions are measured at market prices including
GDP but the balance sheets are presently a mixture of market and book value. The
balance sheets will be converted to full market value by the end of 2004. The input
output and supply and use tables use a modified basic price valuation for balancing
purposes which is a purchase price valuation by industry and product. When value added
by industry is published, it is converted to the basic price concept recommended in
SNA93.

3.c    The CSNA Sequence of Accounts

  The CSNA publishes a full sequence of accounts quarterly, which is a slightly
modified version of the international standard. The accounts of the CSNA are as follows:
          • The gross domestic product account, which records the value of
              production (GDP), the income from production and the final expenditures
              on goods and services produced. This is a combination of the Production
              account and Production of Income accounts of SNA93. These accounts
              are also published monthly for value added by Industry but only in the
              form of chain linked value added, adjusted for inflation. No sector detail
              is available for the GDP account except for a “business”, “non-business”
              split used in the production of labor and multifactor productivity
              estimates. Volume and Price measures are published based on the Final



                                             21
                Expenditure approach of GDP using quarterly Chain-linked Fisher index
                formula method
            • The Income & Outlay Accounts, which show primary and secondary
                income transactions, final consumption expenditures and consumption of
                fixed capital. Net saving is the balancing item on this account. The
                CSNA income account joins the primary and secondary distribution of
                income accounts of SNA93 into one. These accounts are produced for
                four major sectors, Households (including non-profit institutions serving
                households), corporations, governments and the external sector.
            • The capital accounts, which record the net accumulation of non-financial
                assets and the financing by way of saving and capital transfers. Net
                lending/borrowing is the balancing item of this account. It is produced for
                the five sectors. In addition to the sectors outlined above, the corporate
                sector is split into financial and non-financial corporations.
            • The financial accounts, which show the net acquisition of financial assets
                and net incurrence of financial liabilities. The balancing item is net
                financial position which is equivalent to net lending/borrowing measured
                in the capital accounts. This account is also recorded for the five sectors
                of the economy. In addition financial accounts are published for 35
                detailed sub sectors.
            • The balance sheets, which record the stock of assets (financial and non-
                financial) and liabilities at a point in time and Net worth, is the balancing
                item. This account is recorded for the five major sectors on a quarterly.
                In addition financial accounts are published for 35 detailed sub sectors but
                only on an annual basis.
    This sequence of accounts (missing only the Other Changes in Volume of Assets
Accounts) is published up to the financial accounts with the GDP release with about a 60
day lag on the reference quarter. The balance sheets are published quarterly with a 90
day lag. While the GDP account is fully reconciled with the Supply/Use and Input Output
system, the Canadian approach to balancing the sequence of accounts is different from
that of other countries. As many as 12 preliminary quarters could be available before a
supply/use balance is available. None of the three measures of GDP is deemed to be the
most accurate in the preliminary system. The final expenditure approach and the income
approach are calculated independently (at market prices) and an average is published
showing a statistical discrepancy of equal and opposite sign on each account. The final
expenditure approach is then deflated and the monthly GDP deflated value added by
industry at basic prices is adjusted to use the more complete information of the quarterly
final expenditure approach but not entirely “reconciled”. The discrepancies of the income
and expenditure approach are not allocated among sectors meaning that the Net
Lending/Borrowing of the economy across domestic sectors and the external account
does not sum to zero. A separate discrepancy is also shown between the net
Lending/Borrowing balances for the Income & Outlay accounts and the Financial
Accounts. The Canadian approach is to correct data gaps and discrepancies which are
specifically identifiable but to leave the basic data unadjusted to the extent that the
discrepancies are not resolvable. Even after the GDP accounts have been reconciled to
the Supply/Use tables a small discrepancy remains as the GDP account published survey


                                             22
based inventory change and operating surplus which are derived residually in the
Supply/Use system. The system then is reconciled and released on a fully consistent basis
with smaller statistical discrepancies than in the preliminary years..
    There is one major inconsistency in the Canadian sequence of accounts. The
consumption of fixed capital recorded for corporations in the sequence of accounts is
taken directly from business accounting records, measured based on a mixture of
historical cost and book value. The capital stocks recorded on the balance sheet for the
corporate sector are derived from a Perpetual Inventory Model where the stocks are
valued at current replacement cost and the consumption of fixed capital inherent in the
net stock value is a current value measure. In addition, a third capital stock measure is
calculated for the purposes of measuring multi-factor productivity. This is an are where
the Canadian system needs further work to clean up the inconsistency.

3.d    Supply/Use and Input Output Tables

     As mentioned earlier, the Supply/Use tables are the statistical tool used to balance the
production account but are also an important administrative tool used to allocate Value-
added tax collections between the federal and provincial governments. This determines
the level of detail both in terms of geography and commodity dimensions. The
Supply/Use tables for Canada are rectangular and balanced for 300 industries using the
NAICS (North American Industrial Classification System) and 726 commodities using a
product classification system unique to the Canadian Input Output tables. Symmetrical
Input Output tables (coefficients) are published on an industry by industry basis for the
300 industries form the Supply/Use tables. The industry by industry configuration was
chosen for the same reason as for the Australian accounts such that no simplifying
assumptions are made in going from the industry technology known from collecting data
at the establishment level as would be the case for separating secondary activities from
industries to arrive at commodity by commodity tables.
    This supply/use balancing is compiled annually for 13 regions of Canada (provinces
and territories) and forms the benchmark for GDP for the sequence of national accounts
mentioned above. (The sequence of accounts is also published by province for the GDP,
household and government sectors up to net lending/borrowing.) This process, from data
collection to the production of the tables, takes about 3 years for the preliminary version
and 4 years for the final version. The additional detail of the Canadian system imposes
an additional year in the finalizing of the sequence of the accounts relative to most other
countries. Work is being done to upgrade the timeliness of this part of the system and
experimental work is also being done to produce preliminary versions of Supply/Use
similar to those produced in Australia and the UK.

3.e    Other Features of the CSNA

    Detailed breakdowns of household expenditure (COICOP) and capital expenditure
are published as part of the sequence of accounts. No breakdown of government
expenditure by function consistent with the CSNA is available but will be when Statistics
Canada completes the production of Government financial statistics based on the




                                             23
GFS2001 manual published by the International Monetary Fund within the next few
years.
    As part of the CSNA, quarterly labor productivity data are published for the
“business” sector (corporations plus unincorporated business) about 10 days after the
quarterly GDP release. Multifactor Productivity measures are also published annually for
the business sector as are the labor and capital services data used to calculate them
(consistent with the CSNA). Productivity analysis is only published for the business
sector because the output of the non-business sector is still only measured by deflating
inputs used for non-business GDP, assuming no change in productivity.
    Annual data on Purchasing Power Parities are also published as part of the CSNA
based on the OECD benchmarks available every three years (volume indexes for GDP
and prices comparisons at the GDP level and for final expenditure components). A more
detailed bilateral PPP database is done for the Canada-United States comparison as
demanded by the key users of the CSNA.

D.     Summary and Conclusions
    The three countries compared in this paper, Australia, Canada and the United
Kingdom, all produce a highly integrated set of accounts which greatly facilitates
consistent analysis of the economy by their domestic users and across international
comparisons. Three important elements of commonality is that all three countries’
systems are based on highly centralized statistical systems, all have a long track record of
producing National Accounts estimates and, all three countries include the Balance of
Payments Statistics as part of the SNA accounting system.
    In each case, the balancing of the sequence of accounts is achieved using the
supply/use framework as suggested in SNA93. For Australia and United Kingdom this is
a relatively new feature of the system, brought in when implementing SNA93. For
Canada, the Supply/Use framework has been used as the official GDP benchmark of the
System of Accounts since 1986, and supply use was published annually back to 1961.
Where the countries differ the most is how the identities are used to balance the system.
In both the UK and Australia, the Supply and Use identities are used to eliminate all
discrepancies up to and including the measure of Net Lending/borrowing in the sequence
of accounts. This is done by allocating all final demand and factor incomes in the supply
use tables and using the same estimates in other parts of the system. In Canada, the
supply/use framework is based on data built from establishment based data sources, and
the institutional sector data is built from institutional unit data. The supply/use
determines the level of GDP, but the variables corporate surplus and inventory change are
not fully reconciled with the data from the institutional unit based sources (this largely
relates to enterprise versus establishment based corporate sector data). A statistical
discrepancy is shown between final expenditure based GDP and factor income based
GDP splitting the difference between the two measures. All countries record statistical
discrepancies between the net lending/borrowing and financial requirements. The
advantage of leaving statistical discrepancies is to keep track of issues in the statistical
feeder system and to keep track of quality changes from preliminary to fully
benchmarked estimates. This way the System of accounts can be used to monitor the
quality of the statistical data used to feed it.


                                            24
    While each country largely follows SNA93, the application does differ across the
three countries. The sequence of accounts is presented quite differently in each case –
while the major analytic aggregates such as GDP, savings, investment, consumption, net
lending/borrowing and wealth are all presented. The United Kingdom presentation of the
flow of accounts is the most akin to the SNA93 suggested presentation. Australia has a
modified flow of accounts, but one consistent presentation. In Canada the parts of the
sequence are all published as separate products, making it more difficult for the user to
identify the integrated nature of the various products. This will be a key focus for
Canada in the upcoming years in presenting the data to users in a more integrated way.
    The slight differences in application of production boundary (and in likely
methodology for some aspects of the accounting system) and valuation reflect what is
significant for that particular economy. Some of the differences are based on the history
of the accounts prior to the SNA93 standard and what the users were accustomed to as
well as the data sources available. To what extent these differences affect international
comparability is difficult to assess. Even areas where the apparent application of the
standard is the same, methodologies or classifications of similar entities can differ. This
is where international coordination plays a key role in helping to add consistency to the
various systems of accounts. The adherence to ESA95 across the European Union adds
discipline to the application of the standard in that ESA95 attempts to put clarity to all of
the “borderline” issues related to compiling a set of accounts.
    The following tables summarize the key features of the three country comparison.

         Table 5: Sequence of accounts comparison

                         Canada                   Australia                   UK
Supply & Use             300 Industry x 725       109 Ix1100C                 123x123 Square
Tables                   Commodity                Annual t-3                  Industry S/U tables
                         Annual t-3               100 Ix 150C                 Preliminary and
                                                  Preliminary t-2 ,t-1        Final t-2, t-1

Input/Output             300 I x 725 C            109x109 Square              123x123 Square
Tables                   Rectangular              Industry x Industry         Industry x industry
                         Commodity                Annual t-2                  Annual t-2
                         Annual t-3

GDP x sector             none                     5 Sectors3                  5 Sectors4
                                                  Annual t-1                  Annual t-1




3
  The sectors are households and non-profit institutions, financial corporations, non-financial corporations,
governments and rest-of world
4
  See footnote 3.




                                                     25
                         Canada                  Australia                  UK



Primary &                4 Sectors5              5 Sectors6                 5 Sectors7
Secondary
Distribution of          One joint               One joint distribution Primary &
Income                   distribution of         of income account      secondary income
                         income account                                 distribution
                                                 Annual and Partial     accounts
                         Quarterly( 60 day       Quarterly (60 day
                         lag)                    lag)                   Annual & Partial
                                                                        Quarterly
Financial                35 Sectors              5 Sectors              5 Sectors
Accounts                 Quarterly (60 day       Annual (90 day lag) Annual & Partial
                         lag)                                           Quarterly
Revaluation &            Blank                   Blank                  Blank
OVCA
Balance Sheets           35 Sectors              5 Sectors           5 Sectors
                         Annual ( 90 day         Annual (90 day lag) Annual & Partial
                         lag)                                        Quarterly
                         5 Sectors
                         Quarterly (90 day
                         lag)


         Table 6: Boundaries and valuation comparisons

                  Canada                     Australia                  United Kingdom

Production        FISIM                      FISIM                      FISIM
Boundary          Some Illegal               No Illegal                 No Illegal
                  Exhaustiveness                                        Exhaustiveness

Asset             No Valuables               No Valuables               Valuables
Boundary          Software and E&D           Software and E&D           Software and E&D
                                                                        Small tools threshold

5
  The sectors are households and non-profit institutions, corporations, governments and rest-of-world.
6
  The sectors are the same as for GDP by sector in footnote 3 above.
7
  The sectors are the same as for GDP by sector in footnote 4 above.




                                                    26
Valuation      GDP @basic &           GDP @basic &           GDP @basic &
Methods        market price           market price           market price

               IO @purchaser price IO @purchaser price IO @purchaser price

                 Assets @mixed         Assets @market        Assets @market
                market//book value    value                  value
Classifications NAICS                 ANZIC                  NACE
                IO products           IO products            CPA




    In all cases the users are well served by a system of national accounts that is
consistent and virtually complete. The statistical systems take full advantage of using the
SNA as a tool for validating and augmenting the survey and administrative data systems.
This helps keep the data relevant and maintains the quality of the system.
    The System of accounts was designed to facilitate the analysis of the macro economic
process from the creation of income via production through to changes in wealth and to
provide detailed information on the evolution of the economy in terms of the structure of
production and spending and the uses of primary factors of production. The SNA93 has
achieved the buy-in of the international community as the tool for building the statistical
database.




                                            27
References
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2000), Australian National Accounts: Concepts, Sources
and Methods
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2003), Measuring Australia’s Economy, Edition 7
Eurostat (1995), A System of European Accounts, (Luxembourg, Eurostat)
National Statistics Office (2003), United Kingdom National Accounts, The Blue Book
2003, London TSO
National Statistics Office (2003), United Kingdom National Accounts, Concepts, Sources
and Methods, London TSO
United Nations (1968), A System of National Accounts, Studies in Methods, Series F,
N0.2 Rev. 3, United Nations, New York
United Nations, Eurostat, International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, and, The World Bank (1993), System of National
Accounts 1993, Series F, No. 2, Rev. 4, (New York, United Nations)




                                          28
