                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    AN INTEGRATED MODEL OF DOWNTOWN PARKING
                             AND TRAFFIC CONGESTION

                                              Richard Arnott
                                                 Eren Inci

                                          Working Paper 11118
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11118


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




This paper draws on Ch. 2 of Alleviating Urban Traffic Congestion (Arnott, Rave, and Schoeb, forthcoming),
entitled "Some Downtown Parking Arithmetic". Authors would like to thank seminar participants at CESifo,
Boston College, West Virginia University, University of Lugano, and the University of Calgary, session
participants at the 2005 ASSA Meetings, especially the discussant Stef Proost, as well as Ronnie Schoeb,
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Richard Arnott and Eren Inci. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
An Integrated Model of Downtown Parking and Traffic Congestion
Richard Arnott and Eren Inci
NBER Working Paper No. 11118
February 2005
JEL No. R4

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper presents a downtown parking model that integrates traffic congestion and saturated on-

street parking. We assume that the stock of cars cruising for parking adds to traffic congestion. Two

major results come out from the model, one of which is robust. The robust one is that, whether or

not the amount of on-street parking is optimal, it is efficient to raise the on-street parking fee to the

point where cruising for parking is eliminated without parking becoming unsaturated. The other is

that, if the parking fee is fixed at a sub-optimal level, it is second-best optimal to increase the amount

of curbside allocated to parking until cruising for parking is eliminated without parking becoming

unsaturated.

Richard Arnott
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
and NBER
arnottr@bc.edu

Eren Inci
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
inci@bc.edu
1     Introduction

Some newspaper articles have asserted that during business hours half the cars on downtown
streets in large cities are cruising for parking. If the claim is true, substantially reducing
cruising for parking in downtown areas could result in huge travel savings. In fact, tra¢ c
experts simply do not know what proportion of cars on downtown city streets are cruising
for parking. Shoup (2005) presents a table summarizing the results of thirteen studies on
cruising for parking. Across the studies, the average share of tra¢ c cruising for parking
was 30% and the average cruising time 7.8 minutes. While the methods employed and the
generality of the results are open to question1 , it is fair to say that current expert opinion is
that cruising for parking adds substantially to the severity of downtown tra¢ c congestion.
It is therefore remarkable that the phenomenon has not been more widely studied by urban
transportation researchers.

This paper is the …rst to look at cruising for parking from an economic perspective. It
provides a thorough analysis of just about the simplest possible model that can be employed
to analyze the phenomenon. The central features of the model are that the demand for
downtown parking is sensitive to both the money and time costs of a downtown trip, parking
is available only on-street and may be saturated (as soon as a parking space is vacated, it
is taken by a car that is cruising for parking), and travel speed depends on the density of
cars cruising for parking and the amount of on-street parking, as well as the density of cars
in transit. It is assumed that the level of demand is su¢ ciently high that providing parking
free results in saturated parking and cruising for parking. Cruising for parking raises the
full price of a downtown trip, and the level of cruising for parking adjusts to clear “the
market”for parking. The principal simplifying assumptions are that downtown is spatially
homogeneous, downtown tra¢ c is in a steady state, drivers are identical, and all travel is
by car. Subsequent papers will enrich the model to allow for driver heterogeneity, mass
transit, and o¤-street parking, which will permit signi…cantly richer policy analysis. The
primary goal of this paper is to lay the groundwork by developing terminology, concepts,
and an analytical framework.

Despite its simplicity, the model generates some interesting results. The …rst is that cruising
for parking is pure deadweight loss. Consider an initial situation in which on-street parking
is provided free and cruising for parking occurs. The equilibrium full price of a trip is
determined by parking availability relative to the level of demand. Imposing a parking fee
   1
     Almost all were one-o¤ studies of cruising for parking in a localized area of a major city. The areas
were probably chosen because cruising for parking was perceived to be a problem there. Furthermore, the
methods employed have varied across studies. In most studies, randomly-selected cars are followed by car
or bicycle, though in a couple of recent studies the information is extracted from aerial video photography.


                                                     2
at a level such that parking remains saturated does not alter the equilibrium full price of
a trip and therefore has no e¤ect on consumer surplus, but generates parking fee revenue.
Thus, the parking fee raises revenue with no burden at all. The second is that the parking fee
should be raised to the point where cruising for parking is eliminated but parking remains
saturated. The third is that, when the level of the parking fee is …xed, the amount of
curbside allocated to parking should be increased to the point where cruising for parking is
eliminated but parking remains saturated.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the literature on the
economics of parking. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 analyzes the model in detail,
and section 5 calibrates it to investigate the e¤ects of the limited range of policies the model
permits. Section 6 discusses some possible extensions, while still retaining the assumptions
that all travel is by car and all parking is on street. Section 7 concludes the paper.



2    Literature Review

The literature on the economics of parking is small. Until a decade ago, the economics
literature looked at parking almost exclusively (but see Douglas (1975)) as a …xed fee added
on at the end of an auto trip. By increasing the full price of an auto trip, parking fees
a¤ect travel demand and modal choice. One early example is Gillen and Westin (1978) that
incorporated parking charges into an empirical model of modal choice in Toronto. Calthrop,
Proost, and van Dender (2000) is a more recent study that examined the second-best level
of the parking fee when congestion tolls cannot be imposed on city streets.

Some other papers have looked at other aspects of parking and parking policy. Arnott,
dePalma, and Lindsey (1992) and Anderson and dePalma (2004) examined the spatial
pattern of parking over time, and how this is a¤ected by various parking policies, when
all drivers have the same desired arrival time at a common destination. Calthrop (2001a)
presented a spatially homogeneous model characterizing the steady-state equilibrium of on-
and o¤-street parking, in which the time searching for on-street parking balances the higher
fee associated with o¤-street parking. Calthrop (2001b) analyzed the optimal enforcement
levels and parking meter fees for on-street parking. Arnott and Rowse (1999) focused on
optimal on-street parking search strategy on an isotropic circular road with unsaturated
parking, taking into account walking time. And Glazer and Niskanen (1992) considered a
sequence of partial models to illustrate possible perverse results from the naïve application
of parking policy. No papers in the literature, however, considers the congestion interaction
on city streets between cars in transit and cars cruising for parking, which is the principal


                                               3
focus of this paper and its sequels.



3       The Model

We start with a thumbnail sketch of the model, and follow it with a formal description.


3.1     Thumbnail description

The model describes a city’s downtown area as a spatially symmetric Manhattan network
of identical, congested city streets. Tra¢ c conditions remain unchanged over the period of
the study. All travel is by car and all parking is on street. All trips are the same, and entail
driving a …xed distance over downtown streets directly to a downtown destination, parking
there immediately if a vacant parking spot is available and otherwise cruising round the
destination block until a spot opens up, visiting the destination for a …xed period of time,
and then exiting the system. The demand for trips is inversely related to the full trip price,
which includes time and money costs.

Parking in the downtown area may be completely saturated. Travel speed on the roads
depends on the street width and the proportion of curbside allocated to parking, as well as
on the density of the two types of tra¢ c — cars in transit and cars cruising for parking.

The model has its central characteristics that, under saturated parking conditions, the stock
of cars cruising for parking adjusts to clear the market for parking, and that cars cruising for
parking slow down tra¢ c, and will be employed to explore how equilibrium tra¢ c conditions
are a¤ected by exogenous parameters as well as policy, which includes parking pricing and
the allocation of curbside to parking.


3.2     Formal description

Spatial symmetry is assumed to simplify the analysis. Blocks are square with sides of length
b, streets are of width W , and Pmax is the maximum possible number of on-street parking
spaces per unit area. Throughout the paper, we shall ignore the complications that arise
from the indivisibility of lanes of tra¢ c2 . Figure 1 portrays the geometry of the Manhattan
street network.
    2
    For concreteness, one may imagine that all streets are one way. This reduces the practical importance
of the indivisibility problem but does not a¤ect the analysis.




                                                   4
                             b    : length and width of a block
                            W     : road width
                            !     : direction of tra¢ c ‡ow (one-way streets)

                                    Figure 1: Manhattan geometry


Individuals are identical and risk neutral, basing their decisions on expected values. All
travel is by car. Each trip originates from outside the downtown area and entails travel
for a distance m through the downtown area to a destination. Destinations are uniformly
distributed over the downtown area, and parking may be saturated. An individual drives
directly to the destination3 , parks there immediately if a parking spot is available and
otherwise circles the block cruising for parking until he …nds a vacant parking spot4 , stays
at the destination for a period of time l and then exits the downtown area. The time required
to walk from the parking location to the destination is ignored. These assumptions permit a
simple representation of tra¢ c at the aggregate level in a saturated steady-state equilibrium.

Let T be the pool or stock of individuals per unit area in transit to their destinations, C be
the pool of individuals per unit area cruising for parking, and P be the stock of on-street
   3
     Arnott and Rowse (1999) consider a model in which the city is located on the outside of a circle and in
which parking is unsaturated. The individual decides, on the basis of the mean density of vacant parking
spaces, how far from his destination to start cruising for parking, then takes the …rst vacant parking space,
and then walks from there to his destination. With this parking strategy, there is no scope for learning.
        In the model of this paper, taken literally, a driver could adopt a more sophisticated strategy than
just circling the block since he knows that no parking spot can be occupied for a period greater than l. With
a simple adaptation of the model, however – assuming that visit lengths are Poisson distributed with mean
l – circling the block is the optimal strategy. Since this adaptation does not alter the model’s steady-state
properties, the reader may choose this alternative speci…cation and interpretation of the model. Later, to
simplify analysis of the stability properties of the model, we assume that not only l but also m are Poisson
distributed.
   4
     For the analysis, it does not matter whether, as they are vacated, parking spots are allocated to cruisers
for parking on a FIFO or on a random basis, but it is natural to assume random allocation, in which case
from the perspective of a cruiser for parking obtaining a parking spot is generated by a Poisson process with
arrival rate P=(Cl).


                                                      5
parking spaces per unit area, which equals the pool of individuals parked per unit area when
parking is saturated.

The rate of entry into the network per unit time-area, or equivalently the trip demand per
unit time-area is D. Trip demand depends on the full price of a trip, which equals the cost
of in-transit travel time plus the cost of time spent cruising for parking plus the expenditure
for on-street parking. Let t denote the in-transit travel time per unit distance, which the
individual treats as exogenous but is determined by how the congested roads are, as part
of the overall equilibrium.

Consider each of the pools in turn. The rate of change of the size of the in-transit pool
equals the entry rate, D, minus the exit rate, E. Thus,

                                       T_ (u) = D(u)     E(u) ;                                       (1)

where u denotes time. With saturated parking the rate of change of the size of the cruising-
for-parking pool equals the entry rate into cruising-for-parking pool, which equals the exit
rate from the in-transit pool, minus the exit rate from the cruising-for-parking pool, Z.

                                       _
                                       C(u) = E(u)       Z(u) :                                       (2)

In steady state5 , the exit rate from the in-transit pool equals the pool size divided by an
individual’s time in the pool, so that (1) becomes

                                                    T
                                              D=          ;                                           (3)
                                                    mt

and with saturated parking the exit rate from the cruising-for-parking pool equals the exit
rate from parking so that (2) becomes

                                              T    P
                                                 =         :                                          (4)
                                              mt   l

These steady-state relationships with saturated parking are displayed in Figure 2.

We refer to (3) as the in-transit pool steady-state condition and to (4) as the cruising-for-
parking pool steady-state condition.
   5
    Later, when we investigate stability, we modify the model slightly so that m is Poisson distributed in
the population, in which case T =(mt) is the exit rate from the in-transit pool away from the steady-state
equilibrium as well as at the equilibrium.




                                                    6
                        T      Stock of cars in transit (per unit area)
                        C      Stock of cars cruising for parking
                        P      (On-street) parking spaces = stock of cars parked
                        D      Demand in‡ow
                         T
                         mt    Exit rate from in-transit pool
                               = entry rate into cruising-for-parking pool
                         P
                         l     Exit rate from cruising-for-parking pool
                               = entry rate into parking pool
                               = exit rate from parking pool

                 Figure 2: Steady-state stocks and ‡ows with saturated parking


The steady-state full trip price, F , is

                                                           Cl
                                         F = (mt +            ) + fl   ;                                     (5)
                                                           P

where     is the value of time and f the on-street parking fee per unit time; the full trip price
is the sum of the in-transit travel time cost, the expected cruising-for-parking time cost,
and the money cost of on-street parking at the destination.

Two more equations are needed to complete the characterization of a saturated steady-state
equilibrium. The …rst is the steady-state ‡ow demand function, which is sensitive to the
full price and is smooth:

                       D = D(F );          D(0) = 1;         D(1) = 0;        D0 < 0 :                       (6)

The second equation describes the smooth6 congestion technology7 :

                                            t = t(T; C; W; P ) ;                                             (7)

where tT > 0; tC > 0; tW < 0; tP > 0 , t(0; 0; W; P ) > 0,                  lim      t(T; C; W; P ) = 1, and t
                                                                           P !Pmax
   6
     We should keep in mind, however, that there may be a jam density (as in the Greenshield’s relation
(1935)) and that the function t may not be well de…ned if the density exceeds this level.
   7
     In the numerical examples, we shall particularize this function, assuming, as is standard, that travel
time is a convex function of the volume-capacity ratio: t^ = t^( V! ) where t^0 > 0; t^00 > 0 ; V = V (T; C) with
VT > 0 and VC > 0 is the e¤ ective volume or density of tra¢ c, and !(W; P ) is the e¤ ective capacity, with
! W > 0 and ! P < 0.



                                                       7
is convex in T , C, and P .



4    Analysis of Saturated Steady-state Equilibrium

Substituting (5), (6) and (7) into (3) and (4) gives the following two equations in two
unknowns, T and C:

                                            l                P
                               D( ((T + C)    ) + f l) =                                     (8)
                                            P                l
                                            T                P
                                                       =          :                          (9)
                                      mt(T; C; W; P )        l

De…nition 1 A saturated, steady-state equilibrium is a pair (T; C) with T > 0; C              0,
that solve (8) and (9) .




                       D0     : Even with no cruising for parking, demand
                                is insu¢ cient to keep parking saturated.
                       D1     : Congested equilibrium occurs at E1 .
                       D2     : Hypercongested equilibrium occurs at E2 .
                       D3     : With any (T; C) that clears the market,
                                the network is too congested to
                                generate tra¢ c ‡ow P=l.

Figure 3: Saturated, steady-state equilibrium in T-C space for di¤erent levels of demand


Figure 3 plots these two loci in the positive orthant of T       C space. We refer to (8) as the
demand locus, (9) as the cruising-for-parking-pool locus, and P=l as steady-state throughput

                                                8
or ‡ow. It is evident that (8) has a slope of                1. Since the partial derivatives of t with
respect to T and C are continuous, (9) is continuous. Its slope is

                                                         t
                                          @C             T        tT
                                                     =                 :                               (10)
                                          @T   (9)           tC


4.1    Uniqueness

(A.1) A car cruising for parking contributes more to congestion than a car in transit
      (tC > tT )8 .


Lemma 1 (Uniqueness) Assume (A.1) holds. Then, if equilibrium exists it is unique.


Proof. In the positive orthant, the slope of the cruising-for-parking pool locus is greater
than that of the demand locus. If, therefore, the two loci intersect in the positive orthant,
they do so only once there.


4.2    Existence

We now consider the conditions for the existence of a saturated, steady-state equilibrium.
Consider (9) with C = 0. The equation is solved for those densities of in-transit tra¢ c
corresponding to tra¢ c ‡ow levels of P=l. One circumstance under which a saturated equi-
                                                                                T
librium does not exist occurs when the road’s ‡ow capacity — de…ned as max mt(T;0;W;P ) —
                                                                                        T
falls short of P=l. In this case, if an equilibrium exists it entails parking being unsaturated9 .
In terms of Figure 3, this low ‡ow capacity situation occurs when the cruising-for-parking
pool locus disappears. Another occurs when, even with no cars on the road, the quantity of
trips demanded falls short of P=l. In terms of Figure 3, this low demand situation occurs
when the demand locus lies everywhere to the left of cruising-for-parking locus. Yet another
occurs when demand is so high that all (T; C) on the demand locus would generate so much
congestion that a steady-state throughput of P=l cannot be achieved. We refer to this as
the high demand situation.
   8
     Rouwendal, Rietveld and Verhoef (1999) analyzes the congestion interaction between slow- and fast-
moving cars on a single-lane road. As one would expect, one slow-moving car when all other cars are moving
fast adds considerably to congestion. But also, one fast-moving car when all other cars are moving slowly
adds considerably to congestion. The situation here is analogous. One car cruising for parking when all
other cars are in transit creates considerable congestion, but so too does one car in transit when all other
cars are cruising for parking. Thus, the congestion technology is in fact more complicated than is assumed.
   9
     We shall investigate this when we discuss stability.




                                                         9
(A.2) Road ‡ow capacity is higher than the steady-state throughput
                  T              P
        (max mt(T;0;W;P ) >      l ).
          T

              T             P
(A.3)    mt(T;0;W;P )   =   l   has two roots10 , T 0 and T 00 , T 0 < T 00 .

(A.4) T 0      (D   1( P )      f l)) lP   T 00 .
                       l



Theorem 1 (Existence) I¤ (A.2), (A.3) and (A.4) holds, a saturated steady-state equi-
librium exists.

                                                                           T
Proof. From (A.2) and (A.3) and the continuity of                  mt(T;C;W;P ) in T and C, the cruising-
for-parking pool locus is in the positive orthant for T            2 [T 0 ; T 00 ]. From (A.4), the continuous
demand locus intersects the C = 0 line below the cruising-for-parking locus and the T = 0
line above it.


Corollary 1 If (A.1)-(A.4) hold, then there exists a unique saturated steady-state equilib-
rium.


4.3     Comparative statics

The comparative static properties of the saturated steady-state equilibrium are given in
Table 1. The comparative static properties with respect to , m, W , and parameters which
shift either the demand function or the congestion function but not both can be simply
derived from Figure 3 since each of these parameter changes a¤ects only one of the loci.
The only remaining parameters, which a¤ect both of the loci, are P and l.

Let us …rst examine the e¤ect of a small increase in demand — an upward shift in the demand
locus. If equilibrium occurs on an upward-sloping portion of the cruising-for-parking-pool
locus, the increase in demand causes an increase in both C and T ; if equilibrium occurs on
a downward-sloping portion of the locus, the increase in demand causes an increase in T
and C + T , but a decrease in C. From (10), it follows that the cruising-for-parking-pool
locus is upward sloping if the elasticity of travel time with respect to T is less than one, and
downward sloping if this elasticity is greater than one. With some abuse of terminology11 ,
  10
    This assumption is implied by (A.2) and the convexity of t in T and C.
  11
    Simple tra¢ c ‡ow models are constructed using two equations. The …rst relates velocity to density:
v = (V ). The second is the fundamental identity of tra¢ c ‡ow, that ‡ow equals velocity times density,
                                                        1
q = V v. Combining these two equations gives q =          (v)v, the graph of which is referred to as the ‡ow-
velocity curve. One particularly simple speci…cation — Greenshield’s Relation (1935) — is that velocity is
a negative, linear function of density, with v being free-‡ow velocity and Vj being jam density; with this


                                                         10
                                                                           1    2
                                            W     P         m   l    f
                            T                     ?5        +   ?5        +
                            Tl
                            P                     ?5        +   ?5        +
                            C          ?3   +     ?5            ?5   ?3   ?4   +
                            Cl
                            P          ?3   +     ?5            ?5   ?3   ?4   +
                            T +C            0     ?5        0   ?5        +    0
                            (T +C)l
                               P            0               0   ?5        +    0

             Notes:
             1. An increase in corresponds to an increase in demand
             at all levels of the full trip price.
             2. An increase in corresponds to a decrease in t for every (T; C; W; P ).
             3. Has sign of 1 E t:T .
             4. Has sign opposite to that for corresponding derivative with respect to .
             5. Sign depends on, inter alia, the demand elasticity.

                       Table 1: Comparative static properties of the model


we say that travel is congested in the former situation and hypercongested in the latter.
Consider congested travel. Increase demand, holding …xed the stock of cars cruising for
parking. From (8), the full price of travel must increase to restore equilibrium. With C
and f …xed, this requires that T increase. Since travel is congested, an increase in T results
in a less-than-proportional increase in t. To continue to satisfy (9), C must increase. The
other comparative static results, except those for P and l, can be obtained by analogous
argument.

An increase in l causes the cruising-for-parking-pool locus to shift up; the increase in l
causes the throughput to fall, which requires that C increase for any level of T . The e¤ect
of the increase in l on the demand locus is ambiguous. The fall in throughput requires
that the quantity of trips demanded fall, but the increase in l causes the quantity of trips
demanded to fall directly. Which e¤ect dominates depends on the demand elasticity; if, as
is realistic, the demand elasticity is less than one, C + T must rise to restore equilibrium,
which entails an upward shift in the demand locus. An increase in P causes the cruising-for-
parking pool locus to shift down; for a given level of T; with increased road space devoted
to parking, the increase in throughput requires that C fall. The e¤ect of the increase in P
on the demand locus is ambiguous. The increase in throughout requires that the quantity
speci…cation, the ‡ow-velocity curve is a parabola. If the equilibrium occurs on a negatively-sloped portion
of the ‡ow-velocity curve, so that an increase in ‡ow corresponds to a decrease in speed, travel is said to
be congested, while if the equilibrium occurs on a positively-sloped portion of the curve, so that an increase
in ‡ow corresponds to an increase in speed, travel is said to be hypercongested (this terminology is due to
Vickrey). Congested equilibria correspond to freely-‡owing tra¢ c, and hypercongested equilibria to tra¢ c
jam situations.


                                                       11
of trips demanded increase, but the increase in P causes the quantity of trips demanded to
increase directly, and which e¤ect dominates depends on the demand elasticity.

Since raising the parking fee when parking is saturated, and when therefore there is cruising
for parking, has no e¤ect on the equilibrium trip price, it is perhaps intuitive that an increase
in parking fee revenue reduces cruising-for-parking costs dollar for dollar. The incorrectness
of this intuition can be seen from Figure 3. Raising the parking fee shifts the demand locus
to the left. If the initial equilibrium is congested, the equilibrium T and C both fall; if it
is hypercongested, the equilibrium T and T + C fall but the equilibrium C rises. Thus,
an increase in the parking fee can increase cruising for parking. The correct intuition is
that parking fee revenue replaces the sum of in-transit travel costs and cruising-for-parking
costs dollar for dollar.


4.4    Steady-state social optimum

The social bene…t from travel per unit area-time is an increasing function of the steady-state
throughput, and its derivative gives the marginal bene…t. The social cost per unit area-time
is the aggregate cost of travel time per unit area-time, which equals the value of time times
the number of cars in transit and cruising for parking per unit area at that point in time.
Social surplus (per unit area-time) equals social bene…t minus social cost.


De…nition 2 The short-run saturated steady-state social optimum is the pair (T ; C ) sat-
isfying (9) such that social surplus, given by B( Pl )       (C + T ), is maximized.


Thus, this social optimum is the solution to

                           P                                   T           P
                 max B(      )   (C + T )        s:t:                    =      :           (11)
                  C;T      l                             mt(T; C; W; P )   l

The maximization problem reduces to the minimization of travel time cost, which is achieved
with C = 0 and T equal to the lower value of T which solves T =(mt(T; 0; W; P )) = P=l.
From an initial situation with saturated parking and no cruising for parking, this social
optimum can be decentralized by setting f at such a level that D( T + f l) = P=l. The
corresponding parking fee is
                                            D   1( P )   T
                                                   l
                                   f =                         :                            (12)
                                                    l
The above reasoning identi…es the short-run, saturated steady-state social optimum and
indicates how it can be decentralized. But is the short-run, saturated, steady-state social
optimum necessarily the overall short-run, steady state social optimum? Suppose it were

                                                  12
otherwise. Since a given throughput can be achieved at lowest cost with no cruising for
parking, the short-run steady-state social optimum would solve

                        S                             T           S
                  max B( )       T     s:t:                         =0 ;                (13)
                  S;T   l                       mt(T; 0; W; P )   l

where S=l is the steady-state throughput and S the stock of occupied parking spaces at
the social optimum. If demand is su¢ ciently high that the S that solves this maximization
problem exceeds P , then the parking availability constraint binds and the steady-state
optimum is saturated (the proof of this uses tT T < 0.). Thus:


Proposition 1 If demand is “su¢ ciently high” (as de…ned just above), the short-run,
steady-state social optimum entails saturated parking and no cruising for parking. This
allocation can be decentralized by setting the parking fee according to (12).


Some remarks are in order. First, the above analysis assumes that the marginal cost of
public funds equals one and that there are no administrative costs in the collection of
parking fee revenue. The analysis can be straightforwardly modi…ed to account for these
complications, which may be practically important. Second, when there is cruising for
parking in steady-state equilibrium, the aggregate e¢ ciency gains from raising the parking
fee to the optimal level are at least as high as the aggregate cruising-for-parking costs in
the initial equilibrium. This can be seen from Figure 3. Raising the parking fee to the
optimal level from an initial saturated equilibrium shifts the demand locus to the left, to
the point where it just continues to intersect the cruising-for-parking locus, with C = 0.
The aggregate e¢ ciency gains from this increase in the parking fee equal the reduction
in the value of (C + T ) from the initial equilibrium to the optimum. Third, we claim
that Proposition 1 is essentially an e¢ ciency result, and so extends to the situation where
individuals di¤er in terms of the value of time, visit duration, and trip length, as long
as lump-sum transfers are feasible. When they are not, some loss in e¢ ciency might in
principle be justi…ed for an improvement in equity. Since, however, few of the truly needy
drive cars, equity considerations in this context are likely of secondary importance.


4.5   Diagrammatic characterization of the equilibrium and optimum

It will aid intuition to recast the model in terms of the standard tra¢ c congestion diagram
in ‡ow-price space, which is based on a model of ‡ow congestion with no parking capacity
constraint. In that diagram, short-run (with road capacity …xed) equilibrium in the absence
of a congestion toll occurs where the user cost curve intersects the demand curve, while the

                                              13
short-run social optimum (which can be decentralized with the optimal toll) occurs where
the short-run marginal social cost curve intersects the demand curve. In the saturated
parking model presented here, the demand curve is well de…ned. On the supply side,
however, the parking model di¤ers from the standard model in two respects. First, user
cost and marginal social cost depend not only on the throughput but also on the amount of
cruising for parking, which is endogenous. Second, there is a parking capacity constraint,
that the equilibrium ‡ow cannot exceed that permitted by the parking available, and with
saturated parking must equal it. When the parking constraint binds, the causality is also
di¤erent. The equilibrium full price, F e , and ‡ow are determined by the intersection of the
demand curve and the parking capacity constraint. The equilibrium stocks of cars cruising
for parking and in-transit are consistent with these equilibrium values. This subsection
presents the results derived in the previous subsection for the short-run equilibrium and
optimum, using this diagrammatic apparatus, on the assumption that demand is su¢ ciently
high that in the absence of a parking fee, there exists an equilibrium with saturated parking.
Recall that, under our assumptions on the form of the travel time function, if there is an
equilibrium with saturated parking it is the unique equilibrium with saturated parking.


Turn to Figure 4, which is in price (full price) – quantity (steady-state ‡ow) space. Draw
in the demand curve and the parking capacity constraint. By assumption, in the absence
of a parking fee, the saturated parking equilibrium occurs at the point of intersection of the
demand curve and the parking constraint, point E in the diagram. It will prove useful to
de…ne short-run user cost and short-run marginal social cost in the absence of cruising for
parking.


De…nition 3 The short-run user cost function (ucsr ) is the (congested) steady-state in-
transit user cost in the absence of cruising for parking, mt, as a function of the steady-state
‡ow, q, and with W and P held …xed:

                             ucsr (q; P ) = mt(T^(q; P ); 0; W; P )   ;                   (14)

where T^(q; P ) is de…ned implicitly by

                                                                   T
                  T^(q; P ) = min[solution wrt T of q =                      ]   :        (15)
                                                             mt(T; 0; W; P )


Thus, T^(q; P ) is the stock of cars in-transit consistent with congested ‡ow q when parking
availability is P , and ucsr (q; P ) is the corresponding (in-transit) user cost.



                                                14
                     jEJj     : parking scarcity component
                     jJGj     : congestion externality component
       jEGj = jEJj + jJGj     : optimal parking fee charge
                      Note    : The dashed portions of the short-run marginal social cost
                               and user-cost curves indicate that these portions of the
                               curves are not relevant for levels of ‡ow in excess of P=l.

Figure 4: Steady-state equilibrium with saturated parking and the parking fee set at the
optimal level


De…nition 4 The short-run marginal social cost function (mscsr ) is the increase in the
aggregate, steady-state (congested) in-transit ‡ow social cost, in the absence of cruising for
parking, resulting from a unit increase in steady-state ‡ow, as a function of steady-state
‡ow, with W and P held …xed:

                                                                   @ T^
                                  sr               @ T^             @ T^
                             msc (q; P ) =              =
                                                    @q          @q
                                                                @ T^ (15)
                                                       mt
                                            =                     :                          (16)
                                                       tT^ T^
                                                   1     t



Several comments are in order. First, T^(q; P ) is so de…ned in order to impose the condition
that the social optimum entails congested rather than hypercongested ‡ow. Second, while


                                              15
the ucsr and mscsr functions are well de…ned for levels of steady-state ‡ow exceeding P=l,
the analysis will use only those portions of the functions with q             P=l. Third, the ratio of
ucsr   to   mscsr
              at a particular level of steady-state ‡ow equals one minus the elasticity of t
with respect to T^(q; P ).

The short-run, steady-state social optimum occurs at point E in the diagram, and entails
no cruising for parking and congested rather than hypercongested travel. This optimum
is decentralized12 with a parking fee f such that f l equals the vertical distance between
E and the point of intersection of the short-run user cost curve and the parking capacity
constraint, G. With this fee, there is saturated parking, no cruising for parking, a full
price of F e , and a ‡ow rate of P=l. The e¢ cient parking charge has two components. The
…rst, jJGj in the diagram, is the ‡ow congestion externality cost, the di¤erence between the
short-run marginal social cost and short-run user cost. The second, jEJj in the diagram,
is the parking externality cost or parking scarcity rent. Social surplus with this level of
parking capacity is given by the area under the demand curve up to the parking capacity
constraint, P=l, minus the area under jBGj; this is also equal to the area under the demand
curve minus the area under the short-run marginal social cost curve up to P=l. Thus, the
parking scarcity rent is the increase in social surplus from relaxing (9) by one unit without
altering the amount of curbside allocated to parking.

Suppose that the parking fee is set below f , at say f 0 . Then there is cruising for parking
in the saturated equilibrium. Since we de…ned the short-run user cost and marginal social
cost curves in the absence of cruising for parking, they no longer apply. The equilibrium full
price and ‡ow are the same as with f set at f . Since the full price equals the private cost,
 l(C + T )=P , plus the parking charge, f 0 l; social surplus is now the area under the demand
curve up to the parking capacity constraint minus the area under jIHj Compared to the
equilibrium with the optimal parking fee, social surplus has fallen by the same amount as
has revenue. Suppose, alternatively, that the parking fee is set above f , at say f 00 . The
parking capacity constraint no longer binds –parking becomes unsaturated and cruising for
parking disappears. An equilibrium13 occurs at the point of intersection of the short-run
user cost curve (which is now applicable since there is no cruising for parking), shifted up
by the amount of the parking charge, f 00 l, and the demand curve, and social surplus is lower
than with the parking fee, f .

The above discussion applies to the situation portrayed in Figure 4, in which the point E
  12
     But there may also be unsaturated, hypercongested equilibria associated with the parking fee f . This
possibility can be displayed using a diagram similar to panel B of Figure 6.
  13
     We say “an” equilibrium since there may be multiple points of intersection of the short-run user cost
curve, generalized to admit hypercongestion, and the demand curve. This possibility can be displayed using
a diagram similar to panel B of Figure 6.


                                                   16
lies to the left of the intersection of the short-run marginal social cost curve and demand
curve. Suppose instead that the point E lies between the intersection points of the short-
run marginal social cost and short-run user cost curves, and the demand curve. The social
optimum then entails unsaturated parking, while in the absence of a parking fee there is
a saturated parking equilibrium. If the point E lies to the right of the intersection point
of the short-run user cost curve and the demand curve, both the social optimum and the
equilibrium in the absence of a parking fee entail unsaturated parking.


4.6   Optimal parking capacity

In this subsection we investigate social optima and equilibria when the government chooses
parking capacity to maximize social surplus.

De…nition 5 The long-run, steady-state social optimum is the triple (T ; C ; P ) satisfying
T =(mt)   P=l such that social surplus is maximized.

Suppose that this optimum entails unsaturated parking, so that the inequality constraint
does not bind and there is no cruising for parking. Since this supposed optimum entails
congested rather than hypercongested travel, the same steady-state ‡ow can be achieved at
lower social cost by lowering the amount of curbside allocated to parking. Thus, the long-
run, steady-state social optimum entails the inequality constraint binding, implying that
parking is saturated. Suppose that this optimum entails cruising for parking. The same
steady-state ‡ow can be achieved at lower social cost by lowering the stock of cars cruising
for parking. Using these two results, we may adopt a less primitive but more operational
de…nition of the social optimum.

De…nition 50 The long-run, steady-state social optimum is the pair (T ; P ), along with
C = 0, satisfying (9) such that social surplus, given by B(P=l)               T , is maximized.

De…nition 6 Long-run marginal social cost (msclr ) is the increase in aggregate in-transit
cost per unit time, T , with a unit increase in steady-state congested ‡ow, varying P so
that parking remains saturated (P = ql) without cruising for parking:

                                          @ T~               @ T~
                            msclr (q) =                = l                :                       (17)
                                           @q                @P
                                                 (9)                (9)


where T~(q) is the lower value of T which solves q = T~=(mt(T~; 0; W; ql)) (or equivalently
P=l = T~=(mt(T~; 0; W; P ))).

                                                 17
There are three components to this cost. The …rst derives from the increase in steady-state
‡ow, holding travel speed …xed; the second, from the decrease in travel speed due to the
increased ‡ow; and the third, from the decrease in travel speed due to the increased amount
of curbside allocated to parking. The increase in the stock of cars in transit due to these
three e¤ects is obtained by total di¤erentiation of (9), holding C …xed at 0, which yields

                                                            P tP
                                  @ T~             T~ 1 +     t
                                               =     (              ) :                 (18)
                                  @P               P 1      T~tT~
                                         (9)                  t


Let P~ =l be the maximum technologically feasible level of ‡ow. We have already assumed
that D      = 1. The additional assumption that msclr (0) is …nite rules out the possibility
         1 (0)

that P = 0. Also, since msclr (P~ ) = 1, the …niteness of demand at this level of ‡ow rules
out the possibility that P = P~ . Thus, P is an element of (0; P~ ). Since, furthermore,
the demand and msclr functions are continuous over this interval, the steady-state social
optimum occurs at a point of intersection of these functions. Finally, since we have assumed
that the demand function is decreasing in q and since our assumptions on t( ) imply that
msclr is increasing in q, the point of intersection of these functions is unique. Thus, the
socially optimal level of parking capacity, P , occurs at the unique point of intersection of
the demand and msclr functions, and satis…es


                                     T
                           max B(       )          T        s:t:      (9) :             (19)
                            T;P      mt

De…nition 7 The long-run user cost is

                              uclr (q) = mt(T~(q); 0; W; ql)              :             (20)



Figure 5 displays the long- and short-run marginal social cost functions, and the short-run
user cost function as well as the demand function, in full price-‡ow space. The long-run
social optimum occurs at , the point of intersection of the demand and msclr functions.
As in the short run, long-run marginal social cost may be decomposed into long-run user
cost (which equals the short-run user cost at P = P ), the congestion externality cost, and
the parking externality cost. At the long-run social optimum, the congestion externality
cost equals the vertical distance jJGj and the parking externality cost the distance j Jj.

The …rst-best optimum can be decentralized by setting P = P and a parking fee




                                                    18
                                j Jj   : parking congestion component
                               jJGj    : tra¢ c congestion externality component
                 j Gj = j Jj + jJGj    : optimal parking fee charge

                                 Figure 5: First-best optimum



                                          P               P
                            f1   = msclr (   )      uclr (   )
                                           l               l
                                          P               P
                                 = msclr ( )        ucsr ( ; P ) :                         (21)
                                           l               l

Thus, we have:


Proposition 2 The …rst-best level of parking capacity solves (19). This corresponds to the
level of steady-state ‡ow at which the demand curve intersects the long-run marginal social
cost curve. In the …rst-best allocation, parking is saturated and there is no cruising for
parking. The …rst-best allocation is achieved by setting parking capacity at its …rst-best level
and the parking fee according to (21).


The observant reader will have noticed that the relationship between short-run and long-
run cost curves, according to our de…nitions, do not accord with those in conventional cost
theory. The conventional long-run average cost curve is de…ned as the lower envelope of the

                                               19
corresponding short-run average cost curves, each de…ned for a particular level of capacity.
Here, in contrast, long-run costs are de…ned as the costs which obtain when capacity is varied
as ‡ow is varied so as to satisfy the saturated parking constraint, that q = P=l. According
to the conventional de…nition, short-run and long-run marginal social cost coincide at the
optimal allocation. According to our de…nitions, the area under the short-run marginal
social curve up to the optimal level of ‡ow and with optimal parking capacity equals the
area under the long-run marginal social curve up to the optimal level of ‡ow. This equality
corresponds to two di¤erent ways of calculating total social cost at the social optimum. The
…rst is to hold constant parking capacity at P and then to add up the increments to social
cost from increasing ‡ow unit by unit. The second is to add up the increments to social
cost from increasing ‡ow unit by unit, continually adjusting the level of parking so that it
remains saturated.

Now consider the second best.


De…nition 8 The second-best optimum conditional on a non-optimal level of the parking
fee is de…ned as the triple (T (f 0 ); C (f 0 ); P (f 0 )) satisfying (8) and (9) that maximizes
social surplus.


There may be multiple equilibria corresponding to a particular f 0 and P . The de…nition
implies that determination of the second-best optimum entails comparing the lowest cost
(and hence entailing congested rather than hypercongested ‡ow) equilibrium for each (f 0 ; P )
as P is varied. Determination of second-best optimal parking capacity is surprisingly easy,
at least conceptually.


Proposition 3 Second-best optimal parking capacity (when the parking fee is set at a non-
optimal level, f 0 ) is such that cruising for parking is eliminated but parking remains satu-
rated.


Proof. Start o¤ with a level of parking capacity for which equilibrium is saturated and
there is cruising for parking. Increase parking capacity incrementally. This causes the
equilibrium to move down the demand curve. Social surplus equals consumer surplus plus
parking revenue, both of which are increased by the movement down the demand curve.
This argument establishes the desirability of increasing parking capacity incrementally when
the equilibrium entails cruising for parking. Now start o¤ with a level of parking capac-
ity for which the equilibrium is unsaturated (and hence involves no cruising for parking)
and so occurs at the point of intersection of the short-run user cost curve for this level of


                                              20
parking capacity, shifted up by f 0 l, and the demand curve. Now decrease parking capacity.
This causes the short-run user cost curve to shift down, increasing equilibrium ‡ow, and
hence increasing both parking revenue and consumer surplus. This argument establishes
the desirability of decreasing parking capacity incrementally when the equilibrium is unsat-
urated. The second-best optimal parking capacity is therefore that where equilibrium is on
the borderline between saturated and unsaturated parking –saturated but with no cruising
for parking.


Corollary 2 The second-best optimum with parking fee f 0 occurs at the point of intersection
of the long-run user cost curve, shifted up by f 0 l, and the demand curve.


Proof. The long-run user cost function gives the locus of user cost as a function of ‡ow for
which there is saturated parking and no cruising for parking. Thus, the point of intersection
of the long-run user cost function, shifted up by f 0 l, and the demand curve, gives the only
allocation at which equilibrium is achieved and the necessary conditions for the second-best
optimum given in Proposition 3 are satis…ed.

We now investigate the relationship between …rst- and second-best optimal parking capac-
ities.


Proposition 4 Second-best optimal parking capacity is less than/equal to/greater than
…rst-best optimal parking capacity according to whether the on-street parking fee is greater
than/equal to/less than the …rst-best on-street parking fee.


Proof. From the corollary immediately above, second-best optimal parking capacity is
decreasing in the on-street parking fee. The proposition follows immediately upon noting
that …rst-best optimal parking capacity coincides with second-best parking capacity with
the …rst-best on-street parking fee.


4.7      Stability

A complete analysis of the stability of the (unique) saturated, steady-state equilibrium
would be complex. The initial conditions would have to be speci…ed in terms not only of
the stock of cars in-transit, cruising for parking, and parked, but also the corresponding
distribution functions in terms of length of stay in the corresponding pool. The number of
entrants into the system as a function of time would depend on expectations concerning
in-transit time and expected cruising-for-parking time, both as a function of entry time.

                                             21
And account would have to be taken of the possibility that the system would get stuck, due
to density exceeding jam density, or that parking might be unsaturated along part of the
adjustment path.

We shall touch on some of the issues by considering a simple variant of the basic model
in which travel distance and visit length are Poisson distributed in the population rather
than being constant. These simplifying assumptions allow the history of the system to
a¤ect the equations of motion only through the stocks of individuals in-transit, cruising for
parking, and parked. We furthermore assume that demand to enter the system at time u is
a function only of the perceived full price of a car with mean m and l at time u, and that
this perceived full trip price is F^ = (mt(T (u); C(u); W; P ) + C(u)l=P ) + f l when parking
is saturated, and F^ = mt(T (u); 0; W; P ) + f l when parking is unsaturated. Under these
assumptions, the equations of motion when parking is saturated and cars are cruising for
parking are

                                              C(u)l                                T (u)
        T_ (u) = D( (mt(T (u); C(u); W; P ) +       ) + f l)                                            (22)
                                                P                          mt(T (u); C(u); W; P )
         _               T (u)           P
        C(u)   =                              ;                                                         (23)
                 mt(T (u); C(u); W; P )   l

where m and l are now the means of the Poisson distributions. When parking is unsaturated,
there are no cars cruising for parking and the equations of motion depend on the stock of
occupied parking spaces, S(u):

                                                                           T (u)
                  T_ (u) = D( (mt(T (u); 0; W; P ) + f l)                                               (24)
                                                                     mt(T (u); 0; W; P )
                  _                  T (u)                S(u)
                  S(u) =                                         :                                      (25)
                               mt(T (u); 0; W; P )         l

Account also needs to be taken of the possibility of transition between saturated and un-
saturated parking.


We have proved14 that, with the equations of motion (22) and (23), a saturated parking
equilibrium with C > 0 is locally stable. Our investigation of global stability uncovered
two distinct reasons why the saturated parking equilibrium may not be globally stable15 .
The …rst, which is intuitive, is that if there is a jam density and if the system starts o¤ in
a situation where the stock of cars in transit exceeds the jam density, the system remains
jammed. The second is that, depending on initial conditions, the system may move towards
  14
   The proofs are available from the authors on request.
  15
   One might argue the possibility of a limit cycle but under our speci…cations a limit cycle is ruled out by
Bendixson’s (1901) Nonexistence Criterion.


                                                     22
                             A                                                    B




           Notes:
                                                        t0
           1. Congestion function is given by t =        V    , where V = C + T is density
                                                    1    Vj

            and Vj jam density.
                                                                          11V               Vj
           2. Demand function is given by f = a          b mt with a = 36mtj0 and b = 36   (mt0 )2
                                                                                                   .
           3. The dashes along S_ = 0 for S > P in panel A and for the short-run user-cost
             in panel B indicate that in this region parking is saturated so that (24)
             and (25) do not apply.

Figure 6: A situation with both a locally stable saturated equilibrium and a locally stable
unsaturated equilibrium with hypercongested tra¢ c


a locally stable, unsaturated parking equilibrium with hypercongested tra¢ c16 , at a solution
T_ = 0 and S_ = 0 for (24) and (25). This situation, portrayed as point E in Figure 6, is
the same as the familiar, diagrammatic depiction of a hypercongested equilibrium, due to
Walters (1961), with the addition of the parking capacity constraint.



5        Numerical Policy Analysis

We start o¤ by parameterizing/calibrating a numerical example. We then employ the exam-
ple to perform a couple of policy exercises. The model admits only two policy instruments,
the on-street parking fee and parking capacity.
    16
     There is an unresolved debate in the literature concerning whether stable, hypercongested equilibria
can occur in practice (see Verhoef (2001)). The stable, hypercongested equilibrium in our model appears
logically sound, and the assumed adjustment mechanism seems sensible.



                                                    23
5.1   Parameterization/calibration

Recall that the steady-state, saturated parking equilibrium is characterized by (3) and
(4). This pair of equations involves a demand function, a congestion function, and several
parameters. The following parameters are assumed:


                 m = 2:0;    l = 2:0;   f = 1:0;           = 20:0;   P = 3712 :

Units are in miles and hours. The in-transit travel distance is 2 miles; the visit length is
2 hours; the on-street parking fee is $1.00 per hour; the value of time is $20.00 per hour;
and the number of on-street parking spaces corresponds (according to calculations made
below) to parking on one side of every street but not the other. The on-street parking fee
is that charged in downtown Boston; the value of time is somewhat on the high side, but is
chosen taking into account that driving on city streets is less pleasant than on freeways and
that downtown drivers are typically well o¤ and busy. P is calculated using the following
assumptions concerning parameters. The block spacing, b + W , is 0.125 miles; road width,
W , is 0.00625 miles (33 feet); and a parking space is 0.0040 miles (21.12 feet) long and
0.002083 (11 feet) wide. With allowance made for crosswalks (7.26 feet or 0.001375 miles)
at each end of a block, 29 cars can be parked on one side of a block. Assuming parking on
one side of the street, and hence on two sides of each block, implies 58 cars parked around
each block and, with 64 blocks per square mile, 3712 parking spaces per square mile.

We shall employ a simple speci…cation of the congestion technology. The general form
is t = t(T; C; W; P ). We particularize as follows. Assume, …rst, that the function is
weakly separable between (T; C) and (W; P ); refer to the sub-function V (T; C) as the
e¤ ective density or volume function, and !(W; P ) as that e¤ ective capacity function. Sec-
ond, assume the travel time depends on the volume-capacity ratio, as is standard, so that
t = t(V (T; C)=!(W; P )). Let the volume function be V = T + 1:5C, so that a car cruising
for parking contributes 1.5 times as much to congestion as a car in transit. Last, assume
that Greenshield’s relation (1935) holds, so that the velocity of cars is a negative, linear
function of tra¢ c volume, with free-‡ow velocity v (= 1=t0 )and jam density or volume Vj .
With these assumptions,
                                                 t0
                                        t=            V
                                                           :                                   (26)
                                             1        Vj

Finally, we assume that jam volume equals a constant,           , times the fraction of the road not
designated for parking, implying that

                                                    P
                                   Vj =   (1            ) :                                    (27)
                                                  11136

                                                 24
This form of the congestion function is consistent with intersection congestion theory
(Arnott (1990)). We assume t0 , free-‡ow travel time, to be .05 hours per mile, which
corresponds to a free-‡ow travel speed of 20 m.p.h. A standard estimate for the elasticity
of demand for peak-period tra¢ c is 0.2, and the constant is chosen so that the mean full
price of a trip in the base situation described is $15. Thus,

                                                       0:2
                                      D(F ) = D0 F                                        (28)

with D0 = 3190:04. Making the additional assumption that in the base case equilibrium 30
percent of cars on the road are cruising for parking allows us to calibrate   = 2667:2.


5.2   Policy exercises

We shall perform a number of policy exercises. The parameters for each exercise are recorded
in Table 2, and the results are recorded in Table 3.

                   f = 1; P = 3712
                                          f ; P = 3712       f = 0; P     f ; P
                     (Base Case)
            m             2.0                  2.0                2.0        2.0
            l             2.0                  2.0                2.0        2.0
                          20.0                 20.0               20.0      20.0
            b           0.11875              0.11875            0.11875   0.11875
            W           0.00625              0.00625            0.00625   0.00625
            t0            0.05                 0.05               0.05      0.05
            D0          3190.04              3190.04            3190.04   3190.04
                        2667.2               2667.2             2667.2    2667.2
            Vj          1778.2               1778.2
            f             1.0                                     0
            P            3712                  3712

            Notes:
            1. * denotes …rst-best
            2. ** denotes second-best
            3. Blank cells correspond to endogenous variables

                         Table 2: Model Parameters: Basic Model


We start o¤ with the base case. Recall that it was calibrated so that, with half the curbside
allocated to parking and a parking meter rate of $1.00/hr., 30 percent of the cars on the
road are cruising for parking in the saturated steady-state equilibrium. The situation is
therefore one of heavy but not extraordinarily heavy congestion. Travel speed is 4.4 m.p.h.,

                                              25
                        f = 1; P = 3712
                                              f ; P = 3712    f = 0; P       f ; P
                          (Base Case)
        T                     844.5                  210.5       349.5        302.7
        C                     361.9                   0.0         0.0           0.0
        V                    1387.5                  210.5       349.5        302.7
        P                                                        5248         4839.0
        t                    0.2275                 0.05671     0.06641      0.06255
        1
        t                    4.396                   17.63       15.06        15.99
                   Tl
            mt =   P         9.100                   2.268       2.656        2.502
        Cl
        P                    0.1950                   0.0         0.0           0.0
         Cl
          P                  3.900                    0.0         0.0           0.0
        f                                            6.366                    0.7412
        F                     15.00                  15.00       2.656        3.984
        RC                    13.00                  2.268       2.656        2.502
          SS                                         19919       22421        22624

        Notes:
        1. Blank cells correspond to exogenous variables.
        2. All …gures are computed on the assumption
        that the marginal cost of public funds equals one.

                         Table 3: Numerical Solutions: Basic Model

and the average cruising-for-parking time is 0.2 hours (or 12 minutes). The full trip price is
$15.00, comprising $9.10 for in-transit travel time cost, $3.90 for cruising-for-parking time
cost, and $2.00 for parking at the destination. The user cost, which equals the resource cost
per individual, RC, is $13.00 per hour.

The …rst policy exercise we perform is to raise the parking fee to the optimal level, where
cruising for parking is just eliminated (consistent with Proposition 1), holding constant the
proportion of curbside allocated to parking. This level is $6.37/hr. Recall from the earlier
discussion that this does not alter the entry ‡ow, which is determined by the steady-state
condition that the entry ‡ow equal the exit rate from parking, since P is held constant
and since the equilibrium remains saturated. Thus, the full trip price does not change but
its composition does. Eliminating cruising for parking reduces congestion by so much that
travel speed increases to 17.6 m.p.h., so that in-transit travel cost falls to $2.27, of which
$0.27 is due to congestion. In the base case, the individual cost of congestion — the value
of time lost due to congestion was $11.00, $7.10 of which is the value of time lost in transit
due to congestion (the in-transit time cost less what it would be with free-‡ow travel) with
the remainder being the value of time lost cruising for parking. Raising the parking fee
therefore eliminates 97.5% of the congestion cost. Since the full price remains unchanged,



                                               26
the per capita revenue raised from the toll exactly equals the reduction in the congestion
cost. As noted earlier, the parking fee revenue is therefore raised with no burden at all.
This policy generates a gain in social surplus ( SS) of $19919 per sq.ml.-hr. If parking
remains saturated for twelve hours a day, from say 7:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., on each of 200
business days a year, this translates into a gain of $47.8 million dollars per sq.ml.-yr.

We now consider the second-best amount of curbside to allocate to parking when parking is
provided free, taking into account that increasing parking capacity decreases jam density.
This is obtained as the solution to (3) and (4) with f and C set equal to zero. The optimal
amount of on-street parking is 5248 spaces per square mile, which corresponds to allocat-
ing 70.7 percent of curbside to on-street parking. With this increase in parking capacity,
congestion almost disappears, cruising for parking is eliminated but parking remains sat-
urated (consistent with Proposition 3), and in-transit travel costs fall to $2.66. Thus, in
this example, though not in general, most of the deadweight loss caused by underpricing
curbside parking is eliminated by a signi…cant increase in the amount of on-street parking
provided. Since demand is not completely inelastic, the corresponding reduction in the full
trip price from $15.00 to $2.66 causes the throughput to rise from 1856 cars per sq.ml.-hr.
to 2624. The gain in social surplus relative to the base case may be calculated as the gain
in consumer surplus plus the increase in toll revenue raised. The gain in consumer surplus
per sq.ml.-hr. is $26133 and the loss is revenue is $3712, for a total gain of $22421.

Our third policy exercise is to solve for the social optimum and the parking fee which
decentralizes it. The amount of curbside allocated to parking is increased from 50 percent
in the base case to 65.2 percent at the …rst-best optimum, and the meter rate is reduced
from $1.00/hr. to $0.74/hr. As a result of these changes, cruising for parking is eliminated
with parking remaining saturated (consistent with Proposition 2) and travel speed increases
from 4.4 m.p.h. to 16.0 m.p.h. The e¢ ciency gains in moving from the base case to the
full social optimum are $22624/sq.ml.-yr. Let us compare the …rst-best and second-best
optimum with free parking. Consistent with Proposition 4, when the parking fee is set
below its …rst-best optimal level, as is the case in this comparison, the second-best amount
of on-street parking exceeds the …rst-best level. Also, the social surplus is of course larger
in the …rst- than the second-best allocation, though in the example not by much.



6    Extensions

The basic model presented in the previous sections was useful in developing a conceptual
framework for the integrated analysis of on-street parking and tra¢ c congestion under


                                              27
saturated parking conditions, an essential element of which is cruising for parking. It is
too simple however to be used as a basis for practical downtown parking policy. Most
importantly, it omits two essential elements — o¤-street parking and alternative modes of
transportation. Ch.2 in Alleviating Urban Tra¢ c Congestion (Arnott, Rave, and Schoeb,
forthcoming) extends this paper’s model to treat these two essential elements. In this
section, we consider the e¤ects of modifying some of the model’s other elements.

Dynamics: In Section 4.7 on the stability of steady-state equilibrium, we considered dy-
namics with a stationary demand function. The simplest way to extend that analysis to a
non-stationary demand function is to assume, as is done in the bottleneck model (Vickrey
(1969)), that there are schedule delay costs as well as travel time costs, and that travel
time over the rush hour evolves so that the equilibrium utility level is constant over the
departure period.

Spatial heterogeneity: The assumption that the downtown area is spatially homogeneous
considerably simpli…ed the analysis. In fact, of course, there is considerable variation in
the number of trips by block in the downtown area. With spatial homogeneity it was
natural to assume that individuals look for parking on their destination block. But with
spatial heterogeneity, it is natural to assume instead that individuals decide which block
to search for parking on so as to minimize the sum of expected cruising-for-parking costs
and walking costs. Another complication is that with spatial heterogeneity, on some trips,
such as for shopping, individuals have a choice of destination. Practical application of any
downtown parking model requires the simultaneous treatment of both dynamics and spatial
heterogeneity. Their simultaneous treatment should introduce no new conceptual issues but
will be computationally challenging.

Individual heterogeneity: Individuals can di¤er according to their demand functions,
trip lengths, visit durations, values of time, and behavior in tra¢ c, as well as in the cars they
drive. The previous analysis can be extended straightforwardly to treat all these elements
of heterogeneity. Policy variables may be conditioned on observable but not unobservable
characteristics. In the basic model, there is no scope for sorting. But in more complicated
models, sorting may occur on the basis of both observable and unobservable characteristics.
Sorting between on- and o¤-street parking occurs in the sequel to this paper. Sorting would
occur in an extended version of the model of this paper in which di¤erent parking fees are
charged for di¤erent meters17 .

Trip length and visit duration: The model allows for the possibility that individuals
will vary the number of trips they take downtown according to the full trip price. Other
  17
    Those with higher values of time and shorter parking durations would choose the parking spots with
the higher meter rates since the expected cruising-for-parking time for them would be lower.


                                                 28
behavioral margins are the trip length m and visit duration l. We know of no empirical
work investigating the responsiveness of behavior on these margins to full trip price.

Illegal parking: Rather than cruising for on-street parking, an individual may choose
instead to park on street in an undesignated parking spot, to double park or to park on
the sidewalk. We implicitly ruled these choices out but in some cities such behavior is
commonplace. Analyzing these alternatives will require modeling parking enforcement (see
Calthrop (2001b)). Double parking also arises when individuals stop and wait for a parking
spot to be vacated rather than circling the block.

Entry and exit parking congestion: This paper is the …rst to analyze the e¤ect of
cruising for parking on tra¢ c congestion. There is another channel through which on-
street parking contributes to tra¢ c congestion — entry into and exit from on-street parking
locations. This could be modeled by making the travel time function dependent on not only
the density of cars in transit and cruising for parking but also the turnover rate of on-street
parking18 .

Resident parking: Most cities have on-street resident parking even in the downtown area.
The model could accommodate this by assuming that there are two groups of individuals,
residents and non-residents. Upon completion of a visit, a non-resident would simply exit
the system — as occurs in the basic model — but a resident would return home and park
on street there. The government would then have four policy instruments, the resident and
non-resident parking fees, and the curbside allocated to resident and non-resident parking.
A political economy module could be added to explain observed policy choices.

Through tra¢ c: The paper ignored through tra¢ c19 . In our paper, by reducing cruising
for parking a rise in the on-street parking fee was able to reduce tra¢ c congestion consid-
erably. The corresponding bene…ts could be substantially diminished if the reduction in
tra¢ c congestion induces a substantial increase in through tra¢ c.



7         Concluding Comments

This paper has explored the properties of a simple model that integrates saturated, on-street
parking and tra¢ c congestion. Since cruising for parking for a longer time raises the full trip
price, the stock of cars cruising for parking adjusts to clear the market for on-street parking.
A central element of the model, which will play a more important role in the sequels to the
paper, is that cars cruising for parking add to tra¢ c congestion. One major result is that,
    18
         We thank Marvin Kraus for this point.
    19
         We thank Ken Button for this point.


                                                 29
whether or not the amount of on-street parking is optimal, it is e¢ cient to raise the on-street
parking fee to the point where cruising for parking is eliminated without parking becoming
unsaturated. The full trip price and hence consumer surplus is unchanged, and revenue is
generated for the government. Another major result is that if the parking fee is …xed at a
sub-optimal level, it is second-best optimal to increase the amount of curbside allocated to
parking until cruising for parking is eliminated without parking becoming unsaturated20 .

The model is a useful …rst step towards the development of an integrated model of downtown
parking and tra¢ c congestion that can be employed in practical policy analysis. But in its
current form it is too simple to provide useful policy prescription. It omits two practically
very important features of downtown transportation — o¤-street parking and alternative
modes of transportation, of which mass transit is especially important. These features will
be added to the model in a pair of sequel papers. We now discuss brie‡y why it is essential
to consider these two features in deciding on downtown parking policy.

Consider …rst adding private o¤-street parking to the model of this paper, and to simplify
assume that the overall demand for downtown trips is …xed. With identical individuals,
the time spent cruising for on-street parking will adjust such that the full prices of on-
and o¤-street parking are equalized. That on- and o¤-street parking are perfect substitutes
should eliminate private o¤-street parking operators’ market power. In this environment,
raising the on-street parking fee will generate a “triple dividend.” Not only will time lost
cruising for parking be converted into revenue, but also the reduction in tra¢ c congestion
will cause the full price for o¤-street parking and hence the equilibrium full price to fall.
The situation is more complicated if individuals are heterogeneous. If there is cruising for
on-street parking, individuals will sort themselves between on- and o¤-street parking on the
basis of both observable and unobservable characteristics. On- and o¤-street parking will no
longer be perfect substitutes and, since o¤-street parking facilities are typically located some
distance from one another, o¤-street parking operators will have market power, which they
will exercise through setting parking fee schedules that are non-linear in parking duration.
In such a setting, if the on-street parking meter rate cannot be set at the e¢ cient level, the
determination of optimal parking policy, which may include time restrictions for on-street
parking, becomes a complicated exercise in the theory of the second best.

Incorporating mass transit into the model would be routine were it not for the economies
of scale mass transit exhibits. To exploit these scale economies, the City of Boston has a
policy of restricting the amount of o¤-street parking. Doing so, it reasons, will raise the
relative price of o¤-street parking, which will encourage modal switching to mass transit,
lowering the full price of mass transit and hence the equilibrium full price. With identical
 20
      This result no longer applies when there is o¤-street as well as on-street parking.


                                                       30
individuals, this reasoning is sound. But with individual heterogeneity, the e¤ects of the
policy are far more complicated and its wisdom is open to question.

In the model presented in this paper, it is e¢ cient to raise the on-street parking fee so
that cruising for parking is eliminated without parking becoming unsaturated. This result
appears to be very robust, continuing to apply when o¤-street parking, mass transit and
individual heterogeneity are introduced. Why then do local governments virtually every-
where persist in setting the on-street parking fee below the e¢ cient level21 ? This question
points to the probable importance of introducing political economy into the policy analysis.
  21
    In downtown Boston, on some streets parking is restricted to residents, on others it is provided free, and
on others there are meters with a $1.00/hr. fee. A variety of time restrictions is also employed.




                                                     31
References
 [1] Anderson, S., and A. dePalma. 2004. The economics of pricing parking. Journal of Urban
     Economics 55: 1-20.
 [2] Arnott, R. 1990. Signalized intersection queuing theory and C.B.D. auto congestion. Economics
     Letters 33: 197-201.
 [3] Arnott, R., A. dePalma, and R. Lindsey. 1992. A temporal and spatial equilibrium analysis of
     commuter parking. Journal of Public Economics 45: 301-335.
 [4] Arnott, R., and J. Rowse. 1999. Modeling parking. Journal of Urban Economics 45: 97-124.
 [5] Arnott, R., R. Schoeb, and T. Rave. forthcoming. Alleviating Urban Tra¢ c Congestion. Cam-
     bridge, MA. MIT Press.
 [6] Bendixson, I. 1901. Sur les corbes dé…nies par des équations di¤érentielles. Acta Math. 24: 1-88.
 [7] Calthrop, E. 2001a. Essays in urban transport economics. PhD thesis number 151, Katholieke
     Universiteit Leuven.
 [8] Calthrop, E. 2001b. When consumers can decide not to pay a tax: enforcing and pricing urban
     on-street parking space. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Working Paper 2001-10.
 [9] Calthrop, E., S. Proost, and K. Van Dender. 2000. Parking policies and road pricing. Urban
     Studies 37: 63-76.
[10] Douglas, R. 1975. A parking model - the e¤ect of supply on demand. American Economist 19:
     85-86.
[11] Glazer, A., and E. Niskanen. 1992. Parking fees and congestion. Regional Science and Urban
     Economics 22: 123-132.
[12] Greenshield, B. 1935. A study of tra¢ c capacity.” Highway Research Board Proceedings 14:
     448-477.
[13] Rouwendal, J., E. Verhoef, and P. Rietveld. 1999. Congestion caused by speed di¤erences.
     Journal of Urban Economics 45: 533-566.
[14] Shoup, D. 2005. The High Cost of Free Parking. American Planning Association.
[15] Verhoef, E. 2001. An integrated dynamic model of road tra¢ c congestion based on simple
     car-following theory: exploring hypercongestion. Journal of Urban Economics 49: 505-542.
[16] Vickrey, W. 1969. Congestion theory and transport investment. American Economic Review
     Papers and Proceedings 59: 251-260.
[17] Walters, A. 1961. The theory and measurement of private and social cost of highway congestion.
     Econometrica 29: 676-699.
[18] Westin, R., and D. Gillen. 1978. Parking location and transit demand. Journal of Econometrics,
     8: 75-101.




                                                 32
