                    NTBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            UNCERTAIN PARAMETER VALUES AND THE CHOICE
                       AMONG POLICY OPTIONS


                          Don Fullerton

                          Andrew B. Lyon




                      Working Paper No. 1111




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            April 1983




We wish to thank Charles L. Ballard, Yolanda K. Henderson, John B.
Shoven, and John Whalley for help with this research and for useful
suggestions. Financial assistance was provided by the Treasury
Department's Office of Tax Analysis, Princeton University, and the
National Science Foundation under grant SES 8O25101-. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #1111
                                                April 1983



                 Uncertain Parameter Values and the
                     Choice Among Policy Options


                              ABSTRACT




     In this paper, we use tax policy choices to illustrate and investigate

the more general problem of using uncertain parameter values in models to

evaluate policy choices. We show, for this tax example, how debate on an

elasticity parameter translates into a debate about policy choices, and

vice versa. To construct this example, we suppose that the choice among

four particular tax reform options is based on a single measure of

efficiency gain. We show how this gain from each reform depends upon the

elasticity of saving with respect to the net rate of return. Within quite

narrow and reasonable bounds for the elasticity parameter, we find regions

in which each of three different tax reforms turns out to dominate the

others.




                                                  Don Fullerton
                                                  Andrew B. Lyon
                                                  Woodrow Wilson School
                                                  Princeton University
                                                  Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                      (609) 452—4811
I. Introduction

     The optimal tax literature provides valuable rules for designing

tax reform to minimize the cost of distortions in economic choices. Yet

the theory alone does not provide guidance on whether, for example, current

tax rates on capital or labor are too high or too low relative to the

optimum rates. Without appropriate estimates of the underlying economic

parameters, the best direction for tax reform is ambiguous.

     In this paper, we use tax policy choices to illustrate and investigate

the more general problem of using uncertain parameter values in models to

evaluate policy choices. We show, for this tax example, how debate on an

elasticity parameter translates into a debate about policy choices, and

vice versa. To construct this example, we suppose that the choice among

four particular tax reform options is based on a single measure of

efficiency gain. We show how this gain from each reform depends upon the

elasticity of saving with respect to the net rate of return. Within quite

narrow and reasonable bounds for the elasticity parameter, we find regions

in which each of three different tax reforms turns out to dominate the

others.

     In the sections that follow, we briefly discuss the theoretical

importance of the saving elasticity in determining intertemporal welfare

effects of taxes on income from capital; empirical estimates of this

elasticity; the interaction of intertemporal distortions with intersectoral

and labor/leisure distortions; and the results of simulating four potential

tax reforms in a general equilibrium model that accounts for these con-

siderations.
                                  —2—

II. Efficiency and Elasticity Parameters

     Consider a single commodity X, produced at constant cost P, and taxed

at the ad valorem tax rate t. If E    is   the compensated demand elasticity,

then the welfare gain or loss from the tax may be written as W(c, t). In

a partial equilibrium model where t is very small,



                                                                          (1)




     This equation can be used to measure the intertemporal distortions

resulting from the taxation of income from capital. When an after—tax

dollar of earnings is saved, it earns a return that is taxed again by the

personal income tax system. Additionally, if this dollar is invested

in the corporate sector, a separate corporate tax is imposed before the

return is paid out. These taxes raise the price of future consump'tiori

relative to the price of present consumption. The welfare cost of this

distortion may be measured using equation (1), where X and P are the

quantity and price of future consumption, t is the additional tax on future

consumption, and e is the price elasticity of demand for future consumption.

     Discussion of taxation and saving has often centered around a different

parameter, n,    the elasticity of saving with respect to the net rate of
return. Martin Feldstein (1978) has clarified two distinctions between ri

and .   First,    e reflects a change in X, the quantity of future consumption,

while r reflects a change in saving, the expenditure on future consumption.

If this expenditure is to remain constant (the case where n =     0),   then

quantity must adjust to offset any change in price. A zero saving elasticity

therefore implies a nonzero quantity elasticity. Second, n is usually

measured as an uncompensated elasticity, while c in equation (1) should
                                  —3—

reflect a compensated elasticity. Nonzero income effects imply further

differences.

     These considerations can be used to derive a linear relationship

between c and n. This relationship points to a substantial error that

can occur from using n directly in (1). In particular, a zero saving

elasticity may be associated with substantially nonzero welfare costs

from taxes on income from capital. Estimates of the saving elasticity

are discussed and employed below, but our model always converts each

value of n into a corresponding value for    before it calculates W.

     We calculate the welfare gains from each of four tax reforms below,

and we show how these gains depend on the assumed value of n.     If the

reforms are compared on the basis of welfare gains, their relative positions

also depend on ri.   As a secondary objective, we also discuss how uncertainty

in the elasticity estimate affects the expected value of the welfare gain.

In any application of equation (1), C may be measured with error. Policy

recommendations should then be based on E[W(E,. t)J,   where E is the expecta-

tions operator. Instead, analysts typically estimate W[E(c), t] in order

to employ a single estimated value for the elasticity parameter. This

shortcut is perfectly valid in the partial equilibrium model represented

by equation (1): W is a linear function of C, SO E[W(c, t)] = W[E(s), t].

Many general equilibrium studies continue to use E(c) to evaluate large

tax changes, however, including the study by Fullerton, King, Shoven, and

Whalley (1981). We investigate the size of this error by using the same

model to plot W as a function of the saving elasticity. If this relation—

ship is nearly linear, then the effect of the error is small.
                                    —4—

 III. Empirical Estimates of the Saving Elasticity

      An increase in the net rate of return lowers the price of future con-

 sumption. The compensated quantity demanded must rise, but the percentage

 increase may exceed or fall short of the percentage decrease in price.

 Expenditure on future consumption (saving) may rise or fall, so the sign

 of n is ambiguous.

     Empirical estimates of r have hardly narrowed the range of plausible

values. "Denison's Law" states that r is zero, following Edward Denison's

 (1958) observation that saving as a fraction of income in the U.S. has been

a historical constant. Econometric estimates by Michael Boskin (1978)

suggest that ri is significantly positive. Using eight different regressions,

Boskin finds values for that range from 0.2 to 0.6, but that cluster between

0.3 and 0.4. Howrey and Hymans (1978) use Boskin's data but find that esti—

mates of n   are   sensitive to (1) the measure of expected inflation, (2) the

sample period, (3) the definition of saving, and (4) the interest rate

variable chosen for the regression. They cannot reject the hypothesis

that r is zero.

     More recently, Lawrence Summers (1981) builds a model in which life-

time consumption plans depend upon intertemporal substitution in utility,

time until retirement and death, the rate of time preference, rates of

growth, and the rate of return to saving. The model is then solved for

the saving elasticity. Plausible values for these other parameters

imply values for r from 1.5 to 3.0, a range much higher than those of

the econometric estimates described above. Finally, David Starrett (1982)

shows how amendments to Summers' model could widen these bounds still further,

but he argues for values of n    that   are lower than those found by Summers.-'
                               —5—

IV. Efficiency Analysis with Several Distortions

     For each different value of n, we use a computational model of the

U.S. economy and tax system to measure the welfare gains from four separate

tax reform proposals.' In the tradition of Harberger (1962, 1966), this

model abstracts entirely from the costs of implementing or administering

alternative tax proposals. It includes 19 different industries, each

with a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) production function defined

over capital, labor, and the outputs of other industries. Capital is homo-

geneous and mobile, and it faces an ad valorem rate of tax in each industry

that reflects corporate taxes, property taxes, and personal taxes. Differ—

ing rates of tax create distortions in the allocation of capital among

industries, so efficiency can be enhanced by any reform that tends to remove

tax rate disparities. In fact, for a fixed stock of capital in any one

period, any common rate of tax on all uses of capital is nondistorting.

     Each of 12 different income classes has an endowment of labor and

capital, and is assigned a nested CES utility function defined over future

consumption, present consumption, and leisure. The model allows the user

to specify any value for the wage elasticity of labor supply and any value

for the interest elasticity of saving. It then calculates parameters for

the twelve utility functions such that utility maximization behavior is

consistent with those elasticities. Government uses revenues in a balanced

budget to purchase industry outputs, to make transfer payments, and to

subsidize government enterprises. A trade sector closes the model.

     Total saving in each equilibrium is used to augment the capital stock

in successive equilibria. We choose an exogenous rate of growth for effective

labor units, such that a simulation with unchanged tax rules provides a

sequence of equilibria that lies on a steady state growth path. A simula-

tion with an alternative tax rule provides a sequence of equilibria that
                                —6—

approaches a different steady state growth path, with a different capital!

labor ratio for the economy. Intertemporal and other distortions are

then measured by comparing the discounted stream of consumption from

each sequence. Aggregate welfare differences are defined by the present

value of compensating variations, in 1973 dollars.-"

     When tax rules are altered for a simulation, we scale all personal

income tax rates up or down in order to keep the government's budget

balanced at the same level of real expenditures and transfer payments.

Miy change in an industry's tax on capital thus affects intersectoral

distortions through the dispersion of tax rates by industry, intertemporal

distortions through the overall average rate of tax on capital, and labor!

leisure distortions through the personal taxes required to maintain real

revenue yields. As a consequence, the model is fully capable of second—

best efficiency analysis in a world where nondistorting taxes are generally

unavailable. In such a world, the comparative advantages of alternative

tax reforms depend on a large set of behavioral parameters. In this paper,

of course, we provide total welfare gains as a function of the saving
             4!
elasticity



V. Tax Reform Simulations

     To demonstrate the relationships discussed above, we select four

particular tax reforms to evaluate. Our selection is essentially arbitrary,

but we wish to look at feasible reforms that are currently under cons idera—

tion by at least some economists and policymakers.

     1. Tax Imputed Rents. Homeowners earn a return to their investment

that currently escapes both corporate and personal taxation. This reform

raises the low rate of tax on capital in the housing industry, reduces
                                —7—

the dispersion of rates, and provides an intersectoral efficiency gain. By

raising more revenue, the government can also reduce the personal income

tax distortions in labor/leisure choices. By raising the overall rate of

tax on capital, however, this reform implies intertemporal losses that

increase in importance with the saving elasticity. Figure 1 shows that

gains outweigh losses for all values of ri between zero and 0.6, but that

the net gain falls from $256 billion to $126 billion across this range of

elasticity values. Because intertemporal losses are small for low n, this

reform dominates the others for n <   0.18.
     2. Index Capital Gains. In the current system, taxes are paid on

40 percent of real capital gains as well as on inflationary increases in

share prices and other asset values. This reform removes inflationary

gains from the tax base and reduces the overall taxation of income from

capital. It thus provides intertemporal gains that increase with n. It

changes industry tax rates differentially and has an ambiguous impact on

intersectoral distortions, but the revenue loss requires additional dis-

torting personal taxes on labor. Figure 1 shows how the net gain increases

from $18 billion to $185 billion, but this reform by itself never dominates

all the others.

     3. Integrate Income Taxes. Since industries differ in the degree to

which firms are incorporated, separate corporate taxes raise effective

rates in some industries more than others. This reform eliminates the

separate corporate tax system, but collects personal tax on retained as

well as distributed profits of corporations.   It lowers the highest rates

of tax on capital and thus provides both intersectoral and intertemporal

gains. Figure 1 shows how these gains outweigh additional distortions in

the labor/leisure choice, with net gains rising from $122 to $393 billion
                                —8--


as n is increased from zero to 0.6. Efficiency gains are larger than those

of any other reform when n is between 0.18 and 0.29.

     4. Integrate and Index. This reform combines those of 2 and 3 above,

and it provides the greatest reduction of taxes on income from capital.

With a zero saving elasticity, these interteinporal gains are relatively

unimportant. The large shortfall in revenue, however, requires major

increases in personal taxes that add to important labor/leisure distor-

tions. Net gains are only $34 billion, but these increase dramatically

to $481 billion as ri increase to 0.6. For values of n >   0.29,   intertemporal

gains outweigh other losses by enough that this reform dominates all

others. This curve in Figure 1 is not the vertical sum of the curves

from reforms 2 and 3, because the combined revenue shortfall requires an

increase in the personal tax rate that enters quadratically in the cost of

labor/leisure distortions.

     Figure 1 further indicates that the first curve is practically linear,

though slightly convex. The other three are practically linear, though

slightly concave. If the distribution of possible values for ri is symmetric

around 0.4, for example, these results indicate that the correct expected

welfare gainfromreducing taxes on capital is slightly less than the welfare

gain obtained with the use of r =   0.4 alone. Thus, when Fullerton, King,
Shoven, and Whalley (1981) report results for reforms 3 and 4, the effect

of this error is very small. By using only 0.4, however, they may leave the

misimpression that integration with indexing always dominates integration

alone in this model.
                                 —9—

VI. Conclusion

     In this paper, we use a general equilibrium simulation model to rank

four possible tax reforms on the basis of a measure of economic efficiency

that includes the intersectoral allocation of capital, the intertemporal

allocation of consumption, and the labor/leisure allocations of individuals.

The welfare gain from each tax reform is an almost linear function of the

saving elasticity assumed in the model, and we show the sensitivity. More-

over, even within the relatively narrow region between zero and 0.6, we

find values of the saving elasticity for which each of three different

tax reforms is ranked highest.

     One interpretation of this result is that until theorists such as

Summers (1981) and Starrett (1982) agree on a concept for the saving elas-

ticity, and until econometricians such as Boskin (1978) and Howrey and

Hymans (1978) agree on an estimate for the saving elasticity, those of us

who use this parameter to simulate tax reforms cannot hope to provide unambigu-

ous recommendations. to policymakers. Furthermore, because the saving

elasticity is only one of many uncertain parameters, econometric estimates

may never be refined sufficiently to allow the ranking of policy options by

a single criterion. Instead, more attention could be paid to the distribu-

tional effects and administrative costs that result from each reform.
                                            FIGURE I
            WELFARE GAINS (W) FROM FOUR TAX REFORMS, AS
            FUNCTIONS OF THE SAVING ELASTICITY ('77)




(I)

-J
  5
                                                                                      /
-J
0
0                                                                                         4. INTEGRATE
r")
N-
a)
                                                                                /   /        AND INDEX


IL
0
z0
C',   400
                                                                        /     /           3. INTEGRATE

-j
-J

z                                                                 /   /                      INCOME TAXES




U)
z
0
U

-J
U
U-
0                                / /                                                  _-2. INDEX CAPITAL
                                                                                            GAINS
U
-J                         / /                                       ——
                                                                          —




                     / /                    —
                                                —
                                                    —
                                                        ——
                                                             —
                                                                 —
                                                                                     - I.TAX IMPUTED
                                                                                            RENTS
zU
C,,
U              / /           ——
                                       ——




a-

       0
           0                                                                          0.6
                       INTEREST ELASTICITY OF SAVING (17)
                               Footnotes



1.   Lucas (1976) suggests a further problem. Values for n are estimated
     from past data, and individual behavior may adjust in response to a
     policy change.

2.   We provide only the briefest description of the general equilibrium
     model used in this paper, because more detail is readily available
     in Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (1981), and because great
     detail will soon become available in Ballard, Fullerton, Shoven and
     Whalley (1984).

3.   Though the model provides some distributional results, consumer groups
     are differentiated by current income rather than by lifetime earnings.
     Because individuals move through several current income groups during
     their lifetimes, redistribution among such groups is a poor indicator of
     lifetime welfare. Finally, because capital is homogeneous and mobile
     in this model, no individuals suffer immediate capital gains or losses
     as the result of tax reform.

4.   Welfare gains also depend upon the elasticity of labor supply with
     respect to the net wage, and on the elasticity of substitution
     between labor and capital in production. The uncompensated labor
     supply elasticity is set to 0.15 in this paper, while the substitution
     elasticities are chosen for each industry from estimates in the literature.
                             References

Ballard, Charles L., Don Fullerton, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley
     (1984). Evaluation of United States Tax Policies with a Numerical
     General Equilibrium Model, Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing
     Company, forthcoming.

Boskin, Michael J. (1978). "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest,"
     Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI (Part 2, April), pp. S3—S27.

Denison, Edward F. (1958). "A Note on Private Saving," Review of Economics
     and Statistics, XL (August), pp. 261—267.

Feldstein, Martin (1978). "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation,"
     Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI (Part 2, April), pp. S29—S5l.

Fullerton, Don, A.T. King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1981).
     "Corporate Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium
     Approach," American Economic Review, LXXI—4 (September), pp. 677—691.

Harberger, Arnold C. (1962). "The Incidence of the Corporation Income
     Tax," Journal of Political Economy, LXX—3 (June), pp. 215—240.

Harberger, Arnold C. (1966). "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from
     Capital," in Marion Krzyzaniak, ed., Effects of Corporation Income
     Tax, Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

Howrey, E. Philip and Saul H. Hymans (1978). "The Measurement and Deter-
     mination of Loanable—Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, pp. 655—85.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation:     A Critique,"
     in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and   the Labor
     Market, Vol. 1 of Carnegie—Rochester Conferences in Public   Policy, a
     supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary Economics,   Amsterdam:
     North—Holland Publications, pp. 19—46.

Starrett, David A. (1982). "Long Run Savings Elasticities in the Life
     Cycle Model," Factor Markets Workshop Research Paper No. 24, Stanford
     University.

Summers, Lawrence H. (1981). "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a
     Life Cycle Growth Model," American Economic Review, LXXI—4 (September),
     pp. 533—544.
