                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHY HAVE HOUSING PRICES GONE UP?

                                            Edward L. Glaeser
                                             Joseph Gyourko
                                              Raven E. Saks

                                          Working Paper 11129
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11129


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up?
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks
NBER Working Paper No. 11129
February 2005
JEL No. O2

                                           ABSTRACT

Since 1950, housing prices have risen regularly by almost two percent per year. Between 1950 and

1970, this increase reflects rising housing quality and construction costs. Since 1970, this increase

reflects the increasing difficulty of obtaining regulatory approval for building new homes. In this

paper, we present a simple model of regulatory approval that suggests a number of explanations for

this change including changing judicial tastes, decreasing ability to bribe regulators, rising incomes

and greater tastes for amenities, and improvements in the ability of homeowners to organize and

influence local decisions. Our preliminary evidence suggests that there was a significant increase in

the ability of local residents to block new projects and a change of cities from urban growth

machines to homeowners' cooperatives.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Raven E. Saks
saks@fas.harvard.edu
I. The Rise in Housing Prices

       The mean and variance of housing prices have risen across the United States since

1950. The top panel of Table 1 shows that the average price across the 316 metropolitan

areas of the continental United States has increased 1.7 percent annually from $59,575 in

1950 (in 2000 dollars) to $138,601 in 2000. More notable is the widening variance.

Since 1970, the standard deviation of real prices across metropolitan areas increased by

247 percent compared with a 72 percent increase in average prices.

       As Figure 1 shows, this rising variance reflects an explosion of housing values at

the top end of the price distribution. The top line in the figure plots the real average price

for the metropolitan area at the 90th percentile of the house value distribution. The second

line depicts price in the median metropolitan area, and the third line shows the mean

house value for the area at the 10th percentile of the distribution. In 1970, the average

house price in the metropolitan area at the 90th percentile was 35 percent more expensive

than that of the median metropolitan area. In 1990, the 90th percentile area’s price was

more than twice as expensive as for the median metropolitan area. There has been little

change in the gap between the median metropolitan area and low-cost areas.

       Too often, analysts attempt to understand housing prices only by attending to

demand-side factors such as interest rates or per capita income, while ignoring the

supply-side of the market. Rising prices require not only rising demand, but also limits

on supply. The supply of housing includes three elements: land, a physical structure, and

government approval to put the structure on the land. Thus, rising prices must reflect

rising physical costs of construction, increasing land prices or regulatory barriers to new

construction.




                                                                                              2
         The bottom panel of Table 1 reports the real value of construction costs per square

foot for a modest-quality, single-family home in a sample of 177 markets tracked by the

R.S. Means Company, a data provider to the home building industry. Average house

prices and construction costs rose together between 1950 and 1970, but since 1970, the

cost of putting up the physical structure has declined slightly while housing prices have

continued to rise. Even in booming markets, construction cost increases have been

modest. Between 1970 and 2000, real construction costs in San Francisco and Boston

rose by 4.6 percent and 6.6 percent, respectively. Over the same 30 years, real mean

house prices rose by 270 percent in the San Francisco primary metropolitan statistical

area (PMSA) and 127 percent in the Boston metropolitan area.

         Rising structure costs still could explain the post-1970 growth in housing prices if

structural size and quality were increasing rapidly. To assess the importance of housing

quality, we can compare the overall rise in housing prices with the rise in prices measured

by repeat-sales indices that hold housing structure constant. In the United States as a

whole, the real median value of owner-occupied housing rose by 1.20 percent per year

from 1980 to 2000. Over this same period, real appreciation of the repeat-sales index

published by the Office of Federal Enterprise Housing Oversight (OFHEO) was 0.93

percent per year, which suggests that changes in the quality of housing account for no

more than one quarter of the average increase in housing values. The same methodology

in high-price areas shows that quality growth is even less important in those places.1



1
  For example, real median prices rose by 3.14 percent per year between 1980-2000 in the San Francisco
metropolitan area according to U.S. Census data, while OFHEO reports a 3.45 percent real appreciation
rate for its constant quality series of repeat sales. The analogous numbers for the New York metropolitan
area are 3.64 percent and 3.71 percent, respectively. Because changes in structure quality clearly do not
account for higher prices in the most expensive coastal markets, we use Census data because it is available
over a much longer time period.


                                                                                                          3
         A summary measure of the importance of physical structure is the ratio of the

average house price (P) to the estimated physical construction cost (CC) for 102

metropolitan areas in each Census year from 1950-2000.2, 3 If the housing supply market

is competitive, then the difference between the value of this P/CC ratio and one tells us

how much of the value of housing cannot be accounted for by the physical cost of

supplying the unit. 4 This remainder reflects either the cost of land or the costs of

obtaining regulatory approval. The top two rows of Table 2 report the sample means and

standard deviations of the distribution of P/CC in each of the last six Census years, while

the bottom two rows report the implied share of land and regulatory approval (i.e., 1 –

CC/P). Even in the most expensive metropolitan areas, structure appears to have

represented almost all of the cost of housing in 1970 and earlier years.5 As the bottom

two rows of Table 2 indicate, the physical cost of constructing the house represented

about 90 percent of the value of the home in the metropolitan area in the 90th percentile of

the P/CC distribution in 1970. In the San Francisco PMSA, which had the lowest share

2
  Because construction costs are reported per square foot, housing values are divided by an estimate of the
median size of single-family homes in each metropolitan area. Specifically, the American Housing Survey
(AHS) is used to calculate median unit size for single-family homes in 1999. We then assume that unit size
grew by 2.75% per decade between 1960 and 2000, which roughly corresponds to national changes in unit
sizes in the AHS and information on the size of new single-family homes. In other work using data dating
back only to 1980, we make additional adjustments to the numerator and denominator of the P/CC ratio to
help control for potential bias in self-reporting of house values and for aging of the housing stock (see
Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)). Given the longer time span examined here, we are unable to make those
same adjustments. Our previous research shows that not controlling for the depreciation on existing homes
is more important empirically than not controlling for the upward bias in self-reported house values.
Hence, the P/CC ratios used here are likely to be biased downward. Experimentation confined to data from
more recent decades finds that the cross sectional distribution of P/CC ratios across cities is not sensitive to
these adjustments (or lack thereof).
3
  These 102 areas include the PMSA components of CMSAs. Grouping the relevant PMSAs together,
there are 68 distinct MSAs, CMSAs and NECMAs.
4
  Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005) present extensive evidence suggesting the highly competitive nature of
the housing market.
5
  There are several explanations for why we observe so many metropolitan areas with average housing
price below construction costs. As mentioned above, these estimates are not adjusted for the depreciation
of existing homes. Another factor that would bias our estimates downward is if housing units were smaller
in the past than we assume. In general, we have chosen assumptions to err on the side of yielding a
conservative (lower) P/CC ratio.


                                                                                                              4
of total house value accounted for by physical construction costs, only 24 percent was not

due to structure value.

       It is only since 1980, and only in a relatively few metropolitan areas, that there

has been a widening gap between price and construction cost. Almost all of the markets

in which housing prices became substantially higher than physical production costs

during the 1970s were part of the three big coastal metropolises in California—the Los

Angeles-centered CMSA, the San Francisco-centered CMSA, and the San Diego MSA.

       A decade later, gaps between prices and construction costs on the West Coast had

grown and had spread to interior markets in California. For example, structure

represented only 53 percent of average house value in Sacramento in 1990. High prices

relative to construction costs had also spread to other West Coast markets such as Seattle.

The non-structure component of house value also exceeded 40 percent across a swath of

the east coast roughly approximated by Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor.

       By the year 2000, there were 27 metropolitan areas in which structure could

account for no more than 60 percent of total house value. These locations include

virtually all of the coastal areas already discussed. Moreover, the 1990s witnessed the

spread of high housing prices relative to physical production costs to interior markets

such as Ann Arbor, MI, Austin-San Marcos, TX, Denver, CO, Nashville, TN, and

Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill, NC. In the highest priced housing markets in the nation

(the PMSAs within the San Francisco CMSA), structure is estimated to represent no more

than 30 percent of house value. Figure 2 plots the P/CC ratios in 2000 versus 1970 for all

102 metropolitan areas, and starkly illustrates the dramatic rise in the gap between price

and construction cost in the highest price markets over the past three decades.




                                                                                             5
       The key to understanding the rise in housing prices relative to construction costs

is that new construction has declined sharply in high price locations. Figure 3 documents

the drop in new construction intensity in three increasingly expensive metropolitan areas:

New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles. New construction is measured at decadal

frequencies as the share of housing units built since the last Census divided by the

number of units in the area in the preceding Census. The values reported for 1960

indicate that Los Angeles increased its stock by nearly 60 percent during the 1950s, while

the number of housing units in San Francisco expanded by more than 30 percent. Even

New York increased the size of its housing stock by more than 20 percent that decade.

By the 1990s, the housing stock in all three metropolitan areas increased by well under 10

percent over the decade.

       Although these three large, high housing price areas are outliers, Table 3 shows

that there has been a significant reduction in the rate of new construction nationally. In

the 1950s, the median rate of new construction was 40 percent in our sample of 102

metropolitan areas. Four decades later it had fallen to 14 percent, which was still double

the rates seen in San Francisco, New York, and Los Angeles.

       As late as the 1970s, there was a robust relationship between new construction

and the ratio of price to construction costs. Figure 4 shows that in places where prices

were high relative to construction costs in 1970, there was more new construction over

the ensuing decade (with the notable exception of the San Francisco PMSA). Figure 5

repeats the exercise for the 1990s, documenting that this basic relationship has been

reversed. It is no longer the case that high prices relative to construction costs generally

lead to a surge in new construction.




                                                                                               6
       Table 4 shows the declines in residential construction more rigorously. For our

panel of 102 metropolitan areas, we begin by regressing the ratio of new construction to

the initial housing stock on year dummy variables. These coefficients, which are

reported in the first column, document the significant decline in the intensity of new

construction between 1960 and today. The second regression includes controls for

density, income and the ratio of price-to-construction cost at the beginning of the decade.

The controls for price and density are both statistically significant, but they explain little

of the change over time. These three controls together reduce the coefficient on the year

2000 by .05, or about 14 percent. While such a regression is only suggestive, the results

indicate that rising density levels can only explain a small amount of the decline in new

construction over time. The third regression adds interactions of the P/CC variable with

the year dummies. Just as the figures suggested, there was a powerful relationship

between price and new construction during the earlier time periods that vanished by the

1990s (e.g., the total effect of P/CC in 1990, which is the sum of coefficient on the level

of P/CC and its interaction with 1990, is very close to zero).

       These results strongly suggest that restrictions on new supply have become

increasingly important in preventing suppliers from responding to high prices by building

additional units. But are these limits on new construction the result of a dwindling supply

of land or other barriers to new construction? Table 4 already suggested that this change

cannot be explained by density alone. Further evidence that rising density is not strong

enough to explain large declines in construction can be found by examining individual

permit-issuing places within the San Francisco metropolitan area. Figure 6 depicts a

robust negative relationship between initial period density and new construction in the




                                                                                                 7
1990s. However, it also shows many low-density, high cost areas with very little new

construction.6

         A final check on the density hypothesis is to return to the share of housing prices

that is not related to physical construction costs. Beyond physical structure, the cost of

supplying a house includes both the cost of the land and the cost of the right to build. If

the costs associated with the right to build were small, then the non-structure value of the

property would include only the cost of the land. A completely free market for land

would lead land to be worth the same amount on both the intensive and extensive

margins. Stated differently, a quarter acre would be valued the same if it sits under one

house or if it extends the lot of another house. Using this insight, Glaeser and Gyourko

(2003) and Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005) use hedonic price estimation to estimate

the price of land when it extends the lot of an existing house. We find that such land is

not all that valuable; generally a quarter acre is worth about ten times more if it sits under

a house than if it extends the lot of another house. The fact that land is worth much more

when it is bundled together with the right to build provides further evidence that the right

to build is worth a great deal.7

         In sum, the evidence points toward a man-made scarcity of housing in the sense

that the housing supply has been constrained by government regulation as opposed to




6
  A very similar relationship holds if one looks at the same relationship at the census tract level. That is,
more dense tracts have lower permitting intensity, but there are plenty of less dense tracts in the San
Francisco area with equally low permitting activity. That graph is available upon request. More generally,
Glaeser and Gyourko (2003) show that there is little relationship between density and high housing costs
across U.S. metropolitan areas.
7
  Additional evidence on the role of zoning is given by the relationship across metropolitan areas between
zoning and reduced construction levels and higher price increases. Saks (2004) uses an index of subjective
assessments of zoning regulations and finds a positive relationship with housing prices and a negative
relationship with residential construction.


                                                                                                            8
fundamental geographic limitations.8 The growing dispersion of housing prices relative

to construction costs suggests that these regulations have spread into a larger number of

local markets over time. Moreover, they appear to have become particularly severe in the

past 2-3 decades. To explore the source of these changes, the next section develops a

model of the incentives faced by local governments to impose restrictions on residential

development.



    II.      The Economics of Zoning and Permitting

          Our model is one of a local zoning authority that decides whether to approve or

reject residential development. There are two locations: the zoning authority’s town and

a reservation locale. There are N total consumers, of which D live in the town. The

remainder of the population lives in the reservation locale, and there are no constraints

preventing people from moving there. Total utility in this outlying area is a decreasing

function of the number of people living there, U ( N − D) .

          In the town, the flow of utility equals U(D)+a-housing costs, where U(D) is

decreasing in the amount of development in the city, and a is an individual-specific desire

to live in the locale. The distribution of a is described by a cumulative density F(a) and

density f(a). The cost of construction in the town equals K, which can be thought of as

capturing both physical costs of construction and the opportunity cost of land taken away

from agricultural uses. We normalize the cost of construction in the reservation locale to

be equal to zero, so that K reflects the additional cost of building a housing unit in town.

Denoting the interest rate as r, the annual cost of housing construction is rK.

8
  Even in areas like Manhattan where water restricts the ability to build outward, the option to build upward
remains. The choice to limit building heights constrains the number of new housing units just as other
zoning regulations may limit the number of single-family houses.


                                                                                                           9
        As in any spatial equilibrium, there will be a marginal consumer with a taste for

the town equal to â who is indifferent between living in the town or the reservation

locale. Every consumer with a value of a greater than â will live in the town and the

remaining consumers will live in the reservation locale. The marginal consumer must

satisfy D = N (1 − F (aˆ )) ; we use the notation aˆ ( D) = F −1 (1 − D / N ) .

        The initial population of the town is split into homeowners and renters. We

assume that a fraction h of these units are allocated to homeowners and the remainder to

renters. All individuals are assumed to live in the community for exactly L time periods.

After that time, individuals are replaced by identical consumers so that the total size of

                                                                    V
the population remains unchanged. Individuals maximize             ∫t =0
                                                                           e − rt u (t )dt + e − rV • AssetV

where u(t) is the flow of utility at time t, r is the interest rate and AssetV is the value of

any asset as of time V. Renters pay the market clearing rent, which is equal to the same

annual cost as the interest payments on a house. Both rents and housing values will

decline with new development. If the town starts with D housing units, then houses in

                      U ( D) − U ( N − D) + aˆ ( D)
town will be worth                                    .
                                     r

        Given these assumptions, there is a unique amount of development that will

maximize the average discounted lifetime utility of all current residents of the town. In

order to achieve this social optimum, it is necessary to allow for the possibility of side-

payments between developers (who gain from additional residential construction) and

homeowners (who lose from additional development through lower future housing

values). It is straightforward to show that a higher fraction of homeowners will lead to

less development. Moreover, because a shorter lifespan makes the resale value of homes



                                                                                                               10
more salient to homeowners, shorter life spans also curtail the optimal amount of

development.

       There are two reasons why the level of development that maximizes the welfare

of current residents will not be socially optimal. First, higher population density has a

negative impact on the utility of future residents of the town and of the reservation locale

that current residents will not internalize. Second, current homeowners have an incentive

to increase the value of their homes, and do not internalize the impact that higher housing

prices have on non-homeowners who would like to live in the town.

       We now consider the decision faced by the town’s zoning authority who decides

whether a new development project of size ∆ will proceed. We simplify the analysis by

assuming that utility in the reservation locale is fixed at U . Furthermore, we will ignore

the incentive of renters to lobby for more housing to be built. Essentially, this

assumption implies that renters are not organized enough to support the construction of

new housing.

       The zoning authority will receive net benefits of

α + g C (C R − C D ) + g T (TR − TD ) + ε from rejecting the project. The parameter α

captures the innate distaste of the authority for development. C D and C R reflect the cash

spent by developers and town residents to influence the authority’s decision, and g C is a

concave function reflecting the influence that cash will have on the decision-making of

the authority. Similarly, TD and TR reflect the time spent by the developer and residents,

respectively, on influencing the authority, with a concave function g T representing the

influence of time on the authority. We assume that both g(.) functions are symmetric

around zero. Finally, ε is a uniformly distributed mean-zero idiosyncratic term with


                                                                                            11
density 1. We will assume that parameter values are such that there is always some

positive probability that the project will be both accepted and rejected.

         Under these assumptions, the probability that the authority will authorize the

project equals .5 + g C (C D − C R ) + g T (TD − TR ) − α . We denote the cost of time to the

developer as W D and the cost to residents as W R . The developer therefore chooses the

amount of time and cash spent to influence the zoning board to maximize:


(.5 + g C (C D − C R ) + g T (TD − TR ) − α )∆⎛⎜ U ( D + ∆) − U + a( D + ∆) − K ⎞⎟ − WDTD − C D .
                                                                     ˆ
                                               ⎝               r                     ⎠

         From the perspective of each current homeowner, the development project will

                              U ( D + ∆) − U ( D) + e − rL (aˆ ( D + ∆) − aˆ ( D) )
create a net loss equal to                                                          . This expression
                                                    r

reflects both the negative externality associated with increased population density in town

and the decline in housing values. Individuals face costs of influencing the authority

equal to W R TR + C R . Because a continuous distribution of residents implies that each

individual person has a negligible impact on the zoning decision, we assume the

existence of a community organization that organizes town residents. This organization

includes a proportion λ of homeowners and maximizes the aggregate utility of its

members. We assume that W D > W R so that the opportunity cost of time is higher to the

developer than to the homeowners. Although this assumption seems plausible, it implies

that landlords cannot employ renters to lobby the zoning board at the same time cost

faced by homeowners.9



9
 Historically, it has been rare to see renters fight zoning restrictions. Perhaps this is due to some agency
problem that prevents developers from following this strategy. Stronger homeowner participation might be
because homeowners simply enjoy the social activity of protesting new developments.


                                                                                                         12
        Taken together, this model implies the following two propositions (proofs are in

the appendix):

Proposition 1: If both the landlord and the homeowners association undertake some

lobbying effort, then the landlord will use only cash and the homeowners will use only

time.

        Such specialization of effort seems consistent with much anecdotal evidence on

local battles between developers and community groups (Warner and Molotch (2000)).

This result implies:

Proposition 2: If both actors engage in a positive amount of lobbying then:

        (1) the probability that the project will be approved declines with α ,

        (2) the probability that the project will be approved is decreasing with h and λ ,

        (3) if g C ( x) = γ C • g~C ( x) and g T ( x) = γ T • g~T ( x) then the probability the project

            will be approved declines with γ T and rises with γ C , and

        (4) if U ( D + ∆ ) = U ( D ) − u∆ , then the probability the project will be approved

            falls with u.

Proposition 2 sets forth a number of comparative statics that can potentially explain the

change in the zoning environment in the United States. The first, and perhaps most

popular explanation to date, is that an increase in zoning reflects changes in the

preferences of judges and other political decision-makers. While there is evidence from

legal and economics scholarship that judges and local government officials have become

increasingly sympathetic to community and environmental concerns (see the discussion

below), it is unsatisfying to explain a large-scale shift of this nature simply by appealing

to changing preferences.



                                                                                                    13
          The second comparative static suggests that the explanation lies in the rise of

homeownership and the success of community organization. Increases in both the share

of homeowners and the political organization of homeowners’ groups should lead to less

development. In the past 40 years, the fraction of homeownership has risen from about

59 to 68% (Federal Reserve Board, 1964 and Aizcorbe et. al., 2003). Moreover, political

participation of homeowners groups has been rising (Nelson, 2004, Freund, 1974). Not

only should this trend restrict residential development, but Altshuler and Luberoff (2002)

suggest that these groups have been increasingly able to restrict large-scale nonresidential

development projects as well.

          The third part of Proposition 2 points to the changes in the relative effectiveness

of using cash versus time to influence political decision-makers. γ C can be interpreted as

the efficacy of bribes, and it is quite plausible that this parameter has declined over time.

In contrast, it is likely that the efficacy of spending time to influence decision-makers has

increased. Rising education levels and learning from other political battles (e.g., the civil

rights movement) may have made community members more savvy about using courts

and the press.

          The final comparative static concerns the taste for density. If rising incomes have

caused people to place a higher value on living in a low density community, then we

should expect to see less development. Other factors, such as crime and improvements in

transportation, may also have increased the desirability of low-density living.



   III.      Evaluating the Explanations for a More Restrictive Zoning Environment

          In this section, we review the possible reasons why it has become more difficult

to build new homes since 1970.


                                                                                            14
                                      Judicial Tastes

       In 1977, Robert Ellickson noted that “suburban governments are becoming ever

more adventuresome in their efforts to control housing development.” (p. 388). Ellickson

does not explain this change, but points to judicial decisions such as Nectow v. City of

Cambridge which have made it difficult for landowners to stop municipalities from

restricting new construction on their land. Fischel (2004) points to the ideology of

judges: “Courts, whose judges share the same environmental attitudes as middle class

homeowners (just as 1920s judges shared the ideology of hearth and home), were more

sympathetic to claims that the local decision had failed to account for environmental

impacts than they had been to seemingly selfish claims that neighbors’ home values were

at risk.” (pp. 332-333) Other cases such as Mt. Laurel that demanded low income

housing have simultaneously allowed growth controls: "once a community has satisfied

its fair share obligation [a fraction of the region’s low-income housing], the Mount Laurel

Doctrine will not restrict other measures, including large-lot and open area zoning, that

would maintain its beauty and communal character"(Mount Laurel II, 456 A.2d at 421

cited in Fischel (2004), p. 331).

       There can be little doubt that court decisions have become friendlier to anti-

development sentiment. While courts clearly are important, ultimately it is unsatisfying

to attribute the change in the zoning environment to changing attitudes of judicial

decision-makers. These attitudes are not exogenous, but reflect other trends in American

society. If changes in the tastes of judges and policy makers reflect societal trends like

the environmental movement, then these changes should be viewed as an improved

effectiveness of certain groups in shaping policy. In the language of the model, this




                                                                                             15
should be viewed as an increase in TR or γ T , not an exogenous change in α .

Empirically, we cannot reject the hypothesis that judicial tastes changed, but on

theoretical grounds this explanation is so unsatisfying that we will turn elsewhere.

                             The Impact of Residents’ Groups

        While the influence of developers may or may not have declined, many observers

have noted a sizable increase in the organization and political impact of local residents.

Altshuler and Luberoff (2002) examine the history of large scale government projects

(“Mega Projects”) and describe changes that began in the 1960s, when citizens became

better able to challenge large scale projects that would impact their neighborhood. One

early and striking example was Jane Jacobs’ leadership of the Greenwich Village

movement that stopped Robert Moses’ West Side highway project in New York.

Through increasingly sophisticated use of the media, local groups learned how turn

mega-projects into public relations disasters.

        There is abundant evidence of the impact of homeowners’ and neighborhood

groups, but there is less understanding of where this impact comes from. One hypothesis

is that homeowners have become better organized (an increase in λ ). Some analysts

have suggested that the organization skills of environmental groups were learned from

the organizational successes of the civil rights movement and the anti-war protests.

Either through imitation of these earlier groups or because of rising education and media

savvy, local residents appear to have become better at using the media and the courts.

Thus, the typical residential activist of 2004 seems more skilled than its counterpart from

1955.




                                                                                             16
               The Ability to Use Cash to Influence Local Decision-Makers

       A third possible hypothesis is that developers’ ability to use cash to influence

local decision-makers has fallen over time. This influence historically has come both

from legal payments, in the form of campaign donations or legal cash transfers (i.e. a

developer employing a politician for legal work), or illegal cash payments or bribes.

Zoning environments may have become more restrictive if developers in the 1960s were

more easily able to bribe local politicians than they can today. In other words, the urban

growth machine described by Molotch (1976) has weakened as it has become harder for

developers to transfer cash to politicians.

       There is some evidence suggesting a decline in corruption over time within the

United States. Glaeser and Goldin (2004) use newspaper records to show a decline in the

share of articles alleging corruption between the late 19th century and the mid-20th

century. However, their coverage does not show a significant change between 1960s and

the 1990s—the period of the permitting slowdown. Anecdotes about corruption in

development abound, and it may be true that such anecdotes were more common in the

1960s than today. While this hypothesis remains plausible, there is precious little

evidence either supporting or refuting it.

       Even if it were possible to show such a change, it would be desirable to go further

and try to understand why this change occurred. One plausible explanation is that

improvements in the news media have caused more attention to be paid to corrupt deals.

A second explanation is that the political influence of local party machines has declined.

These machines facilitated the flow of funds from developers (or anyone else) and

ensured that legal repercussions from local justice would be modest. The decline of local




                                                                                          17
machines might also have played a role in reducing the influence that developers were

able to have on local governments.

                                  The Value of Amenities

       Another natural explanation for the rise in restrictions on new construction is that

rising income levels have increased the willingness to pay for high amenity

neighborhoods, and in particular, for low density neighborhoods (assuming low density is

a normal good, of course). This hypothesis corresponds to an increase in the parameter u,

which the model predicts should lead to a decrease in permitting as the incentive of

homeowners to spend time to block new construction rises.

       To evaluate the importance of rising incomes in explaining the decline in

permitting, we regress the share of new housing units in 1960 on the ratio of housing

prices to construction costs, density, and the logarithm of income in 1950. The

coefficient on income is -.14 (with a standard error of .23), indicating that richer

communities were less likely to build new housing units.

       However, the magnitude of this coefficient is not large enough to explain the

general decline in permitting over time. Our data suggest that permitting has declined by

37 percentage points between 1960 and today. In those same areas, real median incomes

have risen by .77 log points. Using the estimated coefficient on income, together these

values suggest that rising incomes can explain only about 29 percent of the fall in

residential construction. Rising American incomes are important, but they are only a

small part of the change in the permitting environment.

       Another way to think about the effect of income is to consider the zoning

environment of very rich places in 1960. If the income hypothesis is correct, then




                                                                                          18
permitting in these places should have been as restrictive in 1960 as the entire

metropolitan areas of Boston or New York in more recent years. However, places like

New Rochelle, NY, San Mateo, CA and West Orange, NJ, each allowed at least 10 times

as much development in the 1950s as metropolitan areas with comparable incomes today.

Again, this analysis suggests that the complete story goes well beyond the explanation

that homeowners became richer.

                             Changes in the Housing Market

       A final hypothesis is that the impact of new construction on housing prices has

changed over time. In the 1950s, housing costs were low, lower incomes made people

less concerned about environmental amenities, and an absence of construction in previous

decades may have meant that the quality of new housing was significantly higher than

older units. For these reasons, new construction may not have led to major reductions in

housing prices for existing units and as such, homeowners had much weaker incentives to

fight new construction. In 2004, however, homeowners appear to believe that new

construction will significantly reduce housing prices. Certainly, the evidence in this

paper linking rising housing prices to reductions in construction suggests that they are

right. As in the case of the previous theories, we have little evidence on the relevance of

this theory and we look to further research to examine this hypothesis more thoroughly.



IV. Conclusion

       Housing is one of the most important elements in household portfolios and

budgets. Over the past 30 years, the dispersion in prices across American markets has

increased substantially. In much of the country, new housing units still are abundant and




                                                                                           19
housing prices remain low. In contrast, new construction has plummeted and housing

prices have soared in a small, but increasing number of places. These changes do not

appear to be the result of a declining availability of land, but rather are the result of a

changing regulatory regime that has made large-scale development increasingly difficult

in expensive regions of the country.

        Changes in housing supply regulations may be the most important transformation

that has happened in the American housing market since the development of the

automobile, but they are both under-studied and under-debated. The positive research

agenda going forward should be to understand why these changes have occurred and

what relationship exists with other major trends in the American society. The normative

policy agenda should be to better understand the costs and benefits of limits on new

construction. The costs appear to include higher prices and a misallocation of labor,

while the benefits include internalization of construction-related externalities. Given the

implications of this regulatory shift, the economics profession could make a major

contribution by analyzing the welfare effects of regulation on the rise in housing prices.




                                                                                              20
                                      References

Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur B. Kennickell and Kevin B. Moore. 2003. “Recent Changes in
   U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer
   Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin (January).

Altshuler, Alan and David Luberoff. 2002. Mega-Projects. Washington, DC: The
    Brookings Institution.

Ellickson, Robert C. 1977. “Suburban Growth Controls: An Economic and Legal
    Analysis.” Yale Law Journal 86 (3): 385-511.

Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 1964. “Survey of Financial Characteristics of
   Consumers.” Report (March).

Fischel, William. 2004. “An Economic History of Zoning and a Cure for Its Exclusionary
    Effects.” Urban Studies 41(2): 317-40.

Freund, Eric C. 1974. “Land Development Management: Revolution and Evolution” in
   Municipal Year Book. Washington: International City Management Association.

Glaeser, Edward and Goldin, Claudia. 2004. “Corruption and Reform: An Introduction.”
   National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10775.

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. 2003. “The Impact of Zoning on Housing
   Affordability.” Economic Policy Review 9(2): 21-39.

Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks. 2005. “Why is Manhattan So
   Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in House Prices.” Journal of Law and
   Economics.

Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai. 2004. “Superstar Cities”. Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at
   Wharton Working Paper, July 2004, University of Pennsylvania.

Molotch, Harvey. 1976. “The City as a Growth Machine.” American Journal of
  Sociology 82(2): 309-30.

Nelson, Robert H. 2002. “The Rise of Private Neighborhood Associations: A
   Constitutional Revolution in Local Government.” prepared for a conference on “The
   Property Tax, Land Use and Land-Use Regulation,” sponsored by the Lincoln
   Institute of Land Policy, January 13-15, 2002.

R.S. Means Company. 2000a. Residential Cost Data. Kingston, MA : R.S. Means Co.

__________________ 2000b. Square Foot Costs. Kingston, MA : R.S. Means Co.




                                                                                        21
Saks, Raven E. 2004. “Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on
   Employment Growth in Metropolitan Areas.” Working Paper.

Warner, Kee and Molotch, Harvey. 2000. Building Rules: How Local Controls Shape
  Community Environments and Economies. Boulder, CO: Westview.




                                                                                  22
                              Appendix: Proofs of Propositions


Proof of Proposition 1:

                                          U (D ) − U (D + ∆ ) + e − rL (aˆ ( D) − aˆ ( D + ∆) )
        We use the notation that Φ R =                                                          and
                                                                 r

       ⎛ U ( D + ∆) − U + aˆ ( D + ∆)     ⎞
Φ D = ∆⎜                              − K ⎟ for the losses and gains from development for
       ⎝              r                   ⎠

the homeowners and the developer respectively. For the developer, the marginal product

of spending an additional dollar is g C′ (C D − C R )Φ D − 1 and the marginal product of

spending more time equals g T′ (TD − TR )Φ D − W D . The second derivative of the

developer’s utility with respect to spending is g C′′ (C D − C R )Φ D and the second derivative

of the developer’s utility with respect to time is g T′′ (TD − TR )Φ D . For the homeowners,

the marginal impact of more spending is λhΦ R Dg C′ (C D − C R ) − 1 and the marginal

impact of more time is λhΦ R Dg T′ (TD − TR ) − WD . The second derivative with respect to

spending is − λhΦ R Dg C′′ (C D − C R ) and the second derivative with respect to time is

− λhΦ R Dg T′′ (TD − TR ) . Obviously, if the second order conditions hold for the

homeowners they cannot hold for the developer and vice-versa. Because the problem is

inevitably concave for one of the actors and convex for the other, it cannot be an

optimum in which for both actors use both technologies.

        We have assumed that each actor uses at least one technology, so it remains to be

shown which technology will be used by each actor. For the homeowners to use cash, it

must be the case that λhΦ R Dg T′ (−TR ) − W R < 0 = λhΦ R Dg C′ (C D ) − 1 which would

imply that g T′ (−TR ) / g C′ (C D ) < WR . For the developers to use time,



                                                                                                      23
g C′ (C D )Φ D −1 < 0 = g T′ (−TR )Φ D −WD , but this would imply that g T′ (−TR ) / g C′ (C D ) > WD

which is a contradiction. On the other hand, if the homeowners use time and the

developers use cash, this must imply that

λhΦ R Dg T′ (−TR ) − WR = 0 > λhΦ R Dg C′ (C D ) − 1 and

g C′ (C D )Φ D −1 = 0 > g T′ (−TR )Φ D −WD .



Proof of Proposition 2: Given the assumptions that have been made, the probability that

the project is authorized .5 + g C (C D ) + g T (−TR ) − α , where λhΦ R Dg T′ (−TR ) = WR and

gC′ (CD )Φ D = 1 .

(1) Given that the value of α does not impact the type of lobbying employed by either

interest group, the probability of the project being approved will decline with α .

(2) Differentiation of λhΦ R Dg T′ (−TR ) = WR and second order conditions implies that TR

is rising with both λ and h. As TR rises, the probability that the project will be approved

falls.

(3) If g C ( x) = γ C • g~C ( x) then the probability of approval equals

.5 + γ C g~C (C D ) + g T (−TR ) − α and the derivative of this with respect to γ C is

                             ∂C D
g~C (C D ) + γ C g~C′ (C D )      , where using the implicit function theorem,
                             ∂γ C

∂C D      g~C′ (C D )
     =                    which is positive since second order conditions have been assumed
∂γ C   − γ C g~C′′ (C D )

to hold, so the overall impact of γ C is positive. If g T ( x) = γ T • g~T ( x) then the derivative

                                                                                      ∂T
of the probability of approval with respect to γ T equals g~T (−TR ) − γ C g~C′ (−TR ) R ,
                                                                                      ∂γ T


                                                                                                   24
                         ∂T R    g~T′ (−TR )
where g~T (−TR ) < 0 and      = ~               which is positive since second order
                         ∂γ T  γ T g T′′ (−TR )

condition have been assumed, so the overall impact is negative.

(4) If U ( D + ∆) = U ( D) − u∆ , then the parameter u only enters through the terms

     U (D ) − U (D + ∆ ) + e − rL (aˆ ( D) − aˆ ( D + ∆) )
ΦR =                                                       and
                            r

       ⎛ U ( D + ∆) − U + aˆ ( D + ∆)     ⎞
Φ D = ∆⎜                              − K ⎟ . Differentiation then yields the result that
       ⎝              r                   ⎠

∂TR    ∆g T′ (−TR )             ∂C D   − ∆2 g C′ (C D )
    =                   > 0 and      =                    < 0 , so lobbying by homeowners
 ∂u   rΦ R g T′′ (−TR )          ∂u    − Φ D g C′′ (C D )

increases and lobbying by developers decreases. Thus, the probability of approval must

fall.




                                                                                            25
                        Table 1: Real House Prices Over Time
                           316 Metropolitan Areas; $2000
                   1950       1960       1970        1980            1990         2000
Mean              $59,575    $73,741   $80,556     $109,570        $120,929     $138,601
% Change in
Mean Over            --        23.8%       9.2%        36.0%         10.4%       14.6%
Decade

                    Real Single-Family Construction Costs Over Time
                            One-Story, Modest Quality Home
                                       $2000/ft2
                    1950        1960      1970         1980        1990           2000
     Mean          $49.70      $58.50    $63.60       $65.40      $63.30         $61.60
 % Change in         --
  Mean Over                    17.7%      8.7%         2.8%       -3.2%            -2.7%
    Decade
Notes:
1. The source for the house price data is Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2004). Prices are
for single-family homes, with metropolitan area values being aggregated across their
county components based on 1999 definitions from the Office of Management and
Budget. Prices are reported for individual primary metropolitan statistical area (PMSA)
components of consolidated metropolitan statistical areas (CMSAs).

2. Construction costs are from the R.S. Means Company, a consultant and data provider
to the home building industry. The underlying data include material costs, labor costs,
and equipment costs for a lower-quality, one story house without a basement that still
meets building code requirements in each market. See the following two publications by
the R. S. Means Company for greater detail on the underlying cost data: Residential Cost
Data, 19th annual edition, (2000) and Square Foot Costs, 21st annual edition (2000), both
published by the R.S. Means Company.




                                                                                       26
              Table 2: Price-to-Construction Cost Ratios (P/CC) Over Time
                                102 Metropolitan Areas
                     1950        1960        1970        1980      1990         2000
Mean                 0.83        0.90        0.88        1.15       1.35        1.46
Standard
                    0.16        0.16         0.16        0.30        0.59        0.55
Deviation
90th Percentile     1.04        1.10         1.12        1.49        2.17        1.85
Maximum             1.19        1.30         1.31        2.17        3.49        4.06

                                    Implied Land Share (~1 – CC/P)
90th Percentile     0.04        0.09        0.11        0.33       0.54          0.46
Maximum             0.16        0.23        0.24        0.54       0.71          0.75

Notes: Mean house prices are constructed for each metropolitan area using county-level
data from the relevant decennial census. Construction cost data are from the R.S. Means
Company as described above. Various adjustments to the price and cost data as
described in the text.




                                                                                        27
             Table 3: New Housing Units as a Fraction of Initial Housing Stock
                      25th percentile         Median               75th percentile
      1960                  .33                 .40                      .59
      1970                  .24                 .35                      .45
      1980                  .23                 .36                      .53
      1990                  .11                 .18                      .26
      2000                  .09                 .14                      .19
Note. New units in 1960, 1970 and 1980 are the number of housing units built since the previous census.
New units in 1990 and 2000 are the total number of building permits. Sample is limited to a balanced panel
of 102 metropolitan areas for which it is possible to calculate housing prices relative to construction costs.




                                                                                                          28
                                         Table 4:
               Declines in Residential Construction Controlling for Density
                 Constant (1960)           .52        .46          .58
                                          (.04)      (.06)        (.07)
                 Year
                     1970                 -.14       -.09         -.17
                                          (.02)      (.05)        (.05)
                     1980                 -.12       -.03         -.11
                                          (.03)      (.09)        (.07)
                     1990                 -.32       -.24         -.35
                                          (.03)      (.08)        (.07)
                     2000                 -.37       -.29         -.37
                                          (.03)      (.09)        (.08)
                 Year* P/CCt-10
                     1970                                         -.36
                                                                  (.20)
                     1980                                         -.51
                                                                  (.21)
                     1990                                         -.70
                                                                  (.28)
                     2000                                         -.83
                                                                  (.28)
                 Log densityt-10                     -.10         -.12
                                                     (.02)        (.02)
                 P/CCt-10                             .15          .89
                                                     (.05)        (.30)
                 Log incomet-10                      -.06         -.08
                                                     (.15)        (.14)
                 Adjusted R2              0.27       0.42         0.48
Note. Dependent variable is the number of new units in each decade relative to the initial housing stock.
New units in 1960, 1970 and 1980 are the number of housing units built since the previous census. New
units in 1990 and 2000 are the total number of building permits. Sample is limited to a balanced panel of
102 metropolitan areas for which it is possible to calculate housing prices relative to construction costs.
Density is the number of housing units per square mile. Income is a weighted average of median family
income by county, where the weights are the fraction of families in the metropolitan area. Each right-hand
side variable is expressed relative to its sample average. Standard errors are clustered by metropolitan area.




                                                                                                           29
                    Figure 1: Changes Across the House Price Distribution
                                    Average Values, 316 MSAs
        200000
          150000
     2000 $
100000  50000




                   1950      1960          1970            1980   1990   2000
                                                  year

                                    10th                 50th     90th




                                                                                30
Figure 2: House Prices Relative to Construction Costs in 1970 and 2000


                                          4
                                                                                                                                                   San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                    San Fran

                                         3.5
Housing Price/Construction Costs, 2000




                                                                                                             Santa Cr

                                          3


                                                                                                                                     Oakland,
                                         2.5                                                                                                       Orange C
                                                                                                                             Ventura,
                                                                                                                         San Dieg
                                                                                                                   Seattle-       Denver,
                                          2                                                                                                     Los Ange

                                                                                                                                    NashvillNew Have     Fort Lau
                                                                                                    Yolo, CA                                     Washingt
                                                                                       Raleigh-   Sacramen
                                                                                           Austin-S Boston-W          Ann    ArboMiami,   New Bergen-P
                                                                                                                                               York
                                                                                                                                         FNassau-S
                                                                                                                  Atlanta,        Newark,
                                         1.5                                                  Salt Lak Phoenix-
                                                                                          Greeley,
                                                                                              Albuquer    Charlest          Middlese      Norfolk-
                                                                                            ColoradoRiversid
                                                                                              Baltimor
                                                                                               Greensbo                    Springfi
                                                                                                                        Monmouth      Columbia
                                                                                                                                Chicago,
                                                                                          Bremerto
                                                                                           Orlando,    Tampa-St Columbus       Memphis,
                                                                                                                                Las  Vega     New Orle
                                                                                       Jacksonv
                                                                                             Hamilton
                                                                              Tacoma, Olympia,Wilmingt  Dallas,      Milwauke
                                                                                                                        Little R
                                                                                 Chattano     Omaha,
                                                                                             Cincinna  N      Baton
                                                                                                           Minneapo
                                                                                                     Shrevepo
                                                                                                     Detroit,        Ro
                                                                           GrandKnoxvill
                                                                                  RaIndianap
                                                                                         Tulsa,
                                                                                     Hagersto    OKenosha,
                                                                                                 Wichita,
                                                                                                       Akron, O
                                                                                                Canton-M
                                                                                          ProvidenDutchess     Clevelan
                                                                           Birmingh
                                                                          Fort  Wor                       Racine,
                                                                                                       Gary,
                                                                                                     Peoria-P  INEl Paso,
                                                                                      St.  San
                                                                                     Houston,   Anto
                                                                                            Toledo,
                                                                                        Oklahoma
                                                                                          Loui
                                          1                        Fresno,
                                                                              Brazoria
                                                                           Philadel
                                                                            Bakersfi
                                                                             Galvesto
                                                                                        Kansas
                                                                                    Newburgh
                                                                                        Albany-S
                                                                                        Youngsto C
                                                                                          Kankakee      Rocheste
                                                        Allentow
                                                                     Vineland
                                                                       Pittsbur
                                                Scranton                  Syracuse

                                          .5
                                               .4                        .6                   .8                   1                                           1.2
                                                                              Housing Price/Construction Costs, 1970




                                                                                                                                                                               31
Figure 3: Declining Construction Intensity in Select High House Value Markets
San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York PMSAs, 1960-2000


                                                          San Francisco PMSA          Los Angeles PMSA
                                                          New York PMSA

                                              .6
New Housing Units Relative to Initial Stock




                                              .5


                                              .4


                                              .3


                                              .2


                                              .1


                                              0
                                                   1960            1970        1980          1990        2000
                                                                               year




                                                                                                                32
Figure 4: Residential Construction and P/CC in the 1970s
Metropolitan Areas with P/CC > 1 in 1970


                                                                                                                              Fort Lau
                                                      .952966
New Units 1970-80 Relative to Housing Stock in 1970




                                                                                                                  Orange C




                                                                                                                   San Jose
                                                                    Norfolk-
                                                                                 New Orle
                                                                                                 Washingt
                                                                Oakland,


                                                                           New Have
                                                                      Nassau-S                     Los Ange
                                                                                                                                           San Fran

                                                                                      Bergen-P
                                                                     New York
                                                      .081713
                                                                1.10612                                                                  1.30795
                                                                                                            P/CC Ratio in 1970




                                                                                                                                                      33
Figure 5: Residential Construction and P/CC in the 1990s
Metropolitan Areas with P/CC > 1 in 1990



                                                                        Las Vega
New Units 1990-2000 Relative to Housing Stock in 1990




                                                        .697771




                                                                        Raleigh-
                                                                          Orlando,
                                                                               Atlanta,
                                                                         Phoenix-
                                                                       Austin-S

                                                                                          Nashvill
                                                                    JacksonvDallas,
                                                                        Ann   Arbo
                                                                            Columbia
                                                                                 Denver,
                                                                           Memphis,
                                                                              Albuquer          Seattle-
                                                                                               Fort Lau Yolo, CA
                                                                     Greensbo                                   Washingt
                                                                   Bakersfi
                                                                       Charlest                          Sacramen
                                                                     El Paso,     Wilmingt           Riversid
                                                                           Tampa-St         Norfolk-
                                                                     Little R
                                                                  Hagersto           Miami,
                                                                                    NewburghF
                                                                                      Baltimor                 Middlese
                                                                                                             Monmouth
                                                                              Chicago,                                        San Dieg Oakland,       Orange  C
                                                                                                                                                       Ventura,
                                                                                                                                                                  San Jose
                                                                       Albany-S
                                                                  Rocheste
                                                                     Philadel              Dutchess
                                                                          New Orle       Providen Boston-W                New Have
                                                                  Shrevepo                                Springfi Nassau-S
                                                                                                                       Newark,                       Santa Cr
                                                                                                                                                Los Ange                     San Fran
                                                                                                                  New YorkBergen-P
                                                        .027381
                                                                  1.10583                                                                                               3.4939
                                                                                                                P/CC Ratio in 1990




                                                                                                                                                                                        34
Figure 6: The Intensity of New Single Family Construction and Density in the San Francisco PMSA
         (Permit-Issuing Places, 1980-2002)
                                           .6
                                                     Half Mo o
single-family permits / SF units in 1980




                                           .5



                                           .4



                                           .3            N ovato
                                                Col ma to
                                                 Portola Tibu ron

                                                                                             Foster C
                                                Woo dside
                                           .2                     Corte Ma
                                                                    Re dwoo d
                                                         Hi llsbor San Ra fa         So uth Sa
                                                       Athe rto n                                                   Daly Cit
                                                     Bri sban e
                                                                   Me nlo Pa San Carl
                                           .1                      Pa cifica
                                                                      Mill Va lFai rfa x BeSausa
                                                                                              lmont
                                                                                L arkspur            lit
                                                        R oss tow
                                                                                  Sa n Anse
                                                                                   Be lved er          San
                                                                                                         Burli
                                                                                                           Manga
                                                                                                               te
                                                                                                                                      Sa n Fra n
                                                                                          SanMiBrun
                                                                                                 llbrae
                                           0
                                                 0               1000                2000        3000       4000        5000   6000
                                                                                     housing units per square mile in 1980




                                                                                                                                                   35
