                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                                            Linda S. Goldberg
                                               Cédric Tille

                                          Working Paper 11127
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11127


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondences
to Linda S. Goldberg or Cédric Tille, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New
York, N.Y. 10045. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org, or Cedric.Tille@ny.frb.org. We thank Lars Svennson,
Helene Rey, David Weinstein, and seminar audiences at Columbia University and Princeton University for
valuable comments. Geoffrey Barrows, Eleanor Dillon, Luis Gonzalez and Matthew Kondratowicz provided
careful and diligent research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Linda S. Goldberg and Cédric Tille. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade
Linda S. Goldberg and Cédric Tille
NBER Working Paper No. 11127
February 2005
JEL No. F3, F4

                                            ABSTRACT

Although currency invoicing in international trade transactions is central to the transmission of
monetary policy, the forces motivating the choice of currency have long been debated. We introduce
a model wherein agents involved in international trade can invoice in the exporter's currency, the
importer's currency, or a third-country vehicle currency. The model is designed to contrast the
contribution of macroeconomic variability with that of industry-specific features in the selection of
an invoice currency. We show that producers in industries with high demand elasticities are more
likely than producers in other industries to display herding in their choice of currency. This industry-
related force is more influential than local macroeconomic performance in determining producers'
choices. Drawing on data on invoice currency use in exports and imports for twenty-four countries,
we document that the dollar is the currency of choice for most transactions involving the United
States. The dollar is also extensively used as a vehicle currency in international trade flows that do
not directly involve the United States. Consistent with the results of our model, this last finding is
largely attributable to international trade in reference-priced and organized-exchange traded goods.
Although the magnitude of business-cycle volatility matters for invoicing of more differentiated
products, it is less central for invoicing nondifferentiated goods.

Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

Cédric Tille
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
cedric.tille@ny.frb.org
                       VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


I. Introduction

       In which currency should exporters set the price of their goods? When selling to a
foreign market, an exporting firm has three options. It can invoice the transaction in its
own currency (producer’s currency pricing, PCP), in the currency of the destination
country (local currency pricing, LCP), in a third currency (vehicle currency pricing,
VCP), or in a combination of these. Which of these three options is best for the firm is
not straightforward from a theoretical perspective. In this paper, we contribute to this
issue both theoretically and empirically. We show the interaction between
macroeconomic variability and industry features in influencing invoice currency
selection. We argue that the preserve of Walrasian type goods, characterized by a high
price elasticity of demand, promotes herding in a single currency. In an industry where
goods are close substitutes, a firm has an incentive to limit the movement of its price
relative to that of its competitors, leading it to invoice in the same currency as they do.
This feature leads to a currency becoming the dominant medium of invoicing in the
market. Macroeconomic variability plays more of a role for differentiated products. We
demonstrate these points empirically, after presenting and analyzing rich new data on the
actual invoice currency choices on the exports and imports of twenty-four countries.
       Our analysis builds on a rich history of thought on vehicle currency selection.
Swoboda (1968, 1969) stressed the role of transaction costs in trading different
currencies, and provided early arguments that currencies used as mediums of exchange
would be those associated with low transaction costs. Such low costs could for instance
reflect a high degree of liquidity in the foreign exchange markets for the currencies in
question. More recently, Rey (2001) elegantly exposited this theme in a three-country
general equilibrium model, confirming the importance of a currency’s “thick market
externalities” arising from a large presence in global international trade and low
transaction costs of exchange. McKinnon (1979) emphasized the role of industry
characteristics. He argued that industries where goods are homogeneous and traded in
specialized markets likely to be invoiced in a single low transaction cost currency.
Krugman (1980) pointed to the presence of inertia in vehicle currency selection. When a
currency is established as the dominant one in a market, a particular firm has no incentive
to invoice in an alternative currency as this would lead to higher transaction cost and


                                                                                         1
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


more volatile sales because of movements in its price relative to its competitors’. Once a
currency has acquired a prominent role, because of low transaction costs for instance, it
may keep this role even if another currency with similarly low costs emerges.
        Macroeconomic variability has likewise been offered as a driver of vehicle
currency choice. Giovannini (1988) was perhaps the first researcher to formalize the role
such variability on both producer profit maximization and the selection of vehicle
currencies. Devereux, Engel and Storegaard (2004) have a similar emphasis, but instead
use a general equilibrium setup to introduce a role for monetary fluctuations in the
invoicing decision. 1 The elegantly show that in a two country world, a high volatility of
monetary stances in either country leads to a high volatility of the exchange rate, leading
producers to set their prices in the currency of the low volatility country.2 Engel (2003)
extent use a similar setup to highlight the parallels between the choice of invoicing when
prices are sticky and the optimal degree of exchange rate pass-through when prices are
fully flexible.
        We present a theoretical model intended to nest some of these themes. Although
our analysis is partial equilibrium, we extend Devereux, Engel and Storegaard (2004) in
two key dimensions. First, we consider a model with three countries in order to establish
conditions for selection of non-counterparty vehicle currencies. Second, we provide an
explicit role for industry-specific characteristics in influencing the invoice currency
choice. This extension is essential for capturing some of the McKinnon-Krugman-Rey
insights. We show that, in any country, producers with differing degrees of product
homogeneity can make different invoicing choices for their international trade
transactions. Producers in a industry with homogenous goods aim at keeping their price
in line with their competitors’, leading them to invoice in the currency that has a
dominant role for the industry. By contrast, producers transacting in differentiated goods


1
 See also Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002) and Devereux and Engel (2001).
2
  Donnenfeld and Haug (2002, 2000) look at the role of exchange rate volatility in driving the invoicing
decision for Canadian trade transactions. They conclude that a higher volatility makes LCP more attractive,
or VCP provided that goods are not too substitutable. These conclusions are in contrast to the ones
discussed above, and may be driven by the particular nature of the (nonstandard) model used. In their
model output is preset first, set prices are set, and then sales take place. The more standard models have
prices set first and then output demand determined. See also Oi, Otani, and Shirota (2004) in which a
general equilibrium model of invoice currency choice is presented and applied to Japanese data. Hartmann
(1998) recently explores vehicle currency choice from a market microstructure perspective.


                                                                                                         2
                          VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


care less about limiting the movement of their price relative to their competitors, and
focus more on macroeconomic volatility.
        This theory provides a nice background for our novel and extensive empirical
evidence on the currency invoicing of international trade for 24 countries. As broad
characterizations, we confirm that the U.S. dollar is the primary, but not unique, invoice
currency choice in transactions involving the United States as a counterparty. The euro
has replaced the legacy currencies in euro-area transactions and has displaced the dollar
mainly in some transactions of European Union accession countries (ECB 2003). The
dollar remains an important invoicing currency in transactions involving Asian countries,
Australia, and the United Kingdom, among others.
        Our analysis of this data reveals other more nuanced patterns in the use of the
dollar as a vehicle currency in international transactions. Within the few countries for
which industry details on invoicing are available, we observe substantial cross-industry
variation in the extent to which the dollar is a vehicle currency on trade. For the larger
group of 24 countries, we explore whether a delineation of types of good traded by
degree of product substitutability explains aggregate invoicing currency choices on
exports and imports. Specifically, we establish this heterogeneity after applying the
Rauch (1999) network indices to the trade composition of each of the countries. These
indices enable us to determine the share of a country’s exports and imports in
homogeneous / high elasticity of substitution goods (i.e. reference-priced goods, goods
traded on organized exchanges) versus in differentiated products. While out theory argues
for the possibility of herding in any currency, the data show the dollar use as a vehicle
currency in country trade with non-U.S. counterparties is tightly correlated with the
prevalence in a country’s exports or imports of transactions in the (Walrasian) organized
exchange-traded and reference priced goods.3
        These observations do not preclude a role for macroeconomic variation in invoice
currency selection. However, our econometric analysis shows that the industry
composition of a country’s exports is much more important for invoicing than the


3
  As detailed in Rauch (1999), “Organized Exchange” traded goods cover products that have an overt
market (i.e. precious metals). “Reference Price” goods are homogeneous goods that nonetheless do not
have a substantial enough volume to have an "official" market (e.g. obscure chemical products), but are
homogeneous enough to have "reference" prices that are published in trade magazines.


                                                                                                     3
                       VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


countries participating in the trade transactions. Our results do not support a strong role
for standard business-cycle magnitude variation in vehicle currency selection. The
industry effects are most pronounced in trade in more homogeneous products. Small
degrees of macroeconomic volatility are not likely to disturb currency invoicing
equilibria or the strong role of the dollar in the export and import transactions involving
more homogeneous goods.
       Overall, we show theoretically and empirically the herding in invoice currency
choice for Walrasian goods. An implication is that, absent large macroeconomic shocks
that could potentially disturb this established vehicle currency equilibrium, the
prevalence of the dollar as a worldwide vehicle currency may be tied to the share of
“homogeneous” goods in world trade and to the share of the U.S. as a direct counterparty
in international trade transactions. While Rauch (1999) had argued that trade barriers play
distinct roles in the context of differentiated products versus homogeneous products, we
likewise find that macroeconomic variables have distinct roles in the determination of
currency invoicing choices across these types of goods.


II. A Three-Country / Three Currency Model of Invoice Currencies

       Several recent studies explore conditions under which a firm will set its export
price in its own country’s currency, in which case the price paid by foreign consumers
moves with the exchange rate, or in the currency of its customers abroad, in which case
the firm bears the exchange rate risk.4 The existing theoretical work limits an exporter to
two currencies in her decision, invoicing either in her own currency (PCP) or the
currency of her customers (LCP). While these models are conceptually rich, they ignore
the possibility that the exporter could choose to invoice in a third vehicle currency
(VCP), that is neither her currency nor that of her customer.
       We broaden the theoretical modeling of currency choice for trade invoicing,
developing the interaction between industry features and macroeconomic variability in a
new open-economy macro model with price rigidities that builds on Devereux, Engel and
Storegaard (2004). Although we do not derive a full-blown general equilibrium version




                                                                                         4
                          VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


of our model, we nonetheless extend the existing theory in several key dimensions. First,
we move from a two-country / two-currency world to a world consisting of three
countries and three currencies, thereby allowing for invoicing in a vehicle currency that
belongs neither to the exporter or importer home markets. The use of a specific currency
in invoicing international trade transactions can now be broader than the importance of
that currency’s home country as a direct counterparty in international trade transactions.
        Second, we contrast the role of industry characteristics, such as the substitutability
between competitors'goods, with macro-economic factors, such as business cycle and
exchange rate volatility. We show that industry characteristics are more relevant for
industries where goods are closer substitutes. Consider the situation of a firm selling to a
foreign market. With prices in the market set in different currencies, exchange rate
fluctuations will affect the price of the firm’s goods relative to that of its competitors,
leading to fluctuations in the quantities sold. If there is little differentiation between the
goods produced by different firms, even small movements in relative prices generate
large movements in each firm’s quantity sold. The firm then has an incentive to limit the
fluctuations of its relative price by choosing a trade invoicing strategy close to that of its
competitors. This leads to a type of ‘herding’ behavior in invoice currency choice as the
exporter of a relatively homogeneous product chooses to invoice in the currency that is
used by the majority of other sellers.
        Third, we introduce decreasing returns to scale in production. A specification with
constant returns to scale limits the results of the model, a point recognized by Devereux,
Engel and Storegaard (2004), since a firm’s marginal cost is not affected by fluctuations
in its output. Output volatility, stemming from volatile prices relative to the firm’s
competitors for instance, then has no direct cost implication. Devereux, Engel and
Storegaard (2004) maintain the assumption of a constant returns to scale technology, but
address this limitation by introducing a link through which output volatility leads to
volatility in wages. While generating a channel through which output volatility affects
marginal costs, their apparatus requires wages to respond to short run movements in
demand, a feature that is disputable. We choose instead to model a technology with


4
 A non-exhaustive list includes Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), Devereux,
Engel and Storegaard (2004).


                                                                                                      5
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


decreasing returns to scale, so that an increase in output leads to an increase in the
marginal cost even when wages are not responsive.
        Overall, the theory provided below emphasizes the roles of product
substitutability and macroeconomic variability in a single theoretical framework.
Although we limit ourselves to a partial equilibrium model, this provides us with more
flexibility when we turn to the empirical section.5 While we can get macroeconomic
variability to play the type of role laid out in recent theoretical studies, our extensions
imply that macroeconomic variability is an important consideration only when the trade
transactions are in differentiated products, where the need to limit movements in relative
prices is less pronounced. The degree of macroeconomic volatility needed to disturb an
invoicing status quo for trade in more homogeneous products would need to be
exceptionnaly large. This result supports the inertia and thick market externalities argued
by Krugman and by Rey. But, importantly, our theoretical prediction is that -- even
within a country where all economic agents face the same degree of macroeconomic
volatility-- different producers will make different invoice currency choices.

II.1 The profit function

        We assume that an exporting firm has to post a price for its goods before knowing
the realization of various shocks affecting the economy. The exporter produces a brand z,
is located in country e, and sells her goods to the destination country d. The exporter
produces goods using a technology with decreasing returns to scale:
                                            1
                              Yed ( z ) =       [H ed (z )]α           (1)
                                            α
                              0<      ≤1
where Yed ( z ) is the output of z, H ed ( z ) is the labor input, and α is the returns to scale

parameter. The firm faces the following demand in country d:

                                         P (z )
                                                       -

                              Yd ( z ) = ed                Cd          (2)
                                          Pd


5
 By contrast Devereux, Engel and Storegaard (2004) derive the optimal invoicing in a general equilibrium
model. While this allows for a complete solution, their analysis is focused on the role of macroeconomic
volatility, and does not include any role for inertia stemming from the dominant role of a currency in the
past.


                                                                                                        6
                              VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


where C d is the total demand for brands of the relevant sector in country d, Ped ( z ) is the

price, in country d currency, of the brand z produced in country e, and Pd is the price
index, in country d currency, across all brands of the relevant sector sold in country d.
λ>1 is the elasticity of substitution between the various brands. (2) shows that the
demand for a specific brand reflects its price, relative to the prices of other brands in the
sector, and the strength of overall demand.
         The exporter producing brand z sets its price in currency k before the realization
of the shocks affecting the economy. We denote the price by Pedk ( z ) . The currency of
invoicing can be the currency of the country in which the exporter is located (k=e), the
currency of the country of destination (k=d), a third vehicle currency (k=v), or a
combination of these three currencies. While considering invoicing in a basket of
different currencies may appear odd, it provides a simple way to generate a partial pass-
through of exchange rate fluctuations to consumer prices, following Corsetti and Pesenti
(2001). The presence of partial exchange rate pass-through is a desirable feature in light
of the empirical evidence [Campa and Goldberg (2004, 2002), Frankel, Parsley and Wei
(2004), Anderton (2003)].
         The exporter sets its price in currency k to maximize expected profits:
                                                                                                     1

                                         S ek P ( z )                        S ek P ( z )
                                               k        −                          k        −        α
                                                                         1
     Π edk ( z ) = EDe S ek Pedk ( z )        ed
                                                            C d − We (α )α        ed
                                                                                                Cd       (3)
                                           S ed Pd                             S ed Pd


where S ek is the exchange rate between currency e and currency k, in terms of units of
currency e per unit of currency k so that an increase corresponds to a depreciation of
currency e. De is the state-specific discount factor at which profits are evaluated,6 and

We is the nominal wage. With its price set in currency k, the unit revenue for the exporter




6
 We consider that the firm is owned by agents in the exporting country, so profits are discounted using the
marginal utility of income for these agents. This is done without loss of generality: while a resident of
another country would value profits after converting them in her own currency, this has no impact on the
optimal invoicing decision that is the focus of the paper. All we require is that the owner treats her marginal
utility of income as independent from the profits of a particular firm, in a similar way as she treats the
consumer price index as independent from the price set by a particular firm.


                                                                                                               7
                                  VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE



in currency e is S ek Pedk ( z ) . Similarly, the price in currency d paid by consumers in the

destination country is [S ed ] S ek Pedk ( z ) .
                                     -1



         Following steps detailed in the Appendix, we solve the producer problem by
expressing the profit function (3) in terms of quadratic approximations around a non-
stochastic steady state. Denoting log deviations from the steady state by lower case letters
( x = ln X − ln X ss ) we obtain:

                     λ
                                E [s ek − λq edk ] + E [s ek − λq edk ]c d
                              1                   2
      π edk =                                                                                   (4)
                λ − α (λ − 1) 2
                α (λ − 1)
                                                  2
                            1
            +              − E q edk                  +       Eq edk we +        Eq edk c d
              λ − α (λ − 1) 2 α                           α                 α2
      q edk = s ek − s ed − p d                                                               (5)

where we ignore terms that are independent of the invoicing decision.
         The term q edk in (5) is the price of brand z in the destination country, relative to
the price of the competing brands in that country. Following shocks, the price of brand z
set in currency k does not move. The price paid by a consumer in the destination currency
d is then driven by the exchange rate between currency k and currency d: s dk = s ek − s ed ,

with an appreciation of currency d vis-à-vis currency k (i.e. s ek − s ed < 0 ) reducing the
price paid by the consumer. The average price paid by the consumer for competing
brands, in currency d, is given by the industry-wide index: p d . An increase in the relative

price ( q edk > 0 ) indicates that the firms producing brand z looses competitiveness, leading
consumers in the destination country to shift their purchases towards other brands. The
magnitude of this shift is driven by the elasticity of substitution between brands, λ.
         Intuitively, the various terms of (4) reflect the co-movements of the marginal
revenue and marginal cost with demand.7 The impact of exchange rate movements on the
marginal revenue is given by the term s ek − λq edk , which reflects the fluctuations in the
quantity sold because of movements in competitiveness, as well as the fluctuations in the
exporter-currency revenue of a given sale, stemming from movements in the exchange
rate between the exporter and invoicing currencies. (4) shows that profitability is
increased when exchange rate fluctuations lead to a high marginal revenue in the states of




                                                                                                      8
                             VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


nature when demand is strong in the destination country (i.e. E [s ek − λq edk ] c d > 0 ).
Marginal costs are increasing in the wage and the strength of demand, the later aspect
reflecting decreasing returns to scale. Profitability is higher when the exporter looses
competitiveness in the states of nature where wages or demand are high
( Eq edk we > 0, or Eq edk c d > 0 ). Intuitively, the reduced competitiveness shifts demand away
from the exporter, sparing her from having to produce at a high cost.


II.2 Optimal invoicing

           The exporter chooses the currency k in which her goods are invoiced to maximize
(4). Specifically, her choice is captured by the exchange rate between the currency of her
country and the currency of invoicing, s ek , in the profits (4) and the relative price (5). The

exporter regards all the other variables in (4)-(5), such as the demand c d , wage we , and

aggregate price p d and exchange rate s ed as independent from her invoicing decision.
           We do not restrict the exporter to invoice entirely in either currency e, d or v.
Instead, we model the invoicing decision as a choice of weights of the three available
currencies in the invoicing currency basket k. Specifically, the weights of currencies d
and v in the invoicing of exports to country d are β dd and β dv respectively, with the

weight of currency e being 1 − β dd − β dv . The exchange rate between the exporter'
                                                                                   s
currency, e, and the composite currency in which she invoices, k, is then a linear
combination of the exchange rates between currency e and the other two currencies, d
and v, with weights reflecting the composition of the invoicing basket:
                                     s ek = β dd s ed + β dv s ev    (6)

                       s currency (PCP) corresponds to β dd = β dv = 0 , while pricing in
Pricing in the producer'

the customers'currency (LCP) corresponds to β dd = 1, β dv = 0 , and pricing in vehicle

currency (VCP) is the case where β dd = 0, β dv = 1 .
           As discussed above, the relative price between brand z and the competing brands
(5) plays a key role in the invoicing decisions. We now turn to the sensitivity of the price


7
    A more detailed discussion can be found in the Appendix.


                                                                                               9
                                  VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


index of competing brands, p d , to exchange rate movements. Some brands are invoiced
in currency d, so the price paid by the consumers for these brands is unaffected by
exchange rate movements. Other brands are invoiced in currency e, and the consumer
price in currency d moves with the exchange rate between the two currencies, s ed , with

consumer paying a higher price when currency e appreciates (i.e s ed < 0 ). A final set of
brands are invoiced in currency v, so the price paid by consumers is higher when
currency v appreciates (i.e. s ed − s ev < 0 ). We denote the share of competing brands

invoiced in currency d by η dd , and the shares invoiced in currency e and v by η de and η dv
respectively.8 The impact of exchange rate movements on price index of competing
brands is then:
                                                                   (       )
                      p d = −η de s ed − η dv (s ed − s ev ) = − 1 − η dd s ed + η dv s ev         (7)

           Combining (6) and (7), we write the relative price (5) as:

                                  (          )        (
                        q edk = β dd − η dd s ed + β dv − η dv s ev    )                          (8)

(8) shows that a full stabilization of the relative price requires the exporter to choose
weights on the different currencies that exactly correspond to their shares in the industry
wide price index: β dd = η dd , β dv = η dv .

           The firm chooses the invoicing weights β dd and β dv to maximize the expected

profits (4), under the constraint that β dd , β dv and β dd + β dv do not fall outside the [0,1]
interval. For a concise illustration of the determinants of the optimal weights, we focus on
an interior solution where both weights are given by setting the first derivatives of (4) to
zero. Following steps detailed in the Appendix we obtain:

              β dd = Ωη dd + (1 − Ω )ρ (med s ed )                                                       (9)
              β = Ωη + (1 − Ω )ρ (med s ev )
                v
                d
                        v
                        d                                                                                (10)
              β = 1 − β − β = (1 − Ω ) + Ωη − (1 − Ω )[ρ (med s ed ) + ρ (med s ev )]
                e
                d
                            d
                            d
                                      v
                                      d
                                                          e
                                                          d                                              (11)

where:
                                  λ (1 − α )                                                 1−α
                       Ω=                                      ,                med = we +         cd
                                α + λ (1 − α )                                                α


8
    The three shares sum to one.


                                                                                                                10
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


         The term med in (9)-(11) reflects the influence of exogenous factors on the firm’s
marginal cost. Movements in wages translate directly into movements in the marginal
cost. Fluctuations in demand also affect the cost. Because of decreasing returns to scale, a
1 percent increase in demand requires a 1 / α percent increase in the labor input, hence a
1 / α percent increase in cost, holding the wage constant. The increase in demand also
leads to a 1 percent increase in revenue, holding the price constant. The net increase in
the marginal cost is then 1 − 1 / α = (1 − α ) / 1 percent.
         The terms ρ (med s ed ) and ρ (med s ev ) in (9)-(11) capture the sensitivity of the
marginal cost, med , to the exchange rates s ed and s ev . Specifically, the coefficients of a

regression of the marginal cost on the exchange rate are ρ (med s ed ) for s ed , and

ρ (med s ev ) for s ev .

         The intuitive interpretation of the optimal invoicing (9)-(11) is that an exporter
invoices in a currency other than her own for two reasons: herding and hedging.
Invoicing in the exporter’s currency has the advantage of fully stabilizing the exporter’s
marginal revenue, as she receives a given amount of her own currency for each unit sold.
This full stabilization ( β de = 1 ) is not necessarily an optimal choice however, for two
reasons.
         The first reason for deviating from a full invoicing in the exporter’s currency
reflects a herding motive, captured by the terms Ωη dd and Ωη dv in (9)-(10). The exporter
optimally limits the movements of her relative price by choosing an invoicing strategy
close to that of its competitors. For instance, the exporter puts a higher weight of
invoicing in the destination currency, β dd , when her competitors invoice a higher share of

their own sales in that currency, η dd . A similar motivation holds for invoicing in the
vehicle currency.
         The second reason captures a hedging motive, denoted by the terms
(1 − Ω )ρ (med   s ed ) and (1 − Ω )ρ (m ed s ev ) in (9)-(10). The exporter wants to choose an

invoicing strategy that limits the impact of fluctuations in marginal costs on her profits. If
she invoices in the destination currency, d, a depreciation of her currency vis-à-vis the
destination currency ( s ed > 0 ) increases the exporter’s revenue, in her own currency, from



                                                                                            11
                            VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


each unit sold. If depreciations of the exchange rate tend to be associated with increases
in marginal costs, i.e. ρ (med s ed ) > 0 , invoicing in the destination currency provides an
hedge as marginal revenue and marginal costs then move in steps. A similar logic applies
to the vehicle currency.
         Equations (9)-(10) show that the extent of invoicing in the destination and vehicle
currencies reflects the herding and hedging considerations. Interestingly, there is nothing
‘special’ about invoicing in the currency of the destination country, as it is driven by the
same considerations as invoicing in any vehicle currency.
         The relative weight on the herding dimension in (9)-(11) is given by the term Ω ,
which solely reflects the structural parameters of the model, namely the elasticity of
substitution between goods, λ, and the degree of returns to scale, α. The herding
dimension is more pronounced ( Ω is large) in industries where goods are more
substitutable (λ is large), as movements in relative prices then leads to large fluctuations
in quantities sold. The effect is also stronger the more the technology exhibits decreasing
returns to scale (α is small), because fluctuations in output generate large movements in
marginal cost.
         Our model indicates that the herding motive can dominate invoicing under
reasonable parameters. Chart 1 shows the combinations of α (horizontal axis) and λ
(vertical axis) leading to a small weight of the herding motives ( Ω =0.2), a medium
weight ( Ω =0.5) and a large weight ( Ω =0.8). Considering values of α=0.65 and λ=6,
which are reasonable parameters,9 leads to to a weight on the herding motive of 0.76. In
the limit case of perfect competition ( λ → ∞ ), only the herding motive remains as the
firm needs to fully stabilize its relative price:

               lim Ω = 1                   lim β dd = η dd    lim β dv = η dv   lim β de = η de
               λ →∞                        λ →∞               λ →∞              λ →∞


         This feature of the solution suggests important distinctions in invoicing choices
across types of industries. The invoicing of exports in industries that are highly
differentiated is relatively more responsive to the pattern of volatility in macro-economic


9
 In a model with a constant returns to scale technology in labor and a fixed factor, such as capital, a labor
share of 65 % is a standard specification. A value of 6 for the elasticity of substitution corresponds to a
20% markup. Elasticities of this magnitude, or even higher, are a common parametrization.


                                                                                                          12
                                              VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


variables, such as wages and demands. By contrast, in industries that produce a more
homogenous good, firms will invoice in a basket of currencies close to that of their
competitors.

                                               Chart 1: Weight of the herding dimension

                          15




                                                           Ω = 0.8
  Substitutability (λ )




                          10



                                                               λ = 6, α = 0.65
                                                                 -> Ω = 0.76
                                                                                       Ω = 0.5
                          5



                                                                                                       Ω = 0.2

                          0
                               0.5            0.6            0.7                 0.8             0.9             1
                                                        Degree of economies of scale (α )



                               Another aspect also points to a moderate role for co-movements of the exchange
rates with marginal cost, relative to herding. The terms ρ (med s ed ) and ρ (m ed s ev ) in (9)-
(11) are essentially ratios between the covariance of the exchange rates with wages and
demand, and the variance of the exchange rates. If the magnitude of exchange rate
fluctuations is much larger than the magnitude of their co-movements with other
variables, the denominators in the terms ρ (med s ed ) and ρ (m ed s ev ) are relatively large,
hence the terms themselves relatively small. If exchange rates are considerably more
volatile than demand and wage fundamentals, herding in invoicing currency selection
will dominate the role of these fundamentals.
                               As stressed by Engel (2003), the factors driving the choice of invoicing currency
when prices are sticky are the same driving the optimal degree of exchange rate pass-
through under flexible prices. While he focuses on limit cases of invoicing, with prices
set either in the producer or consumer currencies, we can show that the optimal invoicing
weights (9)-(10) are equal to the optimal degrees of pass-through under flexible prices.



                                                                                                                     13
                                   VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




II.3 A simplified model

           The optimal invoicing in (9)-(11) shows that there is no simple relation between
the volatility of a particular exchange rate and the choice of invoicing. Instead, the co-
movements between exchange rates and marginal costs play a central role. To put more
structure in the setup, we model the exchange rate between currency e and currency d as
driven by fundamental factors (such as monetary policy) in country e and in country d.
We denote these factors by f e and f d respectively. Recognizing the sometimes difficult
reconciliation between fluctuations in fundamentals and those in exchange rates, we
model the exchange rate as also driven by two noise terms, denoted by                                                e
                                                                                                                         and   d


respectively.10 The exchange rate between currency e and currency v is similar, and we
write:
          s ed = f e − f d +   e   −   d   ,       s ev = f e − f v +       e   −   v   ,   s dv = f d − f v +   d   −   v


We assume that the wage is driven by the fundamental in the exporting country, while
demand in the destination market follows the fundamental in the importing country:11
                           we = γ w f e        ,    cd = γ c f d        ,           γw ≥0 , γc ≥0

where γw and γc reflect the sensitivity of wages and demands to the relevant
fundamentals. The presence of noise in the exchange rate relations allows for exchange
rates to react to variables which have no effects on contemporaneous wages and demand.
Following steps detailed in the Appendix, we assess how changes in the volatility of the
various fundamentals impact the invoicing. The results are summarized in Table 1, where
σ 2 ( x ) = E ( x )2 :




10
   Frankel and Rose (1995) show that volatility of industrialized countries’ exchange rates is an order of
magnitude higher than volatility in fundamentals. Engel and West (2004) provide an interesting fresh
perspective on this issue by treating exchange rates as reflective of a discounted stream of expected future
fundamentals.
11
   These assumptions are consistent with the effects of monetary shocks in a general equilibrium model.


                                                                                                                               14
                          VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


                              Table 1: impact of fundamentals volatility
                                      Increase in the volatility of fundamental
                    Impact on           σ 2 ( fe )     σ 2 ( fd )       σ 2 ( fv )

                       β de                 -              +                +

                       β dd                 +              -                +

                       β dv                 +              +                -


Table 1 shows that an increase in the volatility of fundamentals in one country leads
exporters to reduce the weight of its currency in their invoicing decision, and increase the
role of the other two currencies. The detailed expressions in the Appendix also show that
the shift is more pronounced towards the least volatile currency. For example, if
σ 2 ( f d ) > σ 2 ( f v ) , an increase in σ 2 ( f e ) reduces β d , and increases β d by more than it
                                                                 e                   v



increases β dd .
          While the sensitivity of the optimal invoicing to the volatility of fundamentals is
unambiguous and intuitive, as shown by table 1, the sensitivity to the volatility of the
noise terms is more complex. The Appendix shows that in general the effect is
ambiguous. The only clear pattern is that a higher volatility of the noise term in the
vehicle country, σ 2 (ε v ) , has the same impact than a higher volatility of the fundamentals,

σ 2 ( fv ).

          This model sets the stage for empirical analysis of the determinants of invoice
currency choice across producers and across countries. We begin by expositing facts on
the currency invoicing of international trade. We then examine industry-specific choices
and the role of macroeconomic variability in invoicing outcomes.

III. The use of dollars and other currencies in international trade


III.1 Overview.

          Details on the currency invoicing of international trade transactions are hard to
come by. Some recent but discrete facts are given in papers motivated by individual
countries or regions, as in Swedish invoicing by Friberg (1996), Canadian invoicing by


                                                                                                   15
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


Donnenfeld and Haug (2003), and Japan by Oi, Otani, and Shirota (2004). Evidence has
become available for euro-area and accession countries, in part triggered by the advent of
the euro and efforts to track its adoption in goods markets and financial markets (ECB
2002, 2003).12 No single data source compiles the information from these studies, or
from the various discrete sources of information on country invoicing of international
trade transactions. This section of the paper provides cross country, cross industry and
some intertemporal data.
        The twenty-four countries for which we have collected invoicing information are:
the United States, the United Kingdom, eight euro-area countries (France, Germany,
Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, Italy, Spain, and Portugal), nine European Union accession
countries (Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland,
Slovakia, and Slovenia), plus Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Thailand, and Australia. The data
availability and sources for our study are summarized in Appendix Table 1.13
        The availability information varies tremendously across countries in terms of
details and time histories. Recently, ECB efforts have made available rich cross-country
data within Europe. The United Kingdom and Australia have very detailed information
on currency invoicing of trade transactions of different commodities or with different
country partners. Within Asia, detailed data is available for both Japan and Korea. Data
for the United States is drawn from Customs information used in constructing
international price series.14
        Chart 2 shows the extent to which each country’s aggregated exports are invoiced
in the exporter’s currency, corresponding to the notation β de aggregated across exporters
from the model. The smaller countries represented in this chart typically use their own

12
   Between 1999 through 2001Q3, the European Commission (Quarterly Review of the Use of the Euro)
published quarterly information on the international transactions of euro area firms. This publication
focused on the transition period of the euro, and measured the use of the euro compared with both national
currencies (DM, Ffr, etc) and the foreign currencies.
13
   As Appendix Table 1 details, some of these data are unpublished but made available to us for this work.
We are grateful to the agencies that provided this information and approved our use and dissemination. The
table also shows that different methods have been used by countries in constructing the data. Looking
across countries, in some cases we cannot definitely state whether the data capture the currency of
transaction invoicing or currency of transaction settlement.
14
   For the United States, the BEA the International Price Program collects data on currency solely to
convert prices into U.S. Dollars for the purpose of producing price indexes. The U.S. Customs Service
collects the data on the value of imports and exports, but doesn’t keep data on the currency in which trade




                                                                                                        16
                                                                VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


currency on less than 20 percent of their export transactions. Indeed, a number of small
countries not shown in the chart (but indicated in the footnote) do not even report details
of use of their own currency in international trade transactions. The euro is used as the
invoice currency on 40 to 50 percent of (extra euro area) exports by euro area countries.
The Korean won is seldom used, the yen is used on about a third of Japanese exports, and
the pound sterling on about half of UK exports. The United States is the clear exception,
invoicing more than 90 percent of exports in U.S. dollars. Broadly similar patterns in
country imports, except that the importing country currency is typically less often used in
the import transactions, supporting Grassman’s Law.

                                                             Chart 2: Exports Invoiced in Exporter Home Currency
                                          100
 As Share of Total Exports (in percent)




                                          90
                                          80
                                          70
                                          60
                                          50
                                          40
                                          30
                                          20
                                          10
                                              0
                                                          y#
                                               Be lia

                                                Re #



                                                            #



                                                          e#

                                                                               ly

                                                                                                           n

                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                           a

                                                                                                         g#

                                                                                                        sia




                                                                                                        om

                                                                                                          es
                                                           ic




                                                                                                          l#

                                                                                                         n#

                                                                                                         nd
                                                                                                        vi
                                                         m




                                                                                                       ea
                                                        ce




                                                                                                       pa
                                                        bl




                                                                           Ita




                                                                                                      ga




                                                                                                       at
                                                       ec
                                                      an




                                                                                                      ai
                                                                                                     ur
                                                      tra




                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                     ay
                                                                                       Lu Lat
                                                      iu




                                                                                                    gd
                                                                                                    or
                                                     an




                                                                                                    Ja
                                                    pu




                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                                  rtu

                                                                                                  Sp
                                                    re




                                                                                                  bo
                                                   m
                                                   lg




                                                                                                  al
                                                  us




                                                                                                 K




                                                                                                 in
                                                  Fr




                                                                                                 h
                                                 G




                                                                                                d
                                                 er




                                                                                               M
                                                                                               m



                                                                                             Po




                                                                                               T
                                          A




                                                                                              K

                                                                                              te
                                               G




                                                                                           xe




                                                                                           ni
                                              h




                                                                                           d
                                            ec




                                                                                         te

                                                                                        U
                                                                                      ni
                                          Cz




                                                                                    U




                                                                                     Exporter Country
 # Extra-euro trade only.        1 For Korea, trade data for "Other currencies" (net of US$, yen, euro, UK pound
 sterling) used as upper bound estimate of Korean Won share.          Countries for which we do not have specific data
 for this chart are: Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia.

                                                  Industry details on currency invoicing are directly available for four of the
countries in our database: Australia, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
For each country, the industries for which invoicing data are available are compiled into
one of three broad groups: differentiated products, goods traded on “organized
exchanges”, and “reference priced” goods. The assignment of industries to group follows
the Rauch (1999) painstaking classification of commodities at the three and four-digit

is conducted. A second caveat is that the data they collect is a sample of overall trade rather than every
transaction.


                                                                                                                             17
                                                                  VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


                                    SITC level. In the Rauch indices, an “organized exchange” good is anything that has an
                                    overt market (i.e. precious metals). A “referenced priced” good is a homogeneous good
                                    that nonetheless does not have a substantial enough volume to have an "official" market
                                    (e.g. obscure chemical products), but that because of its homogeneity does have
                                    "reference" prices that are published in trade magazines. These three broad categories
                                    roughly correspond to classes of competitive pricing of goods, with organized exchange
                                    traded goods those that are most highly substitutable with similar categories of foreign
                                    produced goods, and the differentiated products least substitutable.
                                           Chart 3 provides suggestive evidence that the extent of invoicing in the exporter’s
                                    currency is related to the amount of transactions on reference priced or organized
                                    exchange goods. It indicates the share of exports invoiced in the exporter’s currency for
                                    exports of differentiated goods (column ‘n’), reference-priced goods (column ‘r’) and
                                    goods traded on an organized exchange (column ‘w’) for Australia, Japan and the United
                                    Kingdom. It shows that the extent of pricing in the exporter’s currency is higher for
                                    differentiated products, the pattern being most pronounced for Australia. With the
                                    exception of the United States, we observe that the exporter’s currency is more frequently
                                    used on transactions in differentiated goods than in transactions on reference priced or
                                    organized exchange goods.



                                              Chart 3: Home Currency Use in Invoicing of Exports, by Type of Industry

                                    100
                                            n = differentiated product     r = reference priced   w = organized exchange       r
                                                                                                                           n
                                     90
percent invoiced in home currency




                                     80

                                     70

                                     60
                                                                                                        n
                                     50
                                              n
                                     40                                                                            w
                                                                                                              r
                                     30
                                                                           n
                                     20                                            r

                                                              w
                                     10
                                                     r
                                      0
                                                  Australia                     Japan                        UK                USA
              Notes: Data for Australia for 2002, over 10 SITC 1-digit industry categories, covering 96.5% of DOTS-reported total
              imports. Data for Japan for 1999, over 6 SITC 1-digit industry categores, covering 95.1% of DOTS-reported total
                                                                                                                         18
              imports. Data for UK for 2002, over 10 SITC 1-digit industry categories, covering 101.4% of DOTS-reported total
              imports. Data for USA for 2002, over 5 end-use categories, covering 95.2% of DOTS-reported total imports.
                            VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


III.2. Explaining the U.S. Dollar as a Vehicle Currency

         Table 2 reports the use of the U.S. dollar in the invoicing of exports and imports
in our sample. More than 95 percent of U.S. exports and 85 percent of U.S. imports were
invoiced in dollars in early 2003. The use of the dollar in U.S. export and import
transactions depends on the trading partner.15 U.S. exports to and imports from Latin
America, China, Mexico, and most small countries, are almost exclusively invoiced in
U.S. dollars. By contrast, foreign currencies appear more prominently in the invoicing of
U.S. imports from the European Union, the United Kingdom, and Japan. While the
specific shares assigned to foreign currencies is not always consistent across reporting
partner countries, from the perspective of U.S. data about 25 percent of U.S. imports
from Germany (in value terms) are euro invoiced; 14 percent of U.S. imports from the
UK are invoiced in pound sterling, while 12 percent of U.S. imports from Japan are in
Japanese yen. U.S. imports from the rest of the world are overwhelmingly invoiced in
U.S. dollars.
         Turning to other countries, approximately one third of the exports of most euro
area countries (to countries outside of the euro area) are invoiced in dollars. Close to 40
percent of comparable euro area imports are invoiced in dollars. Looking across
countries, the U.S. dollar is used intensively in U.K. trade transactions, on 26 percent of
U.K. total exports and 37 percent of U.K. imports. The EU accession countries are mixed
in the extent to which dollars are used in invoicing their international trade transactions.
Currently, dollar use on invoicing is often lower than incidence of use by euro-area
countries. As we will detail later, these patterns are starkly different than in the recent
past for these accession countries.




15
  The extent to which the dollar is used in bilateral trade transactions is often not identical across the two
parties reporting currency use in trade transactions. Given the sampling limitations in the U.S.-sourced
data, we defer to foreign source data for currency shares when that foreign data is available.


                                                                                                           19
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


Table 2: U.S. Dollar Use in the Export and Import Invoicing of 24 Countries
                          Invoicing                US $ Share in                     US $ Share in
                         Observation*             Export Invoicing                  Import Invoicing
United States               2003                        95.0                              85.0
Asia
 Japan                      2001                        52.4                              70.7
 Korea                      2001                        84.9                              82.2
 Malaysia                   1996                        66.0                              66.0
 Thailand                   1996                        83.9                              83.9
Australia                   2002                        67.9                              50.1
European Union
 Belgium#                   2002                        31.9                              33.5
 France#                    2002                        34.2                              43.2
 Germany#                   2002                        32.3                              37.9
 Greece#                    2002                        71.0                              62.0
 Italy#                     2002                        20.5                              30.8
 Luxembourg#                2002                        35.7                              38.0
 Portugal#                  2002                        33.4                              34.5
 Spain#                     2002                        32.8                              39.5
 United                     2002                        26.0                              37.0
EU-Accession
 Bulgaria                   2002                        44.5                              37.1
 Cyprus                     2002                        44.7                              34.9
 Czech                      2002                        14.7                              19.5
 Estonia                    2003                         8.5                              22.0
 Hungary                    2002                        12.2                              18.5
 Latvia                     2002                        36.2                              29.8
 Poland                     2002                        29.9                              28.6
 Slovakia                   2002                        11.6                              21.2
 Slovenia                   2002                         9.6                              13.3

* Latest Observations are annual except for: Japan – January 2001, Germany & Germany# – 2002Q3,
Estonia – Jan-Aug 2003. United States data are for 2003Q1. Malaysia and Thailand figures are for overall
trade and are not broken down by exports or imports. # Invoicing data refer only to the invoicing of “extra
euro-area” trade. For the U.K. this figure refers to “extra EU-14 trade”.



        By contrast, the dollar remains a dominant currency in the invoicing of both
exports and imports by countries outside of Europe. Both Korea and Thailand use the
dollar in invoicing more than 80 percent of their export and import transactions. For
Japan, Australia, and Malaysia, the dollar is used in more than 50 percent of trade
transactions.



                                                                                                        20
                                                                              VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE



                                                                Chart 4: Vehicle Currency Use of the U.S. Dollar in International Export
                                                                                            Transactions
                                     100
        s Exports to the US as a share of Total



                                                  90

                                                  80

                                                  70
            Country Exports, %




                                                  60

                                                  50

                                                  40
                                                                                              Portugal              Japan
                                                  30
                                                                        45*
 Country'




                                                                                             Belgium                                                  Korea
                                                  20                                German      France                           Malaysia            Thailand
                                                                                 Italy UK       Luxembourg                       Australia
                                                  10                Hungary      Spai
                                                             Slovenia      Czech                         Bulgaria                      Greece
                                                                                 n                Latvia
                                                           Estoni       Slovakia           Poland        Cyprus
                                                  0                        Republic
                                                       0           10         20        30        40         50             60    70            80       90     100
                                              US Dollar Invoicing Share in Country Exports, %
         Source: DOTS and various national sources
         Euro-area country data, with the exception of Italy data, refer to extra-euro area trade and invoicing




                                                       To gain perspective on what portion of these dollar invoicing results might be
directly attributable to country transactions with the United States and what portion is a
pure vehicle currency role, in Chart 4 we contrast the dollar invoicing share in export
transactions of each country (horizontal axis) with the share of the United States as a
direct recipient of a country’s exports (vertical axis).16 Under an extreme assumption of
complete dollar invoicing of trade with the United States and no vehicle currency role for
the dollar, the indicated points would lie along the diagonal of this chart. All data points
are to the right of the 45 degree line, presenting strong (and understated) indicative
evidence of dollar use as a vehicle currency. This vehicle currency role appears
particularly strong for trade transactions by Korea, Thailand, Australia, the United
Kingdom, and Greece, among others. Overall the prevalence of dollar invoicing of a
country’s export and import bundles is far greater than what would be expected purely on
the basis of the direct importance of the U.S. as a direct trade counterparty for any of
these countries.

16
   We have done a similar analysis for country imports from the United States, with broadly similar
findings.


                                                                                                                                                                      21
                              VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


           Another very compelling empirical finding arises from our application of the
Rauch indices to export data in order to explain the portion of each country’s exports that
is invoiced in dollars, without the United States as a counterparty, and in organized
exchange traded or reference priced goods. 17 For each country, we construct measures of
the share of total exports of that country (in trade that excludes the United States) that are
in organized exchange traded products, or referenced priced products. The share of these
transactions in country export transactions are shown in Table 3. Among the countries in
our table, Australia has the highest share of exchange traded and reference priced goods
in its exports, weighing at 66 percent of the exports to countries other than the United
States. Greece, Bulgaria, and Cyprus all have this type of export share at about 40
percent. Japan and Germany have low shares of these types of goods, on the order of 15
percent of their non-U.S. exports.
           Visually, Chart 5 builds on Chart 4. The horizontal axis shows the share of
exports invoiced in dollars, while the vertical axis shows the total share of exports that
are either going to the United States, or consist of reference priced goods going to
destinations other that the U.S. While the role of the dollar exceeds the role of the U.S. as
a destination market, as shown in Chart 4, the pattern shown in chart 5 aligns more
closely with the 45 degree line. Specifically, the role of the dollar in invoicing is in line
with the role of the U.S. as a market and the role of exports of reference priced goods to
countries other than the United States. Consistent with the detailed data available from
Australia, the United Kingdom, and Japan, across countries these commodity-type
transactions appear to “explain” the widespread vehicle currency use of the dollar in most
of the countries (outside of the U.S.) for which we have compiled trade invoicing data.
           While Chart 5 brings us closer to a complete understanding of the role of the
dollar in international trade, two country groups stand out. First, the role of the dollar for
Eastern European countries is smaller than what their patter of exports suggests. This
likely reflects the prominent role of the euro area as a destination market. An exporter
from Eastern Europe selling a non-differentiated goods, such as chemicals, in the euro
area puts a high weight on keeping his price in line with that of his competitors. If a
substantial share of the competitors price in euro, because for instance they are firms

17
     We do an analogous exercise also on the import side for each country, with qualitatively similar findings.


                                                                                                            22
                                                                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


located in the euro area, then the exporter will also invoice in euro. The second outlier
group is made of countries in South-East Asia for which the exports to the U.S. and in
reference-priced goods still fall short of accounting for the role of the dollar as an
invoicing currency. This possibly reflects a downward bias in the measured role of the
U.S. as a trading partner, because of trade flows to the U.S. that go through other
countries. Consider the case of a Thai exporter selling components to a producer in
Malaysia for assembly for final goods destined to the U.S. While the trade flow from
Thailand is not going directly to the U.S., it is part of an export from the region to the
U.S.

                                                            Chart 5 Vehicle currency use of the dollar and "commodity " type exports

                                        100
plus RW Goods Share of Total Country Exports %




                                                 90

                                                 80
              s Exports to the US Share




                                                                                                                           Australia
                                                 70

                                                 60
                                                                                  Belgium   Portugal
                                                 50                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                                                              Bulgaria                                  Greece
                                                                                                         Cyprus   Japan            Malaysia
                                                 40                             UK        Franc                                                       Korea
                                                                                  Germany e
       Country'




                                                                Estonia  Spain                 Luxembourg
                                                 30                  Slovakia Italy     Poland
                                                           Slovenia
                                                                        Czech Republic
                                                 20           Hungary

                                                 10                                           Latvia
                                                          45*
                                                  0
                                                      0            10      20         30        40          50            60           70        80       90     100
                                                                          US Dollar Invoicing Share in Country Exports, %
                                          Source: DOTS and various national sources
                                          Euro-area country data, with the exception of Italy data, refer to extra-euro area trade and invoicing




                                                                                                                                                                       23
                       VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


Table 3: Organized Exchange and Reference Priced Goods in Exports and Imports

                                 Share in Export Transactions   Share in Import Transactions
                        Date      All exports     Net - U.S.     All imports      Net-U.S.
United States           2002         22.7           22.7             24.3          22.7
Asia
 Japan                  2001         15.2           12.9             46.0          39.7
 Korea                  2001         21.1           19.1             49.8          44.9
 Malaysia               1996         27.7           26.5             27.5          25.0
 Thailand               1996         34.7           30.8             35.5          32.5
Australia               2002         70.8           66.3             22.8          20.5
Euro-Area
Countries
 Belgium#               2002         39.5           31.4             47.1          40.2
 France#                2002         23.4           19.9             39.7          36.9
 Germany#               2002         18.0           15.8             29.8          27.9
 Italy
 Greece#                2002         41.9           38.7             43.8          42.8
 Luxembourg#            2002         28.7           24.9             19.4          16.4
 Portugal#              2002         22.5           18.6             53.2          50.6
 Spain#                 2002         24.1           21.5             46.7          44.0
 United Kingdom         2002         25.6           21.9             25.0          23.4
EU-Accession
 Bulgaria               2001         39.7           38.2             26.8          26.1
 Cyprus                 2002         41.2           40.4             26.8          24.3
 Czech                  2002         20.2           18.7             32.1          31.5
 Estonia                2003         27.6           26.8             29.9          29.5
 Hungary                2002         16.4           15.9             23.1          22.7
 Latvia                 2002         37.3           34.7             31.5          31.2
 Poland                 2002         24.9           24.3             32.0          31.5
 Slovakia               2002         27.2           27.0             32.9          32.7
 Slovenia               2002         20.3           19.8             31.4          30.8


III.3   Econometrics of Herding versus Macroeconomic Variability

        Our model emphasizes that β de , β dd , and β dv are endogenous to both industry
structure and macro-economic volatility. The herding motive in invoicing is a more
important consideration for walrasian goods. The macroeconomic volatility underlying
the hedging motive matters more for trade in differentiated products, with the likelihood
of a country’s currency being chosen for invoicing international trade transactions


                                                                                          24
                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


inversely related to the volatility of the country’s fundamentals. In this section, we
provide an econometric analogue of the previous sections graphics. We also relate the
invoicing unexplained by trade with the U.S. or walrasian exports to the volatility of
aggregate demand in the exporting country versus, for example, the United States
market.18
        The regressions take a panel format using all countries for which we have
invoicing data, except the United States. Two dependent variables are used in the
regressions, 1) the share of a country’s exports that are invoiced in dollars, or 2) the share
of a country’s exports that are invoiced in the home country currency.19 The explanatory
variables are the share of the U.S. as a destination market for exports, the share of a
country’s exports (excluding those to the U.S.) that are in Rauch-type walrasian goods
(exchange traded plus organized exchange traded), and home country aggregate demand
volatility. The regressions for invoicing in home currencies also add a variable to reflect
the share of a country’s trade with the euro area. The results of these regressions are
presented below in Table 4. In some specifications, we test whether euro-area countries
have different invoicing sensitivities than countries that have not yet adopted the euro.




18
   We have derived an explicit mapping from the theoretical specification to a regression specification
under the assumption that there are two types of goods in the world, walrasian versus differentiated. This
explicit formulation also assumed that, for a particular industry, the average share of invoicing in the
exporter’s currency is a weighted average across the choices with respect to each trade partner destination,
with the weights corresponding to the importance of each partner as an export market. We have
experimented with specifications of trade-partner weighted volatilities as explanatory variables, but have
not gotten additional insights from those specifications.
19
   A few countries do not report shares of exports that are invoiced in their home currency (Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, see Appendix Table 1 for more details). These
countires are not included in the regression for the home currency invoicing share of exports, but are
included in the regression for the dollar invoicing share.


                                                                                                         25
                               VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE



Table 4 Determinants of the Currency Used in Invoicing Country Export Transactions

Determinants of U.S. Dollar Share in Invoicing

Regression#                                    1              2                3                4

                                               23.35***       -7.76            -1.14            -9.82
constant
                                               (6.72)         (9.63            (12.35)          (10.95)
Export share to the United States              1.96***        2.17***          1.65***          2.23***
                                               (0.54)         (0.43)           (0.58)           (0.48)
Euro area dummy * Export share to the          -1.57**        -0.14                             -0.38
United States                                  (0.57)         (0.85)                            (1.02)
Walrasian share of exports to countries                       0.95***          0.60**           0.97***
other than the US                                             (0.25)           (0.27)           (0.28)
Euro area dummy *Walrasian share of                           -0.81*                            -0.94*
exports to countries other than US                            (0.39)                            (0.49)
Home country volatility of real                                                0.05             0.01
aggregate demand                                                               (0.06)           (0.05)
Euro area dummy * Home country                                                                  8.12
volatility of real aggregate demand                                                             (16.23)
# observations                                 23             23               23               23
adj.R2                                         0.37           0.62             0.30             0.58

Determinants of Home Currency Share in Invoicing Exports

Regression#                                    1              2                3                4
                                               9.57            -0.77           49.92**          8.15
constant                                       (11.27)         (22.19)         (21.15)          (28.19)
Export share to the United States              0.52            0.69            -0.07            0.49
                                               (0.56)          (0.69)          (0.82)           (0.80)
Euro area dummy * Export share to the          2.13***         2.65**                           2.17*
United States                                  (0.52)          (1.10)                           (1.11)
Export share to Euro Area                      0.18            0.26            -0.27            0.25
                                               (0.24)          (0.29)          (0.28)           (0.32)
Walrasian share of exports to countries                        0.20            -0.15            0.20
other than the US                                              (0.34)          (0.30)           (0.39)
Euro area dummy * Walrasian share of                           -0.23                            -0.32
exports to countries other than the US                         (0.45)                           (0.59)
Home country volatility of real                                                -0.95**          -0.54
aggregate demand                                                               (0.40)           (0.35)
Euro area dummy * Home country                                                                  5.51
volatility of real aggregate demand                                                             (18.66)
# observations                                 16              16              16               16
adj.R2                                         0.56            0.49            0.25             0.52

Note: all regressions include constant terms. ***, **, * statistical significance at 10, 5, 1 percent levels.
Standard errors in parentheses.



                                                                                                          26
                          VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


        The regression results support the arguments of our theoretical section, and
reconfirm the empirical observations from Charts 4 and 5. The results for the dollar use in
invoicing as reported in the top panel of Table 4 are most interesting. Regression 1
includes only the share of the U.S. in total exports, allowing for a different effect for
euro-area exporters. This factor alone explains one third of the cross country variation in
dollar use, with a higher dollar use in invoicing by countries that are not in the euro-area.
Regression 2 introduces also consider the role of exports of walrasian goods to countries
other than the U.S. These walrasian good terms explain an additional 25 percent of the
cross-country variation in dollar use in trade invoicing. Once we account for the trade
role of the United States and the composition of trade, we have a good indication of the
extent to which a country will be using dollars to invoice exports.
        The results of regressions 3 and 4 show that the volatility of aggregate demand in
the exporting country is not a statistically significant contributor. It is important to note
that this finding is not necessarily a refutation of the potential role for macroeconomic
volatility terms in the invoicing decisions of producers. As the U.S. aggregate demand
volatility is low relative to the volatility observed in most countries in our sample, a
choice of invoicing in dollar based on volatility considerations would to a large extent be
captured by the constant term. Nevertheless, the constant is not statistically significant,
and the absence of a role for volatility persists even when we distinguish between
countries in the euro-area, with a similar volatility than the U.S., and others. This points
to a limited role of volatility as a driver of invoicing.
        The regression for the use of the home currency is presented in the bottom panel
of Table 4.20 The only statistically significant results are that the countries in the euro-
area are more likely to invoice their exports in the euro. Also, higher domestic volatility
reduces the use of the home currency.




20
  The results exclude the countries that do not report shares of exports invoiced in their home currency
(Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia).


                                                                                                     27
                         VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


 III.4    Perspectives for the international role of the dollar.

          Our analysis suggests that the perspectives for the future role of the dollar as an
 invoicing currency are driven both by the role of the U.S. in international trade, and by
 the importance of world trade in goods that transact via organized exchanges or via
 reference pricing. Based on annual data 1980 through 2002, the U.S. share in total world
 imports fluctuates between approximately 15 and 20 percent, in relation to the U.S.
 business cycle. Also centrally important is the composition of world trade, and
 particularly the share of goods are in industries with high degrees of product
 substitutability. As one rough measure of this, Chart 6 shows the share of world trade in
 goods traded on organized exchanges or goods that are reference priced (which we
 construct using the Rauch measures). This type of trade has been declining steadily as a
 share of world trade over recent decades, consistent with the rapid growth of trade in
 manufactured goods both as intermediate components and as final products. These stark
 declines point to a steady decline in dollar invoicing of trade via this channel.



     Chart 6 Share of Organized Exchanges and referenced priced goods in World Trade
Percent
50


45


40


35


30


25


20
      1988 1989 1990      1991     1992 1993 1994       1995    1996 1997 1998        1999   2000    2001
     Source: OECD                R+W Share of Exports          R+W Share of Imports




                                                                                                    28
                        VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


IV. Concluding Remarks

       Our analysis shows that the dollar is strongly used on all trade transactions with
the United States, and on other transactions that are primarily in goods that are traded on
organized exchanges or that are reference priced. We have shown that this use of the
dollar does not primarily depend on the exchange rate between the dollar and other
partner currencies. Instead, the role of the dollar as a transaction currency in international
trade has elements of industry herding and hysteresis, often with a less central role in
invoicing for hedging as associated with variances and covariances among
macroeconomic fundamentals.
       Our theoretical and empirical results support the type of conclusion reached in a
recent European Central Bank report


         “While the existence of international pricing standards does not preclude, by
itself, the use of another currency for settlement, the euro area’s trade in energy and raw
materials will probably continue to be both invoiced and settled in U.S. dollars, as long as
international prices continue to be expressed in that currency.”

                                                              ECB 2002 pp.41-42.

       We argue that industries with highly substitutable goods have a strong incentive
to herd in their choice of invoicing currency. This type of conclusion is consistent with
the intuitions of McKinnon (1979), Krugman (1980) and Rey (2001). The U.S. dollar
appears to be important in the invoicing of world trade both because the U.S. is an
important consumer and producer in world markets, and because of its use in invoicing
the many products that are traded via organized exchanges or using reference pricing.




                                                                                           29
                      VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


References:

Anderton, Robert. 2003. “Extra-euro Area Manufacturing Import Prices and Exchange
   Rate Pass-Through.” ECB working paper no. 219.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric vanWincoop. 2002. “A Theory of the Currency
   Denomination of International Trade.” NBER working paper no. 9039.
Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg. 2002. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import
   Prices.” NBER working paper 8934. September 2004 revision available.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti. 2001. “International Dimensions of Optimal
   Monetary Policy.” NBER working paper no. 8230.
Devereux, Michael and Charles Engel. 2001. “Endogenous Currency of Price Setting in a
   Dynamic Open Economy Model.” NBER working paper no. 8559.
Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, Storegaard. 2004 “Endogenous Exchange Rate Pass-
   Through when Nominal Prices are set in Advance.” Journal of International
   Economics, Vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 263-291.
Donnenfeld, Shabtai and Alfred Haug. 2003. "Currency Invoicing in International Trade:
   An Empirical Investigation." Review of International Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 332-
   345.
Donnenfeld, Shabtai and Alfred Haug. 2002. "Currency Invoicing in U.S. Imports"
   mimeo.
Engel, Charles and Kenneth West. 2004. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals.” NBER
   working paper no. 10723.
Engel, Charles, 2003. “On the Relationship between Pass-Through and Sticky Nominal
   Prices”, mimeo.
European Central Bank, 2002. Review of the International Role of the Euro.
Friberg, Richard. 1988 "In which Currency Should Exporters Set their Prices?" Journal
   of International Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 59-76.
Giovannini, Alberto. 1988. “Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices.” Journal of
   International Economics, Vol.24, pp.45-68.
Grassman, S. 1973. “A Fundamental Symmetry in International Payments.” Journal of
   International Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 105-16.




                                                                                   30
                       VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Vehicle Currencies and the Stucture of International Exchange,”
   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 12 pp. 513-526.
McKinnon, Ronald. 1979. Money in International Exchange: The Convertible Currency
   System (Oxford University Press).
Murray, John, James Powell and Louis-Robert Lafleur. 2003. “Dollarization in Canada:
   An Update,” Bank of Canada Review, Summer 2003.
Murray, John and James Powell. 2002 “Dollarization in Canada: The Buck Stops There,”
   Bank of Canada Technical Report no. 90.
Oi, Hiroyuki, Akira Otani, and Toyoichiro Shirota. 2004. “The Choice of Invoice
   Currency in International Trade: Implications for the Internationalization of the Yen.”
   Monetary and Economic Studies (March) pp.27-63.
Padoa-Schioppa, T. 2002. “The Euro goes East.” Lecture presented at the 8th Dubrovnik
   Economic conference, http://www.ecb.int/key/02/sp020629.pdf
Rauch, James. 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of
   International Economics, Vol. 48 pp. 7-35.
Rey, Helene. 2001. "International Trade and Currency Exchange" Review of Economic
   Studies, Vol 68, pp. 443-464.
Swoboda, Alexander. 1969. “Vehicle Currencies and the Foreign Exchange Market: the
   Case of the Dollar”, in Robert Z. Aliber, Ed., The International Market for Foreign
   Exchange, Praeger Special Studies in International Economics and Development,
   (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, Publishers).
Swoboda, Alexander. 1968. “The Euro-Dollar Market: An Interpretation”, Essays in
   International Finance 64, International Finance Section, Princeton University.
Tavlas, George. 1998. “The International Use of Currencies: The U.S. Dollar and the
   Euro.” IMF Finance and Development, Vol. 35 no. 2.
Tille, Cédric. 2002. “How Valuable is Exchange Rate Flexibility? Optimal Monetary
   Policy under Sectoral Shocks.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 147.
Walter, N. 2002. “The International Dimension of the Euro and the Path to the Euro for
   Enlargement Countries.” Briefing paper prepared for the Economic and Monetary
   Affairs Committee on the European Parliament, May 2002.




                                                                                       31
                                    VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


Appendix

A.1 Expansion of the profit function

          Maximizing the expected profits (3) leads to the following relation for the optimal
price Pedk ( z ) :

                        (P ) k 1−
                            ed      EDe (S ek )
                                                 1−
                                                      (S ed ) (Pd )      Cd                                     (A1)
                            λα (1−α ) / α k −α
                                         (Ped ) EDeWe (S ek ) α (S ed )α (Pd )α (C d )α
                                                                                      1
                                                             −
                        =
                              λ −1
where we dropped the z index on Pedk ( z ) as all firms face the same problem and hence
choose the same price.
          We express the profits functions (3) in terms of a quadratic expansion around a
deterministic steady state. Following Tille (2002) the expansion is based on the following
relation:
                                                                                 1
                                     X a Y b = X ssa Yssb 1 + ax + by +            (ax + by )2
                                                                                 2
where San Serif letters denotes log deviations from the steady state: x = ln X − ln X ss .
Using (A1), the profit function (3) is expanded as follows:

                           λ
                                    (1 − λ ) pedk + Ed e + (1 − λ )Es ek + λEs ed + Ep d + Ec d
           π   k
                    =                  1
                      λ − α (λ − 1) + E [d e + (1 − λ )s ek + λs ed + p d + c d ]2
               ed

                                            2
                                                                                                                         1
                                        −       p edk + Ed e + Ewe −           Es ek +          Es ed +         Ep d +       Ec d
                        α (λ − 1)           α                              α               α                α            α
                    −
                      λ − α (λ − 1)
                                                                                                                 2
                                            1                                 1
                                        +     E d e + we − s ek + s ed + p d + c d
                                            2             α      α      α     α

where π edk = (Π ed
                 k
                    − Π ss ) / Π ss we used the fact that p edk is of order 2 and therefore does
not enter the squared terms. After some algebra this expression becomes:
                                     λ
                                                E [s ek − λq edk ] + E [s ek − λq edk ]c d
                                              1                   2
               π edk = X ed +                                                                                            (A2)
                                λ − α (λ − 1) 2
                          α (λ − 1)
                                                             2
                                      1
                      +              − E q edk                   +       Eq edk we +           Eq edk c d
                        λ − α (λ − 1) 2 α                            α                 α   2




                                                                                                                                    32
                                     VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


where q edk is the relative price of brand z: q edk = s ek − s ed − p d (recalling that p edk is preset

hence does not enter the squared terms). X ed is a term independent of the invoicing
choice:
                                         α (λ − 1)              1
                    X ed = Ed e −                    Ewe +               [λ (Esed + Ep d ) + Ecd ]
                                       λ − α (λ − 1)       λ − α (λ − 1)
                                                                   α (λ − 1) 1
                                                                                                      2
                                     λ        1                                              1
                                                E [d e + c d ] −
                                                              2
                              +                                                  E d e + we + c d
                                λ − α (λ − 1) 2                  λ − α (λ − 1) 2             α
                                     λ
                              +               E (s ed + p d )d e
                                λ − α (λ − 1)
          The first bracket on the right hand side of (A.2) captures the movements in the

revenue, S ek QPedk  [         ]−
                                    C d . The marginal revenue term s ek − λq edk captures the impact of
exchange rate movements, including through movements in competitiveness. Exchange
rate movements affect the relative price of brand z vis-à-vis the competing brands, q edk ,
leading consumers to shift the allocation of their purchases across brands. In addition,
with the price fixed in currency k, a depreciation of currency e (i.e. s ek > 0 ) increases the
amount of currency e received by the exporter for each unit sold abroad. Expected
revenue for the exporter is higher when exchange rate fluctuations lead to a high marginal
revenue in the states of nature when demand is strong (i.e. E [s ek − λq edk ] c d > 0 ).
          The            second       bracket     in   (A.2)     reflects    marginal     cost       considerations,

   [ ]
                          1
We Qedk
          −
              α   (C d )α .     The expected cost is reduced when the firm in country e is not

competitive (i.e. its relative price Qedk is high) precisely in the states where wages are

high ( Eq edk we > 0 ), as the reduced competitiveness spares the firm from having to produce
a lot at a high cost. The expected cost is also lower when the firm is not competitive in
the states where demand is high ( Eq edk c d > 0 ).Because of the decreasing returns to scale,

fluctuations in output are costly. When Eq edk c d > 0 , a strong demand is offset by a low
competitiveness, a pattern that stabilizes the exporters'marginal cost.




                                                                                                                 33
                                   VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


A.2 Optimal invoicing


         We take the derivative of (4) with respect to the weights β dd and β dv :

              ∂π edk                λ                          ∂s      ∂q k     ∂s ek     ∂q edk
                           =                 E [s ek − λq edk ] eki − λ edi + E       − λ        cd
            ∂β di = d ,v       λ − α (λ − 1)                   ∂β d    ∂β d     ∂β di     ∂β di

                                 α (λ − 1)
                                                         2
                                                                      ∂q edk               ∂q edk                        ∂q edk
                           +                 −               Eq edk            +       E              we +           E            cd
                               λ − α (λ − 1)   α                      ∂β di        α       ∂β di             α2          ∂β di

Using equation (5) the derivatives of the exchange rate and relative prices are:
                                         ∂s ek ∂q edk                          ∂s ek ∂q edk
                                              =       = s ed                        =       = s ev
                                         ∂β dd ∂β dd                           ∂β dv ∂β dv

The derivatives of the profit function are then:
                                  ∂π edk        − λ (λ − 1)             1−α k
                                             =               E s ek + λ    q ed − m ed s ei
                                 ∂β d
                                    i = d ,v
                                               λ − α (λ − 1)             α

where med summarizes the impact of movements in wages and demand in the destination
market:
                                                                         1−α
                                                      med = we +                   cd
                                                                               α
Substituting for s ek and q edk = (β dd − η dd )s ed + (β dv − η dv )s ev using (5) we obtain:

    ∂π edk              1−α d                               1−α v
           ∝ − β dd + λ
                         α
                                     (            )
                           β d − η dd E (s ed )2 − β dv + λ
                                                             α
                                                                                              (
                                                               β d − η dv E (s ed s ev ) + E (s ed med )     )
    ∂β dd


    ∂π edk              1−α d                                   1−α v
           ∝ − β dd + λ
                         α
                                     (            )
                           β d − η dd E (s ed s ev ) − β dv + λ
                                                                 α
                                                                                                  (
                                                                   β d − η dv E (s ev )2 + E (s ev med )         )
    ∂β d v



where ∝ denotes a relation of proportionality. Note that setting the first derivatives to
zero ensures a maximum (provided of course that β dd , β dv , and β dd + β dv do not fall outside
the [0,1] interval), as the direct second derivatives are negative and the determinant of the
matrix of second derivatives is positive.
         Setting the first derivatives to zero and solving the resulting system of two
equations leads to the following weights on the various currencies:
                                              β dd = Ωη dd + (1 − Ω )ρ (m ed s ed )
                                               β dv = Ωη dv + (1 − Ω )ρ (m ed s ev )
                                               β de = 1 − β dd − β dv



                                                                                                                                       34
                                VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE


where:
                                                                λ (1 − α )
                                                      Ω=
                                                              α + λ (1 − α )
and ρ (med s ed ) and ρ (med s ev ) are the coefficients obtained in a regression of med on the

exchange rates s ed and s ev .


A.3 A simpler model
A.3.1 Driving factors
         We consider that each country experiences shocks in a fundamental variable f,
such as the monetary stance. Wages in the exporter’s country and demand in the
destination market are driven solely by the fundamental in the exporting and destination
country, respectively. The exchange rate between two countries follows the difference
between the fundamentals. We also let the exchange rate be driven by a noise variable, ε,
in order to capture the fact that exchange rates are more volatile than wages and demand.
The wage in the exporting country, the demand in the destination country, and the
exchange rates are given by:
                                                                     1−α
          we = γ w f e , c d = γ c f d , m ed = γ w f e +                       γ c fd               γw ≥0                γc ≥0
                                                                        α
          s ed = f e − f d +     e   −    d   , s ev = f e − f v +      e   −    v    , s dv = f d − f v +            d   −   v


where γw and γc capture the sensitivity of the wage and demand to the fundamentals. We
consider that the various fundamentals and noises are all independent from each other,
and    denote        the     variances          of      fundamentals                 and         noise        in      country       i   by
σ 2 ( f i + ε i ) = σ 2 ( f i ) + σ 2 (ε i ) . The components of (9)-(11) are then given in table A.1:

                                         Table A.1: components of invoicing

                                                                        1−α                σ 2 ( fe + ε e )
              ρ (med s ed ) = ∆−1 γ wσ 2 ( f v + ε v )σ 2 ( f e ) −                  γc                            σ 2 ( fd )
                                                                            α               + σ 2 ( fv + εv )
                                                                             1−α
                ρ (med s ev ) = ∆−1 γ wσ 2 ( f d + ε d )σ 2 ( f e ) +                     γ c σ 2 ( f e + ε e )σ 2 ( f d )
                                                                                 α
                                                     σ 2 ( fv + ε v )                         1−α
      ρ (med s ed ) + ρ (m ed s ev ) = ∆−1 γ w                              σ 2 ( fe ) −              γ cσ 2 ( f v + ε v )σ 2 ( f d )
                                                     +σ   2
                                                              ( fd + εd )                        α

         ∆ = σ 2 ( f e + ε e )σ 2 ( f d + ε d ) + σ 2 ( f e + ε e )σ 2 ( f v + ε v ) + σ 2 ( f d + ε d )σ 2 ( f v + ε v )



                                                                                                                                        35
                                VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




A.3.2 Impact of fundamentals’ volatility
       Computing the derivatives of the various components of table A.1 with respect to
the volatility of fundamentals in the exporting country, we obtain:
       ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                 ∂ρ (m ed s ev )             ∂[− ρ (med s ed ) − ρ (m ed s ev )]
                           >0                              >0                                            <0
         ∂σ   2
                  ( fe )                 ∂σ   2
                                                  ( fe )                       ∂σ 2 ( f e )

Turning to the derivatives with respect to the volatility of fundamentals in the destination
country we get:
       ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                 ∂ρ (med s ev )              ∂[− ρ (m ed s ed ) − ρ (med s ev )]
                           <0                              >0                                            >0
         ∂σ   2
                  ( fd )                ∂σ    2
                                                  ( fd )                       ∂σ 2 ( f d )

The derivatives with respect to the volatility of fundamentals in the vehicle country are:
       ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                 ∂ρ (m ed s ev )             ∂[− ρ (m ed s ed ) − ρ (med s ev )]
                           >0                              <0                                            >0
         ∂σ   2
                  ( fv )                 ∂σ   2
                                                  ( fv )                       ∂σ 2 ( f v )


A.3.3 Impact of noise volatility
       The derivatives of the various components of table A.1 with respect to the
volatility of the noise term in the exporting country are:
        ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                  ∂ρ (med s ev )                ∂[− ρ (m ed s ed ) − ρ (med s ev )]
                           <> 0                             <> 0                                              <> 0
          ∂σ (ε e )
                  2
                                           ∂σ (ε e )
                                                   2
                                                                                   ∂σ 2 (ε e )

The derivatives with respect to the volatility of noise in the destination country are:
        ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                  ∂ρ (med s ev )                ∂[− ρ (m ed s ed ) − ρ (med s ev )]
                           <> 0                             <> 0                                              <> 0
          ∂σ (ε d )
              2
                                           ∂σ (ε d )
                                                   2
                                                                                   ∂σ 2 (ε d )

The derivatives with respect to the volatility of noise in the vehicle country are:
       ∂ρ (m ed s ed )                 ∂ρ (m ed s ev )             ∂[− ρ (m ed s ed ) − ρ (med s ev )]
                           >0                              <0                                            >0
         ∂σ (ε v )
              2
                                         ∂σ (ε v )
                                              2
                                                                               ∂σ 2 (ε v )




                                                                                                                     36
                                                           VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




Appendix Table 1 Currency of Invoice in International Trade Transactions: Data Sources and Notes
Country         Data Availability   Type of Data Disaggregation Available                      Data Source and Notes.
United States   2002,2003           Bilateral, by trading partner, by industry.                Confidential. Made available by special request.
                                                                                               BEA the International Price Program collects data on currency solely to
                                    Both export and import invoicing.                          convert prices into U.S. Dollars for the purpose of producing price indexes.
                                                                                               The U.S. Customs Service collects the data on the value of imports and
                                                                                               exports, but do not keep any data on the currency in which trade is conducted.
                                                                                               The data collected is a sample of overall trade rather than every transaction.
United          1999-2002           France, Germany, Italy, Canada, USA, Japan. World,         This is publicly available data. Original source found in “United Kingdom:
Kingdom                             Eurozone, EU14, OECD, Oil Exporting Countries              HM Customs and Excise United Kingdom Imports and Exports Currency of
                                    --- By $, Euro, Pound, Local Partner Currency, Other.      Invoicing”,                   February                 23,                 2001.
                                    Various specific SITC (Rev3) codes and commodities.        http://www.hmce.gov.uk/business/importing/tradestatistics/pr09-2001.pdf
                                                                                               2002 data found at
                                    Both export and import invoicing.                          http://www.uktradeinfo.com/downloads/COIResults02.pdf
                                                                                               These data are not covered by the UK National Statistics quality kitemark, so
                                                                                               should be viewed as indicative rather than as an exact measure. Specifically,
                                                                                               the coverage in this survey is limited for all exports and for imports from the
                                                                                               rest of the European Union, consequently caution should be exercised in
                                                                                               interpreting the results for a single year.
Japan           1992-2001           Breakdown by World, U.S. SouthEast Asia, and EU.           This is publicly available data. Original source is:
                                    Breakdown by $ Yen, Other.                                 “Japanese MOF Study Group for the Promotion of the Internationalization of
                                                                                               the Yen Report”, June 2001. http://www.mof.go.jp/english/if/if043a.htm#con
                                    Both export and import invoicing.                          Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry, downloaded from the
                                                                                               Ministry of Finance web site
                                    Data reported in percent of total trade invoiced in each   http://www.mof.go.jp/english/if/if043f.htm
                                    currency. Each year is only represented by data from
                                    only one or two months: January (2001), March (1995-
                                    1998), and/or September (1992-1997)
Korea           1976-2001           Breakdown by $,yen, DM, pound, other.                      This is publicly available data. It can be found in the Monthly Statistical
                1984m01-                                                                       Bulletin, 2003 vol 57 no. 6, Bank of Korea, Table 52 Source: Korea National
                2002m04             Overall Trade Only                                         Statistics Office, Downloaded from http://www.nso.go.kr/eng/index.shtml
                                                                                               Data is for currency invoicing and is provided in 4 categories: Receipts-Visible
                                                                                               Trade, Receipts-Invisible Trade, Payments-Visible Trade, Payments-Invisible
                                                                                               Trade.
Australia       1997Q1-2003Q1       Overall Trade Only                                         This is publicly available data. The source is the Australian Bureau of Statistics,
                                    $, yen, pound, New Zealand $, Australian $, Various        Australia Now "International Merchandise Trade, Australia 2003, feature article on




                                                                                                                                                                             37
                                                      VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




                                 Other Asian Currencies, Other. Both exports and imports.    Export and Import Currencies, March 2003.
                                 Currency invoicing data.                                    http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs%40.nsf/46d1bc47ac9d0c7bca256c47002
                                                                                             5ff87/5e55d2aa9e595ebeca256d2e0083c571!OpenDocument.            Other data
                                                                                             also purchased from ABS.
Bulgaria        1998Q1- 2003Q1   Overall Trade Only                                          Customs clearing data from the "Information Services" Company, processed
                1998-2002        $,euro, DM, pound, various other now defunct European       by the BNB and supplemented with NSI data. Preliminary data as of 24-Mar-
                                 currencies                                                  2003. See NSI BNB web sites http://www.bnb.bg
                                                                                             select English version, then click statistics -> foreign trade -> Currency
                                 Reported in percent share of imports and exports for each   Structure (all 4 files))
                                 currency.
Belgium   and   1999             Euro, Other for overall trade                               Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
Luxembourg                                                                                   Separate data for Belgium and Luxembourg were not available in 2000 and
                2002Q1-2002Q4,   Extra-euro area trade in Goods and Services. $,euro, yen,   2001. All data is for trade settled in the relevant currencies. Euro data for
                2002             pound, Other.                                               2001 and 2002 includes trade settled in both Euros and in the Euro Zone
                                                                                             legacy currencies. Data was received in the form of total values settled in
                                                                                             Euros, US dollars, Yen, etc. recorded separately for goods and service
                                                                                             (including travel).
Greece          2001-2002        Extra euro area exports and imports of goods and services   Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                2001Q1-2002Q4    Euro, other
Portugal        2000-2002        Extra euro area exports and imports of goods and services   Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                2001Q1-2002Q4    $, Euro, yen, pound,other                                   In the case of exports and imports of goods and services the currency
                                                                                             breakdown refers to the currency of settlement, which may differ from the
                                                                                             actual currency of invoicing.

Spain           1998-2002        Extra euro area exports and imports of goods and services   Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                1998Q1-2002Q4    $, Euro, yen, pound,other                                   The currency breakdown of Spain’s trade in goods and services with non-euro
                                                                                             countries (called the extra euro area) are based on settlement currency instead
                                                                                             of invoicing currency. There is no way to assess when the settlement currency
                                 i) The Spanish data refer to the use of the euro as a       is also the invoicing currency. As these data have not been published yet, a
                                                                                             proper checking and cleaning process has not been carried out, so the
                                 settlement currency instead of invoicing currency;
                                                                                             cleaning and the quality of Spanish data cannot be guaranteed sufficiently.
                                 ii) Data on services excluded travel.
Italy           2001-2002        Extra euro area exports and imports of goods and            Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                                 services. Euro, other
France          1988-1999        Overall Trade $,yen, pound, France, Austrialian $, DM,      Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                                 Other now defunct European Currencies
                2000,2001qtrs    Total Euro, US$, Other
                                 Extra-euro area exports and imports of goods and            Special request via to Banque de France
                                 services. Euro, US$, Other
                2000Q1-02Q4
                2000-2002




                                                                                                                                                                           38
                                                              VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




Germany            2002Q1-Q3            Overall Trade $,euro, pound, other                          Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                   2002Q1-02Q3          Euro, US$, pound, Other. Extra-euro area exports and
                   2000-2002            imports of goods . Euro, US$, pound, yen, Other             In general, the data are derived from a survey conducted twice a year. This
                                                                                                    survey was implemented in 1989 to cover overall trade exports for DM and
                                                                                                    some other European invoicing currencies, USD and Yen. From 2002
                                                                                                    onwards, data on currencies for trade imports were included; above that, the
                                                                                                    survey was expanded to implement the extra euro area trade breakdown.
                                                                                                    Since then, the respective invoicing currencies are broken down by EUR,
                                                                                                    USD, Pound Sterling and others.
Cyprus,Estonia,    2002 or 2003         Breakdowns provided for use of euros, dollars, pounds,      Confidential
Hungary,                                yen, rubles, and other currencies, including those of the   European Parliament briefing document
Latvia, Poland,                         accession countries.
Sovakia,                                                                                            The Latvian central bank (Latvijas Banka) provides data on their web site:
                                                                                                    http://www.bank.lv/eng/main/pubrun/lbgadaparsk
Slovenia
Czech Republic     2001-2003            Overall Trade. Euro, US$, pound, local currency, Other.     Confidential. This data was received through a special request via ECB. (1)
                   first 9 months                                                                   Czech     Statistical     Office,   extracted     from     the     web    site
                                                                                                    (http://www.czso.cz/eng/edicniplan.nsf/p/6001-04)
Malaysia/          1995-1996 (A)        Exports and imports combined. Data was received as          Senivongs, Chirathep, “Currency Internationalisation in Selected ASEAN
Thailand                                the percent share of total invoicing for each currency.     Countries”, Unpublished Monograph, International Monetary Fund, 1997.
                                                                                                    Source: Senivongs, Chirathep, “Currency Internationalisation in Selected
                                                                                                    ASEAN Countries”, Unpublished Monograph, International Monetary Fund,
                                                                                                    1997. Table from "FINANCIAL AND MONETARY COOPERATION IN
                                                                                                    EAST ASIA: THE SINGAPORE PERSPECTIVE" Ngiam Kee Jin, Senior
                                                                                                    Fellow, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, paper presented at PECC
                                                                                                    Finance Forum Conference Issues and Prospects for Regional Cooperation
                                                                                                    for Financial Stability and Development, Honolulu August 11-13, 2002
Note: Industry specific details are available for the USA, United Kingdom, Japan, and Australia.
(1) Data for 2000 and 2001 include trade settled in euro and in legacy currencies. Data refer to the use of the euro as a settlement currency, except for Germany. For
Germany, data on trade in goods reflect the average value of data collected in surveys carried out in the first and third quarters of 2002 on behalf of the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Data on services for Greece, Portugal, and Spain exclude travel.




                                                                                                                                                                                  39
                                                      VEHICLE CURRENCY USE IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE




Appendix Table 2 Alternative Currencies in Trade Invoicing
                                    Currency Share in X                                     Currency Share in M
                Latest Year      US $         Euro       Yen                             US$        Euro        Yen
United States             2003                95                                          85
Asia
 Japan                    2001               52.4              *           36.1          70.7             *            23.5
 Korea                    2001               84.9              *            7.1          82.2             *             9.8
 Malaysia                 1996               66.0              *            6.8          66.0             *             6.8
 Thailand                 1996               83.9              *           8.2           83.9             *            8.2
Australia                 2002               67.9             1.4           1.0          50.1            8.7            4.0
Canada
Euro Union
 Belgium                  2002             31.9#             54.2#         0.5#         33.5#           54.2#          1.5#
 France                   2002           34.2#/21.2       55.8#/71.6         *        43.2#/25.0     48.6#/70.0          *
 Germany                  2002           32.3#/18.1       45.9#/70.5        0.0       37.9#/21.2     45.5#/73.0       0.0#/*
 Greece                   2002             71.0#             24.1#         0.2#         62.0#           30.7#          1.0#
 Luxembourg               2002             35.7#             49.1#         1.7#         38.0#           37.4#          4.0#
 Portugal                 2002             33.4#             48.1#         0.4#         34.5#           57.8#          0.9#
 Spain                    2002             32.8#             58.1#         0.6#         39.5#           54.7#          0.8#
 U.K.                     2001           40.0#/29.0        5.0#/15.0         *        61.0#/38.0      1.0#/10.0          *
EU-Accession
 Bulgaria                 2002               44.5            60.1            *           37.1            52.3            *
 Cyprus                   2002               44.7            21.8            *           34.9            45.5            *
 Czech                    2002               14.7            68.0            *           19.5            66.2            *
 Estonia                  2003                8.5            70.4            *           22.0            61.7            *
 Hungary                  2002               12.2            83.1            *           18.5            73.1            *
 Latvia                   2002               36.2            40.1            *           29.8            51.5            *
 Poland                   2002               29.9            60.2            *           28.6            59.6            *
 Slovakia                 2002               11.6            73.9            *           21.2            60.1            *
 Slovenia                 2002                9.6            86.9            *           13.3            82.8            *
*- Data Not Available for this particular currency. See Notes on Table 4.3 for more information about the data sources and dates
used. #Extra-euro area trade.




                                                                                                                                   40
