                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SHIRKING, SHARING RISK, AND SHELVING:
                     THE ROLE OF UNIVERSITY LICENSE CONTRACTS

                                         Marie Thursby
                                         Jerry Thursby
                                       Emmanuel Dechenaux

                                        Working Paper 11128
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11128


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2005




We thank Ajay Agrawal, Ashish Arora, Irwin Feller, Josh Lerner, Yann Meniere, Fiona Mur- ray,
Richard Nelson, Arti Rai, and participants of workshops at Emory University, Harvard Business School,
the University of California at Los Angeles, the NBER Entrepreneurship and Higher Education Meetings,
the International Industrial Organization Conference at Northwestern University, and the Georgia
Tech Roundtable for Research on Engineering Entrepreneurship for comments. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Alan and Mildred Peterson Foundation through the Purdue University Technology
Transfer Initiative. Thursby and Thursby acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation
(SES0094573) and Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Marie Thursby, Jerry Thursby, and Emmanuel Dechenaux. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shirking, Sharing Risk, and Shelving: The Role of University License Contracts
Marie Thursby, Jerry Thursby, and Emmanuel Dechenaux
NBER Working Paper No. 11128
February 2005, Revised February 2008
JEL No. D82,L14,O3

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a theoretical model of university licensing to explain why university license
contracts often include payment types that differ from the fixed fees and royalties typically examined
by economists. Our findings suggest that milestone payments and annual payments are common because
moral hazard, risk sharing, and adverse selection all play a role when embryonic inventions are licensed.
Milestones address inventor moral hazard without the inefficiency inherent in royalties. The potential
for a licensee to shelve inventions is an adverse selection problem which can be addressed by annual
fees if shelving is unintentional, but may require an upfront fee if the firm licenses an invention with
the intention to shelve it. Whether the licensing contract prevents shelving depends in part on the university
credibly threatening to take the license back from a shelving firm. This supports the rationale for Bayh-Dole
march-in rights but also shows the need for the exercise of these rights can be obviated by contracts.


Marie Thursby                                         Emmanuel Dechenaux
College of Management                                 Kent State University
Georgia Institute of Technology                       Department of Economics
800 West Peachtree street, NW                         Kent, OH 44242-0001
Atlanta, GA 30332-0520                                edechena@kent.edu
and NBER
marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu

Jerry Thursby
Georgia Institute of Technology
jerry.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
1       Introduction
In this paper we address the disparity between theories of licensing which focus on
simple upfront fees and royalties and recent empirical evidence on contracts. Several
surveys show that additional fees, such as those paid annually as well as fees paid
when technical or business milestones are reached, are common [Edwards et al. 2003,
Thursby et al. 2001, and Agrawal and Cockburn 2006]. Existing theories cannot
explain either the prevalence of annual fees and milestone payments or the fact that
they are typically combined with upfront fees and royalties.
    We construct a model of university patent licensing in order to examine when,
if ever, it is optimal to include annual fees and/or milestone payments in a license
contract. This is an ideal setting in which to examine these contract terms, as com-
mercialization of university inventions often requires inventor and licensee effort in
development, neither of which is observable. The need for inventor effort presents a
moral hazard problem because inventors may “shirk” if they prefer research to devel-
opment. The need for licensee effort suggests a problem with adverse selection since
firms may “shelve” inventions either because their intent in licensing is simply to block
other firms from developing them or, more innocently, because by the time develop-
ment is completed expected profits are less than originally anticipated. While inventor
moral hazard has been studied, albeit in the context of royalties or equity [Jensen and
Thursby 2001], shelving by licensing firms has not.1 Since the intent of laws allowing
university ownership of inventions, such the US Bayh-Dole Act and Bayh-Dole-inspired
legislation in Europe [Verspagen 2006], is to promote commercialization, this is an im-
portant oversight.
    We consider the problem of a Technology Licensing Office (TLO) with the re-
sponsibility for designing and offering an exclusive license contract to a firm that has
expressed interest in developing an invention owned by the university. The invention
requires further inventor and licensee collaboration in technical development, as well as
licensee investment in commercialization. Importantly, we allow for the possibility of
contracts with payments based on events or quantities the TLO can observe (contract
acceptance, technical and commercial success, and output). In this context, we ana-
lyze the role that different payment types play in extracting rents as well as providing
appropriate incentives to the inventor and the firm.
    Assuming risk neutrality, if incentive provision is not an issue, a simple upfront
fee is optimal. On the other hand, if inventor effort is not observable (but absent
of any concern with shelving) the TLO’s optimal offer includes payments contingent
on technical success and possibly an upfront fee. However, the optimal contract does
    1
    Macho-Stadler et al. [2007] examine shelving by the TLO as a device to improve the quality of
inventions licensed.



                                               2
not include a royalty because it would distort the firm’s output. Hence, when the
licensee is genuinely interested in developing the invention, risk aversion on the part
of the TLO and the firm are necessary for optimal contracts to include an upfront fee
and a royalty, although it is not sufficient. With licensee risk aversion, an optimal
contract may include an upfront fee, payments contingent on technical success (such
as milestone payments), and an output royalty.
    We then examine the problem when, in the course of development, the licensee
may learn that although the invention works, the opportunity cost of investing in its
commercialization is higher than anticipated. In equilibrium, contracts include annual
fees to induce such licensees to return the license so that it can be offered to a firm
with lower expected costs of commercialization. We also introduce the possibility of a
firm licensing the invention with the intent to shelve rather than develop it. We show
that upfront fees may serve a different purpose here than they do in an environment in
which shelving is not considered a problem (where they merely extract rents or spread
risk). Finally, we show that payments that depend on technical success can address
the shelving problem when used in conjunction with a credible threat to license to
another firm if the licensee fails to meet technical milestones defined in the contract.
    These results contribute to the extensive theoretical literature on licensing which
has focused primarily on simple contracts involving fixed fees and royalties, with little
attention paid to milestones (see Kamien [1992] for a review). Exceptions are Arora
[1995] and Bousquet et al. [1998] who discuss the role of state-contingent fees in the
transfer of tacit knowledge and risk sharing, respectively. By largely ignoring issues
related to licensing of inventions that require further development, this literature is
unable to explain the complications that arise in university licensing. For example,
in Bousquet et al. [1998] milestones are impractical for risk sharing since there are
no development milestones in their model. In Macho-Stadler et al. [1996], Jensen
and Thursby [2001], and Choi [2001], development is a single stage process. The
only evidence of success is the firm’s output, so that output royalties arise naturally
as a success-contingent form of payment. By contrast, when early stage inventions
are licensed, milestones are not only feasible but also may be easier to define than
royalties.2 Furthermore, although, as these studies show, royalties can address inventor
moral hazard, we show that milestone payments are preferable since they don’t distort
output.
    Our most novel results pertain to the adverse selection problem that arises from
shelvers having private information about their intent. Prior studies find that licensor
and/or licensee private information can be used to justify royalties [see Gallini and
Wright 1990, and Beggs 1992]. With shelving, however, royalties are ineffective. We
show that, depending on the type of shelving and the credibility of the threat of
  2
      See Thursby et al. 2005.


                                           3
licensing to an alternative firm, fees paid upfront, annually, or with achievement of
milestones can be used.
    Our work is also related to the literature on the organization of R&D with in-
complete contracts. We contribute to this literature by showing that, when shelving
is a possibility, contingent ownership combined with appropriate contract terms is
important. The work closest to ours is that of Aghion and Tirole [1994a, b] which
examines conditions under which an invention should be owned by the research unit,
final customer, or some combination. They derive conditions under which ownership is
irrelevant for efficiency. One of the conditions is whether the invention could be devel-
oped independently by the research unit or the customer. The types of inventions that
we model are those which cannot be independently developed by either the university
inventor or the firm. Moreover, in their model the final customer has no incentive to
prevent development of the invention.
    Finally, we contribute to the literature on university licensing and associated public
policy concerns (see Agrawal [2001] and Thursby and Thursby [2003] for reviews). In
particular, our results on shelving contribute to the US debates on the importance of
government rights to take ownership of federally funded inventions in the absence of
reasonable commercialization efforts. These “march-in” rights, granted by the Bayh-
Dole Act, have never been exercised, leading to the view that the law needs to be
strengthened [Rai and Eisenberg 2003]. We contribute to the debate by showing that
contract terms and a willingness of universities to terminate licenses may well provide
a market mechanism to minimize shelving, thus obviating the need to exercise the
“march-in rights.”
    Section 2 provides survey results that motivate our consideration of multiple devel-
opment stages as well as shelving concerns. Section 3 presents the basic problem. In
Section 4, we focus on the moral hazard problem when shelving by the licensee is not
a concern. In Section 5, we consider the adverse selection problem that arises when
the firm’s opportunity cost of commercializing the invention is not observable by the
TLO. Section 6 concludes. The Appendix contains all proofs.


2    University license environment
The types of inventions and licenses we consider are motivated by two university li-
censing surveys, one of 62 US university TLOs and one of 112 firms that license-in
university inventions [Thursby et al. 2001 and Thursby and Thursby 2002]. Respon-
dents to both surveys characterize the majority of inventions licensed as embryonic,
estimating that three fourths or more of these inventions are no more than a lab scale
prototype at the time of license [Jensen and Thursby 2001]. As a result, their com-
mercial use requires further development by the licensee, making shelving a potential

                                            4
issue for most inventions licensed. TLO and business respondents claimed that 71%
and 40%, respectively, of the inventions require inventor cooperation in development.
Further, since most inventions must go through substantial development and testing,
and in many cases clinical trials, this development is risky. Respondents to the business
survey reported 46% of the university inventions they license fail. Forty-seven percent
of those failed for purely technical reasons [Thursby and Thursby 2002].
    Respondents to the university survey reported that three-fourths of the inventions
they license are licensed either exclusively or exclusively in a field of use.3 We therefore
focus on exclusive contracts. This is without loss of generality because shelving would
not be an issue with non-exclusive licenses since multiple licenses would be feasible for
the same use. Moreover, much of the Bayh-Dole policy debate pertains to exclusivity.
Proponents argue that without exclusivity, firms would not have the incentive to risk
investing in commercializing the embryonic inventions which typically result from fed-
erally funded research. Critics, however, worry that the monopoly power associated
with exclusivity may actually stand in the way of commercialization, as in the case of
shelving.
    Both surveys show that contracts typically include multiple payment types. For
example, in the university survey, 97% of the respondents reported that royalties were
included in license contracts either “almost always” or “often,” 92% reported the same
for upfront fees, 89% for annual payments, and 72% for milestone payments. Only 8%
of the respondents reported often including equity, and when equity was included the
majority of contracts also included other fees [Thursby et al. 2001].
    The responses to open-ended questions in the university survey suggest that fees
are often motivated by due diligence. With regard to annual payments, 19% of the
respondents volunteered that they include annual payments as due diligence to ensure
the licensee makes “reasonable efforts to commercialize.” Interestingly, one respondent
mentioned using, not annual fees, but an upfront payment when the “feasibility of
march-in to recover the license was low.” Whether or not these payments indeed deter
such actions is an open question, but an additional 18% said they had problems with
firms shelving despite their best attempts at due diligence. In general, due diligence to
ensure licensee development appears to be a thorny issue for TLO personnel. Indeed,
78% of the respondents noted that when they had to terminate licenses, the reason
was failure to meet due diligence requirements or payments.
    Both surveys include information on milestone payments. Examples of milestones
include reaching animal or clinical trials, development of a business plan or prototype,
and the level of earnings [Rector and Thursby 2008]. In response to a question on
the importance of various payment terms when inventor cooperation is critical for
  3
     The Association of University Technology Managers Survey reports that roughly half of the
licenses executed by its members are exclusive.


                                              5
development of the technology, respondents to the business survey noted that milestone
payments are by far the most important payment term. Although the university survey
did not contain information linking milestones with inventor cooperation, respondents
emphasized that one of their most difficult issues is maintaining the needed inventor
involvement [Thursby and Thursby 2004].
    When, if ever, the use of annual and milestone payments is optimal is not clear a
priori, nor is it clear that the complex contracts in university licensing are optimal.
For these reasons, in the following sections, we set up a stylized model of university
licensing in which a TLO must design and offer an exclusive license contract to a firm
that has expressed interest in developing a university invention. The invention requires
further technical development, completion of which is impossible without the inventor’s
cooperation. Commercialization of the technology also requires further investments by
the firm, but the TLO has no information on the firm’s true intent.4
    Also drawing on the university survey, we specify the TLO objective as a function,
not only of revenue, but also commercialization. All survey respondents reported
having multiple objectives including earning revenue and sponsored research, as well
as simply executing licenses and encouraging commercialization. The most important
of these objectives was earning revenue, with 98% of the respondents noting that
revenue was either moderately or extremely important to them. Next in importance
was the number of inventions commercialized, with 92% noting that commercialization
was either moderately or extremely important [Thursby et al. 2001]. Specifying the
TLO objective as a function of commercialization also has the benefit of linking the
analysis to the incentives provided by the “march-in” rights of Bayh-Dole.
    Finally, it is worth noting that Bayh-Dole also requires universities to share a
portion of the revenue from licensing with the inventor. Revenue sharing rules vary
widely across universities, but except when the university returns all invention rights
to the inventor, the inventor share rarely approaches 100%. In our survey the inventor
share was 40% on average. From the standpoint of modeling optimal license practices,
this is interesting since a well known way to solve moral hazard problems is the so-
called “sell out” contract in which a principal sells the project to the agent and extracts
all rent with a fixed fee [Laffont 1989]. It is also interesting that the inventor share
is specified at the university level rather than as one of the variables in an individual
licensing decision (Jensen et al. 2003).
   4
    This is in contrast to recent work in which the TLO serves an intermediary purpose by being
better informed than other players in the technology transfer process (Hoppe and Ozdenoren [2005],
Hellmann [2007], and Macho-Stadler et al. [2007]).




                                                6
3       A model of university licensing
Consider the problem faced by a university TLO with the responsibility for licensing
an invention that requires further development before it can be successfully commer-
cialized. Our baseline model is in the spirit of Jensen and Thursby [2001]. However, we
exploit the fact that many inventions must go through multiple stages of development
before they can successfully be commercialized. In Section 5 below, we also take into
account the fact that not all of the firms willing to buy the license are interested in
developing a product based on the invention.
    The timing of the game is shown in Figure 1. At the beginning of the first period,
the TLO draws a firm from a pool of candidates and offers a license contract to that
firm. The firm may accept or reject the contract. If it accepts, a development stage
begins, in which inventor effort and firm investment are required for technical success.
The probability of technical success at the technical development stage is given by
p(e, X) where e is inventor effort and X is the firm’s investment. We assume p(0, X) =
p(e, 0) = 0 and p(e, X) ∈ [0, 1). The probability p(e, X) is strictly increasing in both
                                                                          2 p(e,X)
arguments; it is strictly concave and e and X are complements, with ∂ ∂e∂X         ≥ 0 for
all e ≥ 0 and X ≥ 0. If the invention is a technical success, the game proceeds to
the commercial development stage. Conditional on technical success, the probability
of commercialization is equal to zu . However, the firm may invest a fixed amount C in
order to increase the likelihood that the invention is commercialized to z. We assume
that zu is in [0, z). Finally, all players are risk neutral.
    The TLO acts on behalf of the university which owns and can exclusively license
the invention.5 In accordance with Bayh-Dole, this property right is contingent on
the licensee making “reasonable” efforts to commercialize it and a portion, α, of the
revenue earned from the license must accrue to the inventor. Accordingly, the TLO
maximizes utility from expected licensing revenue R̃, UA (R̃; L) given by
                                  ½
                                      (1 − α)R̃s     if commercial success,
                  UA (R̃; L) =
                                      (1 − α)R̃f − L if commercial failure,

where R̃s is expected revenue in case of commercial success, R̃f is expected revenue in
case of commercial failure. In UA , (1 − α) is the TLO’s share of revenue, and L is a
loss associated with commercial failure. Thus even if licensing revenue is certain, the
TLO strictly prefers an outcome in which the firm invests in commercialization.6
    5
     We abstract from any agency problems between the TLO and administration. See Jensen et al.
[2003] regarding the alignment of TLO and administration objectives.
   6
     For the TLO, holding revenue constant, the presence of L induces a preference for commercializa-
tion. Because of the Bayh-Dole march-in provisions, universities face the possibility of losing property
rights to the invention in the absence of commercialization. We believe this can lead to an important
loss of reputation for the university (and thus, revenue from future licenses). This loss is accounted


                                                   7
    The inventor’s utility from license revenue is given by UI (R̃) = αR̃. She incurs
strictly positive and increasing disutility of effort represented by the continuous func-
tion V (e), with V (0) = 0. We also assume increasing marginal disutility (V 00 (e) > 0).
Hence, the inventor’s payoff function is given by αR̃ − V (e).
    The TLO offers the firm an exclusive license contract that specifies all payment
terms. We restrict attention to payment types that are contingent on observable events
and quantities. We denote a contract by O = (F, M, A, r, t). Payment term F is
an upfront fee paid when the firm accepts the contract. Payment term M , which
we refer to as a milestone payment, is a lump sum fee paid if and only if technical
development is successful. Payment term A, which we refer to as an annual payment,
is paid along with the commercialization investment, that is, after technical success,
but before commercial success. Finally, r is an output royalty, and t is a profit tax
or alternatively, a share of the firm’s equity.7 Hereafter, we refer to M , A, r and t as
continuation payments, since the firm would have to return the license if it failed to
make either of these payments.
    The firm’s full expected utility is given by its (random) profit net of license pay-
ments. The firm’s profit from selling a product based on the invention is equal to π(x)
with x denoting output. Where there is no ambiguity, we write π for maxx {π(x)}.
Clearly, in the absence of distortionary payments based on output, if the firm commer-
cializes the invention, it chooses the optimal level of output and earns π. We assume
zπ − C > zu π, so that the firm finds it worthwhile to invest C when it obtains π
from commercializing the invention. Thus, immediately after technical success, the
firm’s expected profit is given by Π[x∗ (r, t), r, t] = max{z[(1 − t)π[x∗ (r, t)] − rx∗ (r, t)] −
C, zu [(1 − t)π[x∗ (r, t)] − rx∗ (r, t)], 0}, where x∗ (r, t) is the firm’s optimal output level
when the royalty rate is r > 0 and the equity share is equal to t.
    If the firm invests X at the technical development stage, and behaves optimally at
the commercialization stage, its expected payoff is given by

                             p(e, X)[Π[x∗ , r, t] − A − M ] − X − F.

   In general, inventor effort and firm investment (e, X or C) are neither observable
nor contractible, and the inventor’s share of revenue α is not chosen by the TLO.
However, as a benchmark we consider the TLO’s problem if investment and effort are
observable and contractible and α is a choice variable. With full information and a
for by L in our model.
   7
     Note that Jensen and Thursby [2001] also consider F, r, and t. Bousquet et al. [1998] consider
upfront fees and royalties only. However, they allow for two different types of royalties. One is an
output royalty, and the other is a tax on the firm’s revenue. We focus on output royalties, which is
without loss of generality in our model. Either type of royalty implies a distortion of the licensee’s
output, which is what matters for our results. Because of the way we model uncertainty at the
commercialization stage, the distinction between the two different types of royalties is inconsequential.


                                                   8
flexible α, the TLO maximizes its expected payoff by choosing payment terms, required
effort and investment, and the inventor’s share of revenue subject to the inventor’s and
the firm’s participation constraints. Since the required effort and investment levels
can be written in a contract independently of payment terms, as in Choi [2001], a
contract with a simple upfront fee is sufficient.8 At an interior solution with e > 0 and
X > 0, the optimal values of α and of the upfront fee are such that the firm’s and the
inventor’s participation constraints are binding.9


4       Non-contractible effort and investment
Our university survey revealed that TLO personnel view obtaining faculty participation
as one of the more challenging parts of their jobs [Thursby et al. 2001 and Jensen et
al. 2003]. Jensen and Thursby [2001] show that obtaining inventor effort requires some
type of payment tied to commercial success, such as royalties or equity. In their model,
there is a single development stage so there is no role for milestone payments. In this
section, we show that when development milestones are feasible, a payment tied to
their achievement can solve the problem of inventor moral hazard.
    As in Jensen and Thursby’s [2001] model with sponsored research, we assume that
after the firm accepts the contract, the inventor and the firm choose their effort and
investment levels simultaneously and non-cooperatively. Thus, effort and investment
are determined in the Nash equilibrium of this simultaneous move game. In this section,
we abstract from shelving and assume the firm has a natural incentive to invest because
its only source of revenue is the profit from commercialization. However, the inventor
solves:
                        Maximize αR̃ − V (e) with respect to e.
It is clear that the expected utility term will not depend on e if the reward αR̃ is the
same whether or not the invention works because, under Bayh-Dole, αF must be paid
to the inventor whether or not the invention works.10 However, in our set-up, there
    8
     With risk neutrality, any single non-distortionary payment type or combination of payment types
may be used to extract the optimal amount of revenue from the firm, because the required effort
and investment levels are specified in the contract. Hence, to implement the first-best levels of effort
and investment, the only payment type that is ruled out is an output royalty because it implies a
dead-weight loss.
   9
     Under certain conditions, the solution to the TLO’s maximization problem described in the text
coincides with the solution that is obtained if the TLO sets α = 1 and sells the project to the inventor
for a fixed price (a sell-out contract). We examine this possibility in the Appendix. The solutions
will coincide if, (i) with the sell-out contract, the inventor, not the TLO, bears the loss L in case the
invention is not commercialized and (ii) the inventor is willing to accept the sell-out contract without
subsidization by the TLO.
  10
     As an anonymous referee pointed out, if the TLO could make α contingent on technical success,
then it could offer an upfront fee contract, and set α = 0 in case of technical failure and α > 0 in case


                                                   9
are a wide variety of payment terms that are received by the university (and thus, the
inventor) only if the invention is either technically or commercially successful. We show
that an optimal contract will contain at least one such payment type when feasible.
As in other licensing models, the optimal contract may also include an upfront fee to
extract any residual rent from the firm.

Proposition 1 Suppose that all parties are risk neutral and that neither inventor ef-
fort, nor firm investment are contractible. Then, if an optimal licensing contract that
leads to positive inventor effort and firm investment exists, it contains at least one con-
tinuation payment type tied to technical success. Furthermore, the optimal contract is
not unique regarding payment types. However, in all optimal contracts, the output roy-
alty rate r is set equal to zero and the upfront fee is set so that the firm’s participation
constraint is binding.

    Given the complementarity of the inventor’s effort and the firm’s investment, there
is another equilibrium in the technical development subgame in which the firm does
not invest and the inventor spends no effort so that the project fails with probability
one. As in Jensen and Thursby’s [2001] analysis of moral hazard with royalties and
sponsored research, it is straightforward to show that this equilibrium is unstable with
standard assumptions on the firm’s and inventor’s problems. We therefore restrict our
attention to the equilibrium with positive effort.11
    As shown in Proposition 1, in our simple model, if an equilibrium with non-zero
probability of development exists, the specific payment terms do not matter as long
as a sufficient portion of the total payments to the TLO is contingent on technical
success and the output royalty rate is set equal to zero.12 There are several ways, not
of technical success to provide incentives to the inventor.
   11
      We do not examine the case p(0, X) > 0 for X > 0 and the possibility to obtain additional effort
from the inventor in this paper. If the firm earns a profit of zero when it does not commercialize (that
is, it does not have an incentive to shelve) and inventor effort is not necessary, then the TLO always has
the option of offering a contract with a simple upfront fee and foregoing the inventor’s participation.
Note that the TLO would still be required to transfer a share α of revenue to the inventor even if
the inventor spends no effort. The TLO’s other option is to provide an incentive for the inventor
to work, via continuation payments like in our model. The optimal contract is thus determined by
a comparison between the contract that maximizes the TLO’s expected payoff conditional on zero
inventor effort and the best contract that induces positive inventor effort. Hence, if the probability of
success is non-zero even when the inventor does not participate, the TLO faces a trade-off between,
on the one hand, letting the firm develop the invention on its own and on the other hand, introducing
payment terms that distort its investment in order to motivate the inventor. This trade-off depends on
the degree of complementarity between inventor effort and firm investment. In Section 5, we examine
a game between the TLO and the firm and focus on the moral hazard problem that arises when some
firms have an incentive to shelve the invention.
   12
      The conditions on the inventor’s and the firm’s best-replies that are required for the existence
and uniqueness of an equilibrium in which inventor effort and firm investment are strictly positive are
similar to equation (15) in Jensen and Thursby [2001] after adjusting for notational differences.


                                                   10
modeled here, to explain why milestone payments are prevalent. One such explanation
is discounting of future payoffs by the inventor and the TLO. Since we assume that the
TLO makes a take-it-or-leave it offer to the firm, even a small preference for current
payoffs would make it optimal for the TLO to set A = 0 and t = 0 and charge all
continuation fees in the form of a technical milestone. A similar argument can be
made if either the TLO or the inventor, or both, are risk averse, while the firm is risk
neutral.
    An important result is that, when all players are risk neutral, the milestone payment
dominates a royalty. Why then do we observe contracts that include royalties and
upfront fees in addition to milestones and annual fees? With uncertainty related to
commercialization, Bousquet el al. [1998] show risk aversion on the part of the firm
explains the presence of output-distorting royalties. If, as they do, we assume that
equity contracts are not feasible, then risk aversion is a natural explanation given the
embryonic nature of university inventions. In our model, once the firm invests C, it
obtains Π[x∗ (r, t), r, t] either with probability z < 1 or with probability zu < 1, so that
the worst state of nature for the firm is one in which the invention is a technical success
but commercial success is not realized. In this case, the firm anticipates having to pay
the milestone payment and the annual fee, while earning no revenue from the invention.
A positive royalty rate will reduce the variance in the distribution of profits and result
in more equal payments across states. With a risk neutral TLO and inventor, this
leaves open the possibility that the optimal contract will include an output royalty
when z is sufficiently low.13


5      Shelving
In this section, we examine the problems that arise because the firm’s commercializa-
tion effort is not contractible. We consider situations in which the firm may be better
off shelving the invention than commercializing it. We allow for two types of shelving,
one in which a firm licenses with the intent to prevent commercialization of the inven-
tion and another in which a firm licenses intending to commercialize the invention, but
decides not to commercialize it after spending time on development. For simplicity,
we refer to the first type of shelving as intentional and to the second as unintentional.
    The motivation for intentional shelving is similar to that of “sleeping patents”
examined by Gilbert and Newbery [1982] in which a monopolist patents substitutes for
  13
    If the firm’s investment can take only two values, 0 or X and the probability of technical success is
given by p(e, X) = p(e) and p(e, 0) = 0, it is possible to show the following. If there exists a contract
with M > 0 and r = 0 that leads to positive inventor effort and is accepted by the firm, then a small
increase in r compensated by an equivalent reduction in M will increase the expected payoff of the
firm without affecting the probability of success. Hence, increasing r allows the TLO to increase the
upfront fee and thus, its expected payoff.


                                                   11
its product to keep others from producing it. Well known examples include DuPont’s
patenting of 200 substitutes for Nylon. More recently, Cohen et al. [2000] find that
when firms in their survey patent inventions, 82% (64%) patent them in order to block
rivals in the case of product (process) inventions.
    The most publicized example of unintentional shelving was involved in the CellPro-
Johns Hopkins march-in dispute. In 1997 CellPro petitioned the National Institutes
of Health to take back the Johns Hopkins license for the My-10 antibody originally
licensed to Becton Dickinson. While the company had invested in development, over
time it decided to withdraw from the therapeutic business, so that developing the
antibody had no economic value to the company.


5.1    The Shelving Game
In order to keep the model as simple as possible, but rich enough that it generates
insight into the shelving problem, we assume that the probability of success depends
only on the firm’s investment. That is, we assume the probability of technical success
is equal to p if the firm invests a fixed amount X > 0 and zero if the firm does not
invest. Without loss of generality, we set α = 0 and z = 1. Finally, to keep the notation
simple, we rule out output royalties since we assume that the players are risk neutral
(and equity contracts are feasible). It will also become clear that payments which
depend on commercialization are ineffective at solving the shelving problem since they
are not paid by shelving firms.
    We introduce the possibility of shelving in the following way. At the time the TLO
offers a license contract, there are two types of firms in the pool. With probability s
the firm is interested in licensing the invention to prevent development (either by itself
or a rival). It is natural to think of this firm either producing or trying to develop a
substitute for the invention. The firm, which we call an intentional shelver, earns profit
π m when it obtains the license for the invention but does not commercialize it, and
π c ≤ π m , if it obtains the license and commercializes it. The shelver earns π d ≤ π m if
another firm, holding the exclusive license, commercializes the invention. Therefore, a
shelver would never attempt to commercialize the invention since max{zu π c , π c − C} <
π m by assumption. Moreover, a shelver saves an amount D ≡ π m − π d when it obtains
and shelves the license, preventing commercialization of the invention.
    At the time the TLO offers the contract, the probability that the firm is interested
in developing and commercializing the invention is 1 − s. However, we assume that
after technical success is determined but before the decision to incur C is made, new
information becomes available which reveals whether the commercial potential for the
invention is good or bad. With probability q, commercial potential is good and the
firm’s profit from commercializing is equal to π. With probability 1 − q, the firm is


                                            12
an unintentional shelver whose investment in commercialization has to be increased to
Cu > C to ensure that the probability of commercialization is equal to 1. This could be
because technical success has revealed that this invention is not as profitable as other
development projects the licensee is working on concurrently.14 Moreover, we assume
that zu π > π − Cu holds, so that an unintentional shelver finds it too costly to invest
in commercial development and thus faces a lower probability of commercialization zu .
If a firm is not an intentional shelver, following technical success but before it learns
its type, its expected profit is equal to ẑπ − qC, where ẑ ≡ q + (1 − q)zu .
    The timeline for this game is given in Figure 2. The TLO first offers a contract to
a firm that was randomly selected from the pool. If it rejects, the TLO must decide
whether or not to search for a second firm at a cost K > 0. The second firm may
accept or reject the contract. If it rejects the contract, we assume that the project
is abandoned. Thus, we assume that the TLO can search only once. If the first firm
accepts, it pays an upfront fee and decides whether or not to invest X. If the observed
outcome of the technical development stage is a failure, the TLO can take the license
back from the firm. Note that failure will be observed when either the firm does not
invest or the invention does not work. If the TLO takes the license back, it decides
whether or not to search for a second firm at cost K. The outcome of the search process
is as described above. On the other hand, if technical development is successful, the
licensee must pay the milestone payment. If the firm is not an intentional shelver,
it also learns its type (its commercial development cost). Upon learning the cost of
commercial development, if the firm decides to keep the license, it must pay the annual
fee. Otherwise, it returns the license to the TLO which can search for another firm at
the cost K. If the firm decides to keep the license, it then decides whether or not to
invest.
    There are three critical dates at which the TLO may want to search for a different
firm: immediately after the initial contract offer is made if it is rejected, immediately
after observed failure in the technical development stage, and, finally, after technical
success if the TLO determines that the firm is an unintentional shelver. The infor-
mation available to a potential second firm about the first firm’s investment plays an
important role in this context. To abstract from potential agency problems between
the TLO and the second firm, we assume that the second firm has the same information
as the TLO.
    Throughout the analysis, we focus on contracts that can be supported as pure strat-
egy Perfect Bayesian equilibria within the class of contracts that, first, are accepted
by firms that are not intentional shelvers, and second, lead to positive investment in
  14
    For instance, suppose that the licensee learned that another one of its innovations would surely
be commercially successful and yield a profit net of development costs equal to πu . If the licensee
has limited resources, and can only work on one of the two projects, then the opportunity cost of
investing C in the university invention is C + πu = Cu .


                                                13
technical development by such firms. A contract can be supported as an equilibrium
if there is no other contract that satisfies all participation and incentive compatibility
constraints and gives the TLO a strictly higher expected payoff. Hence, an equilibrium
contract is optimal for the TLO, subject to participation and incentive compatibility
constraints. For the problem to be interesting, we assume

A0: p(ẑπ − qC) − X > 0

    If A0 is not satisfied, firms that are not intentional shelvers are unwilling to accept
any contract which generates strictly positive revenue.
    To characterize equilibrium contracts, it is necessary to analyze the TLO’s behavior
if the first firm rejects the original contract offer. In this case, the TLO may try to
license the invention to a second firm. If the TLO searches for a second firm, then it
will optimally extract all rents from this firm by offering, for instance, an upfront fee
contract. If the firm accepts the contract and is not an intentional shelver, its expected
payoff gross of payments to the TLO is

                                    p(ẑπ − qC) − X.

Hence, a contract offer of O = (F ) to this firm, where F = p(ẑπ − qC) − X, maximizes
the TLO’s expected payoff. A simple calculation shows that the TLO will search for a
second firm if and only if

                      (1 − s)[p(ẑπ − qC) − X] + (1 − s)pẑL ≥ K.                      (1)

   Since our premise is that the TLO views shelving as a problem we make the fol-
lowing assumption:

A1: The TLO’s utility loss from failing to commercialize the invention and the cost
of search satisfy (1 − s)[p(ẑπ − qC) − X − pẑD] + (1 − s)pẑL ≥ K.

    Since D > 0, A1 is stronger than (1). This assumption rules out the TLO finding
it profitable to offer an upfront fee contract to an intentional shelver. To see this,
suppose the TLO knows the firm’s type and is faced with an intentional shelver. The
assumption implies that the TLO prefers to turn that firm down and search for another
firm rather than extract all rents from the shelver and commit not to take the license
back after observing technical failure.
    For some, but not all, of our results, we also assume

A2: ẑπ − qC ≥ (1 − s)D.

                                            14
   This condition guarantees that if technical development is a success, the expected
profit from commercialization for a firm that is not an intentional shelver is greater
than the amount an intentional shelver expects to save by blocking commercialization.


5.2    Unintentional shelving: The role of annual fees
In this section, we assume s = 0 and focus on the problem presented by unintentional
shelving. Consider the incentives faced by a licensee that is not an intentional shelver.
Since, ex-ante, the firm does not know the value of the licensed invention, it expects to
earn a gross expected profit equal to ẑπ − C if technical development yields a success.
The problem is that when ẑ < 1 the TLO may want to take the license back even if
technical development is successful. The TLO’s incentive to take the license back from
an unintentional shelver stems from the opportunity to license to a second firm, which
on average, will have a higher probability of commercialization. It is thus important to
determine when it is optimal for the TLO to license to a second firm after it observes
a technical success with the first firm.
    Suppose technical development is successful, but the licensee learns that zu π >
π − Cu so that it is not profitable to invest in commercialization. Then if (1) holds
with s = 0, it is simple to show that the TLO will always find it worthwhile to search
for a second firm. This additional search cannot be done with the first firm holding an
exclusive license unless the license is terminated. To justify termination, the TLO may
include another type of contract requirement before commercialization. Suppose that
the TLO’s contract includes an annual fee A > 0 to be paid after technical success,
but before commercial success. If this payment is sufficiently high, specifically greater
than an unintentional shelver’s expected profit, zu π, then a firm of that type will prefer
to return the license to the TLO to avoid making this payment.
    The tradeoff faced by the TLO is the following. Setting A ≥ zu π brings about
an obvious benefit. Indeed, if the first firm is an unintentional shelver who returns
the license, the TLO gets a chance to search for a second firm, which, on average
has a higher probability of commercialization. This benefit increases as zu decreases.
However, forcing unintentional shelvers to return the license is costly. First, the revenue
raised from the first firm is necessarily lower than if the licensee anticipates keeping
the license regardless of its type. This cost increases as zu increases. Second, search
itself is costly. The next proposition shows that if annual fees are feasible, then it is
optimal for the TLO to include an annual fee if and only if q is sufficiently high and
zu is sufficiently low.




                                            15
Proposition 2 Assume s = 0 and suppose A0 and (1) hold.
                X
  (i) If q ≤ p(π−C) < 1, then the firm will reject any contract with an annual fee
      A ≥ zu π.
                X
 (ii) If q > p(π−C)  holds, there exists a zˆu > 0 such that a contract that contains an
      annual fee A is optimal if and only if zu ∈ (0, ẑu ]. The annual fee must be no
                                                                     X
      less than zu π and no greater than Â where Â ≡ (π − C) − pq    . In equilibrium,
      the firm accepts the TLO’s contract and invests X, but returns the license to the
      TLO if it learns that it is an unintentional shelver.

    In our model, the distinction between annual fees and technical milestone payments
is somewhat artificial. Annual fees are paid along with the commercial development
cost, while technical milestones are paid immediately following technical success. An
interpretation of our simple timing assumption is that in order for the firm to learn
about the commercial potential it must undertake commercial development, as would
be the case with market testing, for example. However, the firm is committed to pay
the milestone payment immediately upon technical success so that annual continuation
fees to be paid at a later date are required to ensure due diligence. Clearly, whether
the TLO decides to enforce due diligence by including such annual fees will depend on
the revenue it has to forego as shown in Proposition 2.
    In solving the problem with unintentional shelving, it is clear that annual payments
dominate output royalties since royalties distort output. Furthermore, it is possible
to show that annual payments dominate equity shares. Indeed, equity shares will
negatively affect a non-shelver’s investment in commercial development since they are
paid only if commercial success occurs. Our model provides an extreme example of this
effect. Consider the equity share that is sufficient to deter unintentional shelvers from
maintaining the license. Here, the equity share equals 1 since unintentional shelvers face
no cost from commercial development. But then, this means that a non-shelver earns
a profit of zero from commercializing the invention and thus will optimally invest zero
in either commercial or technical development. An annual payment does not generate
any such adverse effects.


5.3    Intentional shelving: The role of upfront fees and contin-
       uation payments
In this section, we consider the case where unintentional shelving is not an issue (q = 1),
but s > 0 so that some firms in the pool are intentional shelvers. The problem with
intentional shelvers is that if such a firm obtains the license, it definitely will not
invest in commercial development. Thus, if the licensee is an intentional shelver, the


                                            16
TLO incurs the loss L with certainty if it allows the firm keep the license until the
commercialization stage. Our analysis highlights the role of upfront fees and technical
continuation payments along with the credibility to threaten to license to another firm
if a technical failure is observed.
    If types were observable, the TLO would simply select a non-shelver from the pool
and offer, for instance, a simple upfront fee contract Ô = (F̂ ) that extracts an amount
of revenue equal to
                                    F̂ ≡ p(π − C) − X
from the firm. The probability of commercialization would be equal to p, and the
TLO’s expected payoff would be p(π − C) − X − (1 − p)L.
    With unobservable types, we assume that the TLO can offer two types of contracts,
separating or pooling, and determine when each type of contract can be supported in
a Perfect Bayesian equilibrium. We call a separating contract one that is accepted
by non-shelvers and rejected by shelvers, while a pooling contract is one that is ac-
cepted by both types of firms. An equilibrium contract is a contract, either separating
or pooling, that maximizes the TLO’s expected payoff and satisfies all participation
and incentive compatibility constraints. For a wide range of parameter values, an
equilibrium contract is straightforward to characterize and consists of an upfront fee
(Propositions 3 and 4). However, in the most interesting case, where the TLO can
credibly threaten to license the invention to a second firm after observing a technical
failure, if the benefit from blocking commercialization is high enough for intentional
shelvers, the TLO will offer a pooling contract that consists of success-contingent fees
only (Proposition 5). In every equilibrium, expected licensing revenue to the TLO is
less than or equal to F̂ , and the probability of commercialization is strictly less than
p.
    Since A1 implies that (1) holds (after setting ẑ = 1), it is clear that if the first firm
rejects the contract, the TLO will search for a second firm. This has an important
implication for equilibrium behavior as summarized in Lemma 1.

Lemma 1 An equilibrium in which both shelvers and non-shelvers accept the TLO’s
contract and invest X in technical development does not exist.

Proof. Suppose that an equilibrium exists in which both types of firms invest X. We
show that shelvers have an incentive to deviate, contradicting equilibrium behavior.
Indeed, upon observing a technical failure, both the TLO and a potential second firm’s
beliefs should assign probability one to the event that the invention does not work.
Hence, a second firm will not be willing to invest, so that it cannot be worthwhile for
the TLO to search for a second firm. But, anticipating this behavior by the TLO,
shelvers will shirk so as to strictly increase their payoff, contradicting equilibrium be-


                                             17
havior. ¤

    Hence, if an equilibrium exists, it must either be the case that shelvers reject the
TLO’s contract or that they accept it, but shirk at the technical stage. In the case
shelvers accept the contract, there are two possibilities if the TLO observes a technical
failure: Either the TLO finds it profitable to search for a second firm or it does not
and the game ends.
    As shown in Proposition 3, a contract that shelvers reject in equilibrium exists if
and only if F̂ exceeds the expected saving to the firm from shelving. If F̂ is lower than
the expected saving from shelving, then a separating contract cannot be an equilibrium
contract since shelvers would find it profitable to deviate, accept the contract, and pay
any fees that non-shelvers are willing to pay. Note that the separating contract under
asymmetric information leads to a lower probability of commercialization than under
complete information.

Proposition 3 Assume q = 1 and suppose that A0 and A1 hold. An equilibrium
contract is a separating contract if and only if F̂ ≥ (1−s)pD. The equilibrium contract
is not unique, but one such contract consists of a simple upfront fee equal to F̂ .
    In equilibrium, non-shelvers accept the TLO’s contract and invest X in technical de-
velopment. Shelvers turn down the TLO’s contract offer. Furthermore, the probability
of successful commercialization is equal to (1 − s)p + s(1 − s)p.

   In the remainder of this section, we assume that F̂ < (1 − s)pD holds. That is, a
non-shelver’s expected payoff gross of licensing fees is less than a shelver’s expected sav-
ing from blocking commercialization. This implies the following relationship between
the parameters
                              (1 − s)pD > p(π − C) − X.                                  (2)
    In this case, Proposition 3 implies that a separating contract equilibrium does not
exist. Thus, given the result in Lemma 1, we may now focus on equilibrium contracts
that both types of firms accept. We maintain assumption A1 and focus on equilibria
in which non-shelvers invest X, while shelvers do not invest in technical development.
Suppose such an equilibrium pooling contract exists. Recall that the TLO has the
option to search for a second firm upon observing technical failure with the first firm.
If the TLO searches for a second firm, then, using Bayes rule, that firm’s posterior
belief that the invention failed because the first firm did not invest is given by
                                                              s
                 µ = Pr(Investment = 0|Failure) =                        .
                                                      s + (1 − s)(1 − p)

Hence, the second firm’s gross expected payoff from investing X in technical develop-
ment is equal to µp(π − C) − X. A second firm that is a non-shelver will be willing to

                                            18
invest in development at this stage if and only if

                                 µp(π − C) − X ≥ 0.                                  (3)

The maximum amount the second firm will be willing to pay for the license is equal to
the left-hand side of (3), which we denote by F̂2 . It follows that the TLO will search
for a second firm if and only if

                          F̂2 ≥ 0 and (1 − s)[F̂2 + µpL] ≥ K.                        (4)

We can now show that if (4) does not hold, then there exists a unique pooling contract
supported by an equilibrium in pure strategies.

Proposition 4 Assume q = 1. Suppose that A0, A1 and F̂ < (1 − s)pD hold, but
that the threat to license to a second firm after observing a technical failure is not
credible, that is, (4) does not hold. Then, in the unique equilibrium, the TLO offers a
pooling contract with a simple upfront fee F̂ .
    In equilibrium, both non-shelvers and shelvers accept the TLO’s contract, non-
shelvers invest X in technical development, while shelvers shirk. Furthermore, the
probability of successful commercialization is equal to (1 − s)p.

    Now suppose instead that (4) holds and that the TLO offers a contract consisting
of a simple upfront fee F1 to the first firm. Using Lemma 1, if an equilibrium pooling
contract exists, then, in equilibrium, a shelver that accepts the contract shirks at the
technical stage. In such an equilibrium, the TLO will search for a second firm upon
observing a technical failure. Thus a shelver recognizes ex ante that its gross expected
payoff from accepting the contract, but shirking at the technical stage, is equal to

                            (1 − s)pπ d + [1 − (1 − s)p]π m ,

which is also equal to its payoff from rejecting the contract. On the other hand, if the
shelver accepts the contract and invests X in development, its gross expected payoff
is equal to
                                        π m − X.
It follows that, for the TLO’s belief that shelvers accept the contract and shirk to be
correct ex-post, two conditions must hold. First, the upfront fee must be such that a
shelver is no worse off accepting the contract and shirking than rejecting the contract.
That is, the upfront fee must satisfy

                              F1 ≤ (1 − s)[p − p]D = 0.                              (5)


                                           19
Second, it must be the case that a shelver that accepted the contract does not find it
profitable to deviate and invest X in technical development. Hence,

                        π m − X ≤ (1 − s)pπ d + [1 − (1 − s)p]π m

must hold as well, which implies

                                     (1 − s)pD ≤ X.

    Constraint (5) immediately implies that a contract with a positive upfront fee
cannot be part of an equilibrium. Given that the TLO cannot commit not to license to
a second firm upon technical failure if it is profitable to do so, (5) implies that shelvers
will not be willing to pay a positive upfront fee and shirk since this is worse than
rejecting the contract. Further, by Lemma 1, an equilibrium cannot involve shelvers
accepting the contract and investing X.
    We now show that in equilibrium the TLO will offer a contract containing technical
continuation payments such as a technical milestone or annual fees, but no upfront
fee. The continuation payments are set so that non-shelvers are indifferent between
accepting and rejecting the contract, a level that turns out to be sufficiently high to
deter shelvers from investing X. By shirking, shelvers avoid these payments. Finally,
if a technical failure is observed, the TLO takes the license back from the first firm
and searches for a second firm.

Proposition 5 Assume q = 1. Suppose that A0, A1, A2, F̂ < (1 − s)pD and (4)
hold. Then, an equilibrium contract is a pooling contract that consists of technical
continuation payments only and does not include an upfront fee. The expected value of
the sum of continuation payments is equal to Ŝ, where Ŝ ≡ (π − C) − Xp . Furthermore,
technical milestone payments and annual fees combined must add up to no less than
max{(1 − s)D − Xp , 0} < Ŝ and the equity share must be less than t̂ ≡ 1 − (z−zCu )π .
    In equilibrium, both non-shelvers and shelvers accept the TLO’s contract. Non-
shelvers invest X in technical development, while shelvers shirk. Upon observing a
technical failure, the TLO searches for a second firm. Finally, the probability of suc-
cessful commercialization is equal to (1 − s)p + s(1 − s)p.

    Proposition 5 can be interpreted as a signaling result. If the TLO offered a contract
with an upfront fee, then the threat of licensing to a second firm upon technical failure
would not be credible because shelvers would reject the TLO’s contract. However, by
offering a contract without an upfront fee but a set of high continuation payments, the
TLO can guarantee that all types of firms will accept the contract. The TLO is then
in a position to credibly argue to a second firm that a technical failure may well have
resulted from lack of investment rather than a bad invention.

                                            20
    If assumption A2 is relaxed, then a pure strategy equilibrium fails to exist. Indeed,
in this case, the pooling contracts in Proposition 5 are not immune to deviations by a
shelver. If A2 does not hold and the continuation payments are set sufficiently high
to deter shelvers, then the contract is too costly for non-shelvers to accept.


5.4    Both types of shelving
So far, our analysis has considered intentional shelving and unintentional shelving
separately. When both types of shelving are possible, overall, most of the results are
qualitatively similar. However, there is a difference that is worth emphasizing. It arises
when the inequality F ≡ pq(π − C − zu π) − X ≥ (1 − s)pẑD as well as conditions
similar to those in Proposition 2(ii) hold. Proposition 6 below shows that annual and
upfront fees may be included together in an optimal contract when both intentional
and unintentional shelving are possible.

Proposition 6 Suppose that A0, A1, F ≥ (1 − s)pẑD. Then, there exists a ẑu0 >
0 such that if zu ∈ (0, ẑu0 ], the separating contract, O = (F , A) = (F , zu π), is an
equilibrium contract. Furthermore, for such values of zu , F ≥ F > 0 and A ≥ zu π > 0
in all equilibrium separating contracts. In equilibrium, non-shelvers accept the TLO’s
contract, invest X in technical development, but return the license to the TLO if they
learn that they are unintentional shelvers. Intentional shelvers turn down the TLO’s
contract offer. Finally, the probability of successful commercialization is equal to (1 −
s)p[q + (1 − q)(1 − s)ẑ] + s(1 − s)pẑ.

    The intuition behind Proposition 6 is simple. The TLO has to deal with two is-
sues related to shelving. On the one hand, keeping intentional shelvers out requires a
sufficiently high upfront fee, while on the other hand, making sure that unintentional
shelvers return the license in time requires an annual fee no lower than A = zu π. Hence,
a contract that includes the minimal annual fee zu π and an upfront fee that extracts a
non-shelver’s expected rent is optimal. The contract O is not the unique equilibrium
contract. In fact there are other separating contracts that can be supported as equi-
libria. However, it is important to note that all such contracts must include a strictly
positive upfront fee as well as an annual fee no lower than zu π. Furthermore, when
comparing Proposition 6 to Proposition 2, note that in Proposition 6, the condition
                                                                 X
F ≥ (1 − s)pẑD > 0 is substituted for the assumption q > p(π−C)      in Proposition 2.


5.5    Shelving with inventor effort
We have abstracted from inventor moral hazard in this section to highlight the effect of
shelving on optimal contracts. A previous version of this paper contains propositions


                                           21
similar to Propositions 2-5 if inventor effort and shelving are both issues (see Thursby
et al., 2005). It is clear that whenever continuation payments are invoked to solve the
shelving problem, they also help provide incentives for inventor effort. Thus, a result
similar to that of Proposition 2 in the presence of unintentional shelvers holds when
inventor participation is required.
    Importantly, we show that a contract similar to the signaling contract of Proposition
5 is also optimal when the incentive to shelve is sufficiently pronounced. The intuition
is simple. The TLO can use continuation payments both to motivate the inventor
and to prevent shelvers from investing but shelving in the commercialization stage.
However, for values of the parameters similar to those described by the assumptions in
Propositions 3 and 4, the critical difference between situations in which inventor effort
is required and the analysis in this paper is that to motivate the inventor, the TLO
is forced to offer continuation payments that are contingent on success. This implies
a loss of revenue whenever the contract is a pooling contract because shelvers fail to
make these payments.


5.6    Shelving without inventor effort, but continuous invest-
       ment
Another important assumption in our simple shelving game is the firm’s discrete in-
vestment choice. Relaxing this assumption will affect the results in Propositions 2
and 5. Indeed, continuation payments provide a disincentive for investment in tech-
nical development and thus lead to lower probabilities of technical success with the
first licensee. This implies that with continuous firm investment, forcing unintentional
shelvers to give back the license is more costly than under discrete investment. The
annual fee necessary to separate unintentional shelvers from non-shelvers reduces the
optimal value of X with the first licensee. Thus the range of parameter values under
which it is optimal to include an annual fee is not as wide as that investment is discrete.
    Relaxing the discrete investment assumption also affect the result in Proposition 5
for the following reasons. First, contrary to Proposition 5, when the incentive to shelve
is sufficiently pronounced and the threat to license to a second firm in case of technical
failure may be credible, the TLO’s contract may still include a positive upfront fee in
addition to continuation payments. A constraint similar to equation (5) arises, but
the critical value of the upfront fee is not zero with continuous investment because the
expected payoff to a shelver from accepting the TLO’s contract and shirking is strictly
higher than its expected payoff from turning down the offer. This follows because a
second firm that obtains the license after observing a technical failure will invest less
than a second firm that obtains the license after the first firm turns down the TLO’s
offer. Second, an existence problem arises because the level of continuation payments


                                            22
needed to deter shelvers may be too high for a non-shelver to be willing to invest.


6      Conclusion
University-industry technology transfer is an important part of national innovation
systems and one fraught with incentive problems, largely because of the informational
asymmetries and investment needed for industrial application of many university in-
ventions. In this paper, we focus on the role of contracts, and in particular the form
of payments in overcoming these distortions. We show that in the presence of moral
hazard and adverse selection, simple contracts are unlikely to be optimal. Interestingly,
continuation payments such as milestones or annual fees, which have largely been ig-
nored in the literature, may be used not only to solve moral hazard problems with the
inventor, but also to deal with licensee shelving.
    By assuming that several stages of development must be completed before an in-
vention can be commercialized, our model accounts for an important characteristic of
university licensing, namely the embryonic nature of university inventions. We show
that when development requires both firm investment and inventor participation, but
these inputs are not observable, payments tied to the achievement of technical mile-
stones, or continuation payments, are necessary to obtain inventor cooperation. When
inventor participation is not required, but shelving is a concern, continuation payments
may also be optimal.
    In our model of firm shelving, the TLO offers a contract to a firm that is either
one of two unobservable types, an intentional shelver or a non-shelver. Moreover, ex
ante non-shelvers may learn over the course of development that they are unintentional
shelvers, facing higher than expected commercialization costs. Licensing to an inten-
tional shelver leads to a sure commercial failure, an outcome the TLO seeks to avoid,
while licensing to an unintentional shelver simply results in a lower probability of com-
mercialization. In this context, our analysis highlights the role played by upfront fees,
continuation payments, and the TLO’s option to search for and license to a second firm
when the original licensee fails. An upfront fee matters because any firm that accepts
the contract must pay it, whether or not the firm plans to shelve. Continuation pay-
ments matter when intentional shelving is a problem because, if the original licensee
fails to develop the invention, the TLO can use them to send a credible signal to a
potential second firm regarding the expected quality of the invention. Finally, annual
fees are optimal when unintentional shelving significantly reduces the probability of
commercialization. They are included in contracts to induce unintentional shelvers to
voluntarily return the license to the TLO.
    Notice that the contracting problems we examine are predicated on the split own-
ership implicit in Bayh-Dole, that is, the university owns the invention but the govern-

                                           23
ment reserves the right to take it back in the absence of reasonable commercialization
effort. We argue that this march-in provision provides the incentive for the univer-
sity to execute separating contracts, so that in equilibrium actual march-in would not
occur.
    The university ownership of the invention makes our contracting problems funda-
mentally different from those of Aghion and Tirole [1994a]. In our model the researcher
(inventor) has a moral hazard problem that does not exist in their framework where
either the researcher or the customer (licensee in our case) owns the invention. How-
ever, it is well understood from principal-agent theory that if the agent is risk neutral
and faces no limited liability constraints, the principal can usually fully solve the moral
hazard problem by “selling” the project to the agent and extracting rent with a fixed
fee (see, for instance, Laffont [1989]). This solution is reminiscent of a commonly ob-
served practice in university licensing, which consists of letting the inventor start her
own firm to develop and commercialize the invention. An interesting question for fur-
ther research, particularly given increasing commercialization through inventor startup
companies, is when it would be optimal for the university to transfer ownership to the
inventor. This question has also been the topic of debate among a number of European
countries where traditionally ownership has resided with the inventor [OECD 2003].
Another question, currently a point of contention between some firms and universities,
is when the firm funds the research, whether firm ownership is optimal.




                                            24
References
 [1] Aghion, Philippe and Tirole, Jean. “The Management of Innovation,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 1994a, 109, pp. 1185-1209.

 [2] Aghion, Philippe and Tirole, Jean. “Opening the Black Box of Innovation,” Eu-
     ropean Economic Review, 1994b, 38, pp. 701-710.

 [3] Agrawal, Ajay. “Research on University to Industry Knowledge Transfer: Litera-
     ture Review and Unanswered Questions,” International Journal of Management
     Reviews, 2001, 3, pp. 285-302.

 [4] Agrawal, Ajay and Cockburn, Iain. LES Licensing Survey. 2006.

 [5] Arora, Ashish. “Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the
     Market for Know-How,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1995, 4,
     pp. 41-59.

 [6] Beggs, Alan. “The Licensing of Patents under Asymmetric Information.” Inter-
     national Journal of Industrial Organization, 1992, 10, pp. 171-191.

 [7] Bousquet, Alain, Cremer, Helmuth, Ivaldi, Marc, and Wolkowiz, Michel. “Risk
     Sharing in Licensing,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 1998, 16,
     pp. 535-554.

 [8] Choi, Jai Pil. “Technology Transfer with Moral Hazard,” International Journal of
     Industrial Organization, 2001, 19, pp. 249-266.

 [9] Cohen, Wesley, Nelson, Richard, and Walsh, John. “Protecting Their Intellectual
     Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent
     (or Not),” 2000, NBER Working Paper No. w7552.

[10] Edwards, Mark, Murray, Fiona, and Yu, Robert. “Value Creation and Sharing
     Among Universities, Biotechnology and Pharma,” Nature Biotechnology, 2003,
     21, pp. 618-624.

[11] Gallini, Nancy and Wright, Brian. “Technology Transfer under Asymmetric In-
     formation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1990, 21, pp. 147-160.

[12] Gilbert, Richard and Newbery, David. “Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence
     of Monopoly,” American Economic Review, 1982, 72, pp. 514-526.

[13] Hellmann, Thomas. “The Role of Patents for Bridging the Science to Market
     Gap,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2007, 63, pp. 624-647.


                                          25
[14] Hoppe, Heidrun and Emre Ozdenoren. “Intermediation in Innovation,” Interna-
     tional Journal of Industrial Organization, 2005, 23, pp. 483-503.

[15] Jensen, Richard and Thursby, Marie. “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licens-
     ing of University Inventions,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91, pp. 240-259.

[16] Jensen, Richard, Thursby, Jerry, and Thursby, Marie. “The Disclosure and Li-
     censing of University Inventions: The best we can do with the s**t we get to work
     with,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 2003, 21, pp. 1271-1300.

[17] Kamien, Morton. “Patent Licensing.” in Robert Aumann and Sergiu Hart, Hand-
     book of Game Theory, 1992, Amsterdam: North Holland.

[18] Laffont, Jean Jacques. The Economics of Uncertainty and Information. Cam-
     bridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1989.

[19] Macho-Stadler, Ines, Martinez-Giralt, Xavier and Pérez-Castrillo, David. ”The
     Role of Information in Licensing Contract Design,” Research Policy, 1996, 25, pp.
     43-57.

[20] Macho-Stadler, Ines, Pérez-Castrillo, David and Veugelers, Reinhilde. “Licensing
     of University Inventions: The Role of Technology Transfer Office,” International
     Journal of Industrial Organization, 2007, 25, pp. 483-510

[21] Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, Turning Science into
     Business: Patenting and Licensing at Public Research Organizations, 2003.

[22] Rai, Arti and Eisenberg, Rebecca. “Bayh-Dole Reform and the Progress of
     Biomedicine,” Law and Contemporary Problems, 2003, 66, pp. 288-313.

[23] Rector, Anne and Thursby, Marie. “The Anatomy of Contracts in Licensing: The
     Context of Bayh-Dole,’ in Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation,
     and Economic Growth, Vol. 18, (Gary Libecap, editor), Emerald Publishing, 2008.

[24] Thursby, Jerry, Jensen, Richard, and Thursby, Marie. “Objectives, Characteristics
     and Outcomes of University Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S. Universities,”
     Journal of Technology Transfer, 2001, 26, pp. 59-72.

[25] Thursby, Jerry and Thursby, Marie. “Who is Selling the Ivory Tower: The Sources
     of Growth in University Licensing,” Management Science, 2002, 48(1), pp. 90-104.

[26] Thursby, Jerry and Thursby, Marie. “University Licensing and the Bayh-Dole
     Act,” Science, 2003, 301, p. 1052.



                                         26
[27] Thursby, Jerry and Thursby, Marie. “Are Faculty Critical? Their Role in Univer-
     sity Licensing,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 2004, 22(2), pp. 162-178.

[28] Thursby, Marie, Thursby, Jerry, and Dechenaux, Emmanuel. “Shirking, Sharing
     Risk, and Shelving: The Role of University License Contracts,” 2005, NBER
     Working Paper No. w11128.

[29] Verspagen, Bart. “University Research, Intellectual Property Rights and European
     Innovation Systems,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 2006, 20(4), pp. 607-632.




                                         27
Appendix
The full information solution

    Below we show that the optimal contract the TLO would offer if it could choose
α, e and X as well as the payment terms (the full information contract) does not
always yield the same outcome as a contract whereby the TLO sells the invention to
the inventor, who then offers a contract to the firm.
    We focus on cases in which (i) the optimal full information contract leads to posi-
tive effort and firm investment and (ii) given the effort and investment level that result
from implementing this contract, expected profit from commercialization is sufficient
to cover the investment cost and the inventor’s effort disutility. This is guaranteed by
the following assumption:

A3: There exists a unique solution (e∗ , X ∗ ), e∗ > 0, X ∗ > 0, to the following problem

              Maximize p(e, X)(zπ − C) − V (e) − X − (1 − p(e, X)z)L

with respect to e ≥ 0 and X ≥ 0. Furthermore, p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − X ∗ − V (e∗ ) > 0.

    Note that the effort and investment levels that solve the problem in A3 are the
first-best levels in this three-player game. Indeed (e∗ , X ∗ ) maximizes the sum of ex-
pected payoffs, which is equal to the expected profit from the invention, minus the
investment and effort cost and the expected loss from not commercializing. Hence, A3
is equivalent to assuming that first-best effort and investment levels are positive, and
that expected profit from the invention covers the sum of their cost.

Full information contract

   Suppose that the TLO offers a contract O = (F, M, A, t, r; X) to the firm and
requires effort e from the inventor in exchange for a share α of licensing revenue. The
TLO chooses O, e and α to maximize its expected payoff subject to non-negativity
constraints and participation constraints. Without loss of generality, we may assume
M = A = t = r = 0. Since r = t = 0, if the firm accepts the contract, it will invest C
upon commercial success. Then the TLO chooses (F ; X), e and α to maximize

                              (1 − α)F − [1 − p(e, X)z]L

subject to
                                    αF − V (e) ≥ 0,

                                           28
                             p(e, X)(zπ − C) − X − F ≥ 0,
and F ≥ 0, α ∈ [0, 1], X ≥ 0 and e ≥ 0.
    We now show that under A3, setting e = e∗ and X = X ∗ is a solution to the
above problem and α∗ ∈ (0, 1). Indeed, consider a problem similar to the above but
ignoring the constraints F ≥ 0, α ∈ [0, 1], X ≥ 0 and e ≥ 0. In this case, to maximize
expected utility, the TLO will clearly set F = p(e, X)(zπ − C) − X since its expected
payoff is increasing in F . Furthermore, for every (e, X), the TLO’s expected payoff
is strictly decreasing in α. Hence, the TLO will set α so that αF − V (e) = 0 or
α = V F(e) . Substituting for V F(e) in place of α in the TLO’s objective function yields
F −V (e)−[1−p(e, X)z]L. Substituting for F = p(e, X)(zπ−C)−X in this last equation
yields p(e, X)(zπ −C)−V (e)−X −(1−p(e, X)z)L. Hence, this unconstrained problem
is equivalent to maximizing p(e, X)(zπ − C) − V (e) − X − (1 − p(e, X)z)L with respect
to e and X. By assumption A3, the solution to the unconstrained problem is (e∗ , X ∗ ).
                                                                                  (e∗ )
We also have p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − X ∗ > 0 so that F ∗ > 0 and α∗ = p(e∗ ,X ∗V)(zπ−C)−X ∗.
         ∗                                           ∗   ∗             ∗        ∗
That α ∈ (0, 1) follows from the assumption p(e , X )(zπ − C) − X − V (e ) > 0 and
                                      (e∗ )
e∗ > 0, which implies 0 < p(e∗ ,X ∗V)(zπ−C)−X      ∗
                                              ∗ = α < 1.

    It follows that under assumption A3, the expected payoff to the TLO from offer-
ing the optimal full information contract is p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − V (e∗ ) − X − (1 −
p(e∗ , X ∗ )z)L, while both the firm and the inventor obtain an expected payoff of 0.

Selling the project to the inventor

    Assume A3 holds and suppose now that the TLO offers a contract to the inventor
with α = 1 and a fixed price FT to be paid by the inventor. That is, the inventor
gets to keep the entire licensing revenue but must pay an upfront fee to the TLO.
The inventor accepts or rejects the contract. If the inventor rejects the contract, the
optimal full information contract is implemented and the inventor obtains an expected
payoff of zero. If the inventor accepts the contract, she then offers a contract to the
firm. Importantly, we assume that the inventor’s expected payoff is given by
                                 ½
                                     R̃s − V (e)     if commercial success,
               UI (R̃; e, L) =
                                     R̃f − L − V (e) if commercial failure.

Without loss of generality, assume that the inventor offers a contract O = (FI , X) to the
firm. The firm’s expected payoff from accepting the contract is p(e, X)(zπ−C)−X−FI ,
while the inventor’s expected payoff is equal to FI − V (e) − FT − (1 − p(e, X)z)L. It is
clear that the inventor will set FI∗ = p(e, X)(zπ − C) − X, so that its expected payoff




                                               29
can be written as

                 p(e, X)(zπ − C) − X − V (e) − FT − (1 − p(e, X)z)L.                       (1’)

Since FT is a lump-sum fee, it will not affect the inventor’s optimal choice of e and X.
The optimal values of e and X maximize p(e, X)(zπ −C)−X −V (e)−(1−p(e, X)z)L−
FT , where FT is a constant. It is clear that under assumption A3, the solution is given
by (e∗ , X ∗ ). The inventor’s expected payoff from offering an optimal contract to the
firm is equal to p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − V (e∗ ) − X ∗ − (1 − p(e∗ , X ∗ )z)L − FT . Hence, the
inventor will be willing to buy the project from the TLO at a positive price, FT ≥ 0, if
and only if p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ −C)−V (e∗ )−X −(1−p(e∗ , X ∗ )z)L ≥ 0. If this last inequality
is satisfied, then the TLO sets FT∗ = p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − V (e∗ ) − X − (1 − p(e∗ , X ∗ )z)L
and earns its expected payoff from the full information contract. Again, the inventor
and the firm earn an expected payoff of zero.
    Now it is clear that if p(e∗ , X ∗ )(zπ − C) − V (e∗ ) − X − (1 − p(e∗ , X ∗ )z)L < 0, the
inventor will not accept the TLO’s sell-out contract unless the TLO offers a subsidy
FT∗ < 0. If the TLO does not offer a subsidy to the inventor, then the sell-out contract
is not feasible.
    Furthermore, if the inventor does not suffer the loss from failing to commercialize,
but instead the TLO does, then the inventor’s choice of e and X under the sell-out
contract will generally differ from (e∗ , X ∗ ). This is simply because in this case, the
inventor’s objective function does not take the term −(1 − p(e, X)z)L into account as
it does in (1’).

Proof of Proposition 1
Suppose that the TLO offers a contract O = (F, M, A, t, r) to the firm. If the firm
accepts, then the firm and the inventor play the simultaneous move investment game.
The firm maximizes

                       p(e, X)(Π[x∗ (r, t), r, t] − A − M ) − X − F,                       (2’)

with respect to X, while the inventor maximizes

                           p(e, X)α(B̃ + A + M ) − V (e) + αF,                             (3’)

with respect to e. In (3’), B̃ is the expected royalty and equity revenue, which depends
on the firm’s decision at the commercialization stage. The TLO’s expected payoff is
given by
             p(e, X)(1 − α)(B̃ + A + M ) + (1 − α)F − (1 − p(e, X)Z)L,
where the probability of commercial success Z depends on the firm’s decision at the

                                              30
commercialization stage (Z = z if the firm invests C, while z = zu if the firm does not
invest).
    We first show that the royalty rate will be set equal to zero in an optimal contract
that leads to strictly positive effort and investment. To this effect note that for any
given contract with strictly positive royalty rate r = r0 > 0, a contract that includes no
output royalty (r = 0), but instead a technical milestone payment M whose amount is
equal to the expected revenue raised by r0 , provides identical incentives to the inventor
than the contract with r0 . This is because, from (3’), the inventor’s expected payoff
depends only on the total expected revenue received upon technical success, B̃ +A+M ,
but not on each payment type separately. Since, by definition, milestone payment M
raises the same amount of expected revenue as r0 , it is no more costly to the firm
than the royalty payment with rate r0 . Furthermore, the milestone payment does not
distort the firm’s output and thus, by assumption, the reduction in r will lead to higher
firm profit, ie, Π[x∗ (0, t), r, t] > Π[x∗ (r0 , t), r, t] for every t < 1 (from π > π[x∗ (r0 , t)]).
Finally, from (2’) and (3’), note that the upfront fee has no effect on the incentives
to spend effort or invest in development. Hence, by setting r = 0 and including a
revenue equivalent milestone payment instead of the royalty r0 , the TLO can increase
the upfront fee, while still satisfying the firm’s participation constraint. It then obtains
a strictly higher payoff. Hence, r = 0 in an optimal contract.
    Setting r = 0, let the expected sum of continuation payments in the contract be
equal to S. That is, S ≡ M + A + B̃, where B̃ depends only on t since r = 0 and the
probability of commercialization. That S > 0 is necessary for strictly positive inventor
effort follows naturally from equation (3’). If M + A + B̃ = 0, then the inventor’s
expected payoff is equal to −V (e) + αF , and thus, optimal effort e∗ = 0 for every X.
    Finally, an optimal contract, if one exists, is not unique regarding payment types
because the three risk neutral players’ payoff functions depend only on S and on the
upfront fee F , but not on each continuation payment type separately.

Proof of Proposition 2
Suppose the TLO offers a contract with A = 0 and an upfront fee equal to the firm’s
expected payoff. Then it is clear that both non-shelvers and unintentional shelvers will
keep the license upon technical success. Hence, the greatest amount of revenue the
TLO will be able to extract from the firm is equal to

                                        p(ẑπ − qC) − X.

An upfront fee contract in which the upfront fee is set equal to F 0 = p(ẑπ − qC) − X
is feasible and raises the greatest amount of revenue. If the TLO offers this contract,




                                                 31
its expected payoff is then equal to

                             p(ẑπ − qC) − X − (1 − pẑ)L.                            (4’)

Now suppose that the TLO offers a contract (F, A) where the fee A is to be paid
upon technical success but before commercial success. If the firm accepted the TLO’s
contract and the fee A satisfies A < zu π, then A has no effect on behavior. However,
suppose A ≥ zu π. Then a firm realizes ex-ante that it will return the license if it finds
out that it is an unintentional shelver. Therefore, ignoring the upfront fee, its expected
payoff from accepting the TLO’s contract is equal to pq(π − C − A) − X. There exists a
contract with A ≥ zu π that the firm will accept if and only if pq(π − C − zu π) − X ≥ 0
or zu ≤ π−Cπ
                  X
               − pqπ , where the right-hand side is strictly greater than zero if and only
          X                                   X
if q > p(π−C) . Thus, the conditions q > p(π−C)   and zu ≤ π−C π
                                                                     X
                                                                  − pqπ are necessary and
sufficient for a contract with A ≥ zu π to be accepted by the firm.
                         X
    Assume that q > p(π−C)    and zu ≤ π−C
                                         π
                                                X
                                            − pqπ hold. If the TLO offers a contract with
A = zu π, F can be optimally set equal to pq(π − C − A) − X to pick up any remaining
slack in the firm’s participation constraint. An unintentional shelver returns the license
after technical success because A ≥ zu π. Given assumption A1 with s = 0, the TLO
finds it profitable to search and offer a contract to a second firm. Furthermore, the
TLO’s contract extracts all rents equal to (ẑπ − qC) − X from that firm. The TLO’s
expected payoff from offering the contract (F, A) is thus equal to

          pq(π − C) − X + p(1 − q)(ẑπ − qC − K) − [1 − pq − p(1 − q)ẑ]L.            (5’)

   To show that ẑu exists, consider the difference between (5’) and (4’). Note that
limzu ↓0 ẑ = q. Hence, in the limit as zu goes to zero, this difference is equal to

                       p(1 − q)[q(π − C) − K] + p(1 − q)qL > 0,

by assumption A1 (as zu goes to zero). Hence, in the limit as zu goes to zero, the
contract (F, A) yields a strictly higher expected payoff than the contract (F 0 ). Since
both (5’) and (4’) are continuous in zu , it follows that the strict inequality will hold
for a range of values of zu that are strictly positive and bounded above by π−C π
                                                                                      X
                                                                                   − pqπ .
Therefore, letting A = zu π and F = pq(π − C − zu π) − X, we have shown that there
exists a ẑu > 0 such that the expected payoff from the contract (F, A) is greater than
the expected payoff from the contract (F 0 ) for all zu ∈ (0, ẑu ].
    Finally, it is clear that for zu ∈ (0, ẑu ], the TLO’s optimal contract must contain
an annual fee A ≥ zu π, but this contract is not unique. The maximum value of the
upfront fee that can be supported is the value of A that solves pq(π − C − A) − X = 0
                     X
or A = (π − C) − pq     = Â. Furthermore, equity payments must be sufficiently so as to


                                           32
guarantee the firm invests in commercial development. That is, t must be such that
(1 − t)π − C ≥ zu π. All contracts with an annual fee A ∈ [zu π, Â], and other payments
set so as to extract all rents from the firm (with the condition t ≤ 1 − (1−zCu )π on the
equity share) are also optimal.

Proof of Proposition 3
We first prove the “only if” part of the statement. Note that in a separating equilib-
rium, upon observing a technical failure, the TLO’s belief should assign probability
zero to the belief that the firm did not invest. Hence, in equilibrium, the TLO will not
search for a second firm upon technical failure. It follows that a shelver’s payoff from
deviating and accepting the contract is equal to π m −F , where F is the upfront fee set in
the contract. The deviation is profitable whenever π m −F > (1−s)pπ d +(1−(1−s)p)π m
or F < (1 − s)pD. Hence, to support the equilibrium F ≥ (1 − s)pD must hold. Since
the maximum upfront fee the TLO can set is F̂ , it follows that F̂ ≥ (1 − s)pD is
necessary to support a separating equilibrium.
     To prove the “if” part of the statement, consider the contract O = (F̂ ). We
show that this contract leads to separation, raises strictly more revenue and leads to
a weakly higher probability of commercialization than other separating contracts or
pooling contracts.
     That O leads to strictly higher revenue and the same probability of commercial-
ization than other separating contracts follows from the fact that F̂ maximizes the
amount of expected revenue the TLO can extract from non-shelvers. Furthermore, the
probability of commercialization is the same for all separating contracts and is equal
to (1 − s)p + s(1 − s)p.
     Consider now a pooling contract O0 . If a contract that both non-shelvers and
shelvers accept is to be supported in equilibrium, from Lemma 1, it must be the case
that shelvers shirk. Hence, with O0 , the probability of commercialization is no greater
than (1−s)p+s(1−s)p, the probability of commercialization that would be obtained if
the TLO was able to license the invention to a second firm upon observing a technical
failure with the first firm. We now show that with O0 , expected revenue cannot possibly
be greater than with O. To this effect, we consider two cases. First, suppose that the
TLO cannot profitably license to a second firm upon observing a technical failure. In
this case, the result follows from assumption A1 with q = 1 and ẑ = 1. Indeed, under
O0 , the maximum amount of expected revenue that can be raised from the first firm is
no greater than (1 − s)F̂ + s(1 − s)pD. Therefore, the payoff the TLO can guarantee
itself with O0 is equal to (1 − s)F̂ + s(1 − s)pD − [1 − (1 − s)p]L. The TLO’s payoff from
offering O is instead equal to (1 − s)F̂ + s(1 − s)(F̂ − K) − [1 − (1 − s)p − s(1 − s)p]L.
The difference between the TLO’s payoff under O0 and its payoff under O is equal to
s(1 − s)(pD − F̂ − pL + K) < 0, where the strict inequality follows from A1.


                                            33
    Now suppose the TLO is able to license to a second firm upon observing a failure
with the first firm. In this case, the probability of commercialization under O0 is equal
to (1 − s)p + s(1 − s)p. We now show that expected revenue cannot possibly be greater
than under O. To this effect, note that if a non-shelver accepts the TLO’s contract
and shirks in technical development, while correctly anticipating that the TLO will
search for a second firm, then the upfront fee must be set equal to zero in O0 . Indeed,
a shelver’s payoff from rejecting O0 is equal to (1 − s)pπ d + [1 − (1 − s)p]π m . Its gross
payoff from accepting the contract is also equal to (1 − s)pπ d + [1 − (1 − s)p]π m , since
the shelver fails with probability one. Hence a shelver will accept the contract only if
the upfront fee is equal to zero. Thus, the TLO earns no revenue from a shelver in this
case. Furthermore, the maximum amount of expected revenue that can be extracted
from a non-shelver is equal to F̂ . Because positive revenue can be obtained from a
second firm only if that firm is not a shelver, it follows that the maximum amount of
revenue the TLO can possibly obtain in this case is equal to (1 −s)F̂ +s(1−s)(F̂ −K),
which is equal to expected revenue under O. Hence, we have proven the result.

Proof of Proposition 4
From Proposition 4, a separating contract cannot be supported in equilibrium. Hence
we focus our attention on pooling contracts that both firms accept. Since (4) does
not hold, the project is abandoned following a technical failure. It follows immediately
that a shelver can guarantee itself a payoff of π m − F by accepting the contract and
shirking. Hence, a shelver will accept any contract with an upfront fee that satisfies
F ≤ (1 − s)pD. From the definition of F̂ and the assumption F̂ < (1 − s)pD, it
follows that if the TLO offers Ô = (F̂ ), both shelvers and non-shelvers will accept
the contract. Non-shelvers will invest X, while shelvers will shirk. Since continuation
payments are only paid by non-shelvers, including such payments would strictly lower
the TLO’s expected revenue without affecting the probability of commercialization.
Hence, it would lower the TLO’s expected payoff. Since the maximum upfront fee
non-shelvers are willing to pay is equal to F̂ , offering the contract Ô = (F̂ ) is optimal
and thus, is the unique equilibrium contract.

Proof of Proposition 5
By Lemma 1 and Proposition 4, we focus our attention on pooling equilibria in which
non-shelvers accept and invest X and shelvers accept, but shirk. If such an equilibrium
exists, then given that (3) is satisfied by assumption, the TLO cannot commit not to
search for a second firm. We have argued in the text that this implies a constraint on
the upfront fee that the TLO can set in the contract in the form of equation (5). That
is, if an equilibrium exists, the upfront fee is set equal to zero. Now consider a contract
O0 = (M 0 , A0 , t0 ) in which the upfront fee is set equal to zero and the expected value


                                            34
of continuation payments is equal to S 0 . In equilibrium S 0 must satisfy the following
for a non-shelver to accept the contract

                                                                  X
                  p(π − C − S 0 ) − X ≥ 0 ⇐⇒ S 0 ≤ π − C −          ≡ S,
                                                                  p

and t0 must satisfy (1 − t0 )π − C ≥ zu π or t0 ≤ t̂, otherwise a non-shelver will prefer not
to invest C in commercial development. Let M 0 and A0 denote the technical milestone
payment and the annual fee included in the contract. Since shelvers will not pay equity
shares, there is no loss of generality in assuming that S 0 = M 0 + A0 . That is, the TLO
sets t0 = 0.
    Under this contract, a shelver will be indifferent between rejecting and accepting,
but shirking. However, for the contract to be part of an equilibrium, shelvers must
prefer shirking to investing X. A shelver will prefer to shirk if and only if:

                                                                                  X
  π m − p(M 0 + A0 ) ≤ (1 − s)pπ d + [1 − (1 − s)p]π m ⇐⇒ S 0 ≥ (1 − s)D −          ≡ S.
                                                                                  p

    Since S − S > 0 from the assumption π − C > (1 − s)D (which is A2 with q = 1), it
follows that any contract O = (M, A) where M +A = S satisfies all necessary conditions
for an equilibrium. Furthermore, by extracting an amount of expected revenue equal
to p(π − C) − X from non-shelvers, the contract maximizes expected revenue. Since
no other contract could possibly generate a greater probability of commercialization,
O is an equilibrium contract.
    Finally, although we ruled out equity shares for simplicity in the first part of the
proof, it should be clear that any contract in which t ≤ t̂, S ≤ M + A ≤ S and
p(tπ − M − A − C) − X = 0 is a contract that can be supported in equilibrium. Indeed,
this contract is incentive compatible and generates the same expected revenue and the
same probability of success as O.

Proof of Proposition 6
Consider the contract O in the statement of Proposition 6. First, note that A = zu π
implies that an unintentional shelver returns the license to the TLO. However, F = F
implies that, ex-ante, a non-shelver will accept the TLO’s contract since it yields an
expected payoff of zero. On the other hand, a shelver’s payoff from accepting the
contract is equal to π m − F , while its payoff from rejecting is equal to (1 − s)pẑπ d +
[1 − (1 − s)pẑ]π m . Under the assumption (1 − s)pẑD ≤ F , it is easy to see that the
former is less than the latter. Hence a shelver rejects O. It follows that the TLO’s
expected payoff from offering O and behaving optimally with a potential second firm




                                             35
is equal to

              (1 − s) {pq(π − C) − X + p(1 − q)[(1 − s)(ẑπ − qC) − K]}

                     +s(1 − s)[p(ẑπ − qC) − X] − sK − [1 − Q]L.                       (6’)
    where Q = (1 − s)p[q + (1 − q)(1 − s)ẑ] + s(1 − s)pẑ is the probability of successful
commercialization.
    Compare the expected payoff in (6’) to the expected payoff from offering the con-
tract Ô0 = (F̂ 0 ), where F̂ 0 = p(ẑπ − qC) − X. This contract clearly maximizes the
TLO’s expected payoff in the class of separating contracts that do not induce uninten-
tional shelvers to give back the license. The TLO’s expected payoff from offering Ô0 is
equal to:

        (1 − s)p(ẑπ − qC) − X + s(1 − s)[p(ẑπ − qC) − X] − sK − [1 − Q0 ]L,          (7’)

where Q0 = (1 − s)pẑ + s(1 − s)pẑ is the probability of commercial success.
  In the limit as zu goes to zero, the difference between (6’) and (7’) is equal to

              (1 − s)p(1 − q)[(1 − s)q(π − C) − K] + (1 − q)(1 − s)2 qL,

which is strictly positive under assumption A1 (as zu goes to zero).
   The proof that a pooling contract cannot possibly provide the TLO with a strictly
higher expected payoff is similar to the second part of the proof of Proposition 3, where
we compare a pooling contract to the separating contract.




                                            36
                                                                       Firm
                                                                       invests X                   Firm attempts to
                                        TLO offers         Firm        Inventor                    commercialize
                                        contract           accepts     spends e          Success   (invests C or 0)      Success     Commercialization


                                                             Rejects                     Failure                           Failure


                                                     Project is                    Project is                         Project is
                                                     abandoned                     abandoned                          abandoned




37
     Figure 1: Timeline of decisions.
                                                                  TLO offers Firm        Firm invests           Firm learns its       Firm               Firm attempts to
                                                                  contract   accepts     X or 0         Success type*                                    commercialize    Success        Commercialization
                                                                                                                                      keeps license


                                                                               Rejects                   Failure                          Gives back           Shelves         Failure


                                                                        TLO can                   TLO can                         TLO can              Project is        Project is
                                                                        search for a              search for a                    search for a         abandoned         abandoned
                                                                        second firm               second firm                     second firm

                                                                                                                   *If not an intentional shelver.




38
     Figure 2: Timeline of decisions in the game with shelvers.
