                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 PROFITABLE INVESTMENTS OR DISSIPATED CASH?
             EVIDENCE ON THE INVESTMENT-CASH FLOW RELATIONSHIP
                       FROM OIL AND GAS LEASE BIDDING

                                          Marianne Bertrand
                                         Sendhil Mullainathan

                                         Working Paper 11126
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11126


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




We are grateful to Jeremy Stein, as well as to seminar participants at the University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business, Harvard Business School, Harvard University, University of Michigan, University of
British Columbia, Wharton, Yale Law School, Stanford University, University of Illinois, Georgia Tech and
the NBER Organizational Economics conference, for many helpful comments. Nahid Rahman provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Profitable Investments or Dissipated Cash? Evidence on the Investment-Cash Flow Relationship
From Oil and Gas Lease Bidding
Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 11126
February 2005
JEL No. G3

                                             ABSTRACT

The strong positive relationship between corporate cash flow and investment has been interpreted
through the lens of both agency- and non-agency-based models. In this paper, we distinguish
between these two interpretations using project-level data in the oil and gas industry. The specific
projects we consider are auctioned-off leases that give mineral exploration rights to tracts of federal
land. We find the standard positive relationship between investment and cash flow in this data, in
that positive shocks to residual cash flow (netting out firm and time effects) are associated with
higher spending on these leases. Interestingly, the increased investment comes from an increase in
the price paid per tract with little to no change in the total number of tracts or total acreage of land
bought. The positive association between price and cash flow holds even after controlling for a set
of tract and firm characteristics that might be ex-ante related to expected return on a given tract. This
data is most useful, however, because we can directly observe the eventual productivity of each of
these projects. We find that the increase in price induced by higher cash flow is associated with
lower average productivity. In fact, the total number of productive tracts does not increase with cash
flow. In other words, while higher cash flow is associated with higher spending on these projects,
higher cash flow does not lead to higher revenues from these projects. Combining this finding with
the lack of a quantity response, we conclude that our results are best described by an agency model
where managers use cash flow to simplify their job (or live a ``quiet life'') rather than ``empire-
build.''

Marianne Bertrand                                       Sendhil Mullainathan
Graduate School of Business                             Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                   Littauer 208
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                              Harvard University
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagogsb.edu                        mullain@fas.harvard.edu
1        Introduction

In a variety of data sets, firm cash flow has been found to predict capital expenditures often much better
than standard measures of investment opportunities or cost of capital (Caballero 1999, Stein 2003). What
can explain this finding? Three main interpretations have been proposed. The first, a mis-measurement
(or omitted variable) interpretation, argues that cash flow proxies for investment opportunities. Under
this interpretation, greater cash flow is simply correlated with the availability of profitable investment
projects (Poterba 1988). The second, a financing constraint interpretation, argues that added cash flow
gives firms the resources to undertake profitable projects that they otherwise could not (Fazarri, Hubbard
and Petersen, 1988). The third, an agency-based interpretation, argues that managers may dissipate “free”
cash flow on wasteful investments for private gain (Jensen 1986).
        Much of the theoretical and empirical debate surrounding this question has focused on the mis-
measurement interpretation, reaching rather mixed conclusions so far. Several papers have shown that
Tobin’s Q may indeed be a poor proxy for the true fundamental determinants of a firm’s investment op-
portunities and that cash flow may contain valuable information about such opportunities (see for example
Erickson and Whited 2000 or Alti 2003). Yet, other papers have shown that capital expenditures are
also significantly affected by increases in cash flow that are plausibly exogenous to changes in investment
opportunities (Lamont 1997, Shin and Stultz 1998, Rauh 2004), thereby seriously undermining a pure
mis-measurement interpretation.
        Assuming there is indeed some causal link between cash flow and investment, it is still an open question
as to whether the additional capital expenditures generated by greater cash flow are profitable (financing
constraint interpretation) or wasteful (agency interpretation).1 Data constraints have so far prevented
researchers from directly tackling this question. Indeed, most of the prior research relies on balance-sheet
data, which does not include information on the specific projects undertaken when firms experience a
positive shock to their cash flow, much less on the outcome of these projects.
        In this paper, we re-examine the investment-cash flow relationship in a data set where both individual
investment projects and the outcome of these projects can be evaluated. The specific investment projects
we focus on are mineral exploration leases. The federal government routinely auctions off exploration rights
to offshore tracts. Firms bid on these tracts in order to have exclusive rights to explore them and, in the
case oil, gas or other minerals are found, extract resources from them. The data set details for each tract
    1
    Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) tested the financing constraint interpretation by comparing investment-cash flow
sensitivities across groups of firms that they define as ex ante more or less financially constrained. Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
started a long debate in the literature on the theoretical and empirical validity of this exercise. Rauh (2004) finds more robust
support for a financing constraint interpretation when relying on exogenous shock to cash flow.


                                                               2
the amount bid by all bidding firms (both winners and losers), the identity of these bidding firms, the
exact timing of the bid (month and year), and numerous tract-level characteristics that may be predictive
of the tract’s eventual productivity. Most importantly, we also observe for each tract whether or not it
was eventually found productive and, for a subset of the productive tracts, the exact quantity of minerals
extracted. The structure of the data therefore allows us to identify the marginal project undertaken when
cash flow increases, as well as to track eventual return on this marginal project.
    We first establish that the standard investment-cash flow relationship holds in this data set. In a
panel regression that includes both firm and year fixed effects, we show that higher cash flow is associated
with higher total spending on oil and gas leases.           2   Interestingly, this positive relationship between total
expenditures and cash flow is not driven by a quantity response. Positive shocks to cash flow are not
associated with firms buying more tracts or more acreage of land. Instead, the relationship between total
expenditures and cash flow is driven by a price response. Firms bid more for each acre of land as their
cash flow increases. The bid price-cash flow relationship is robust to controlling for a set of physical tract
characteristics that are observable by all bidding firms prior to the auction. More tellingly, the bid price-
cash flow relationship estimated on the set of winning bids is also robust to controlling for the second
highest bid in the auction.
    We then study the productivity of the tracts that are bought when residual cash flow is greater. Our
basic measure of productivity is whether or not a tract is declared productive before the lease expiration
date, i.e. whether or not minerals are found in the tract. While previous papers have documented that a
higher bid price positively predicts whether a given tract will eventually be found productive (see Hendricks
and Porter 1996), we find that cash flow-induced increases in bid price are, if anything, negatively related to
eventual productivity. More importantly, in a simple panel regression that controls for firm and year fixed
effects, we find that the overall number of productive tracts does not increase with a firm’s cash flow in the
year these tracts were bought. In other words, while we establish that higher cash flow is associated with
higher spending on these projects, higher cash flow is not associated with a larger number of productive
projects. We also show that this result is not an artifact of focusing on the probability of success as a
return measure. Focusing on a subset of productive tracts for which we have detailed information on the
amount of resources extracted, we find no evidence that productive tracts bought when cash flow is high
systematically generate more resources. These findings contradict a profit maximization-based explanation
   2
     The inclusion of year fixed effects means that we are not simply picking up on an industry wide phenomenon, such as all
firms bidding more when the price of oil increases. The inclusion of firm fixed effects means that we are not simply picking
up on other time-invariant firm characteristics that are systematically correlated with average differences in cash flow across
firms.




                                                                3
for the investment-cash flow relationship in this data set. Instead, they are more consistent with a free
cash flow interpretation.3
    Many industry observers perceive that the oil industry experienced large improvements in corporate
governance in the 1980s. Increases in both takeover activity and in the threat of takeovers are thought to
have reduced some of the managerial misbehavior posited by the free cash flow view. We find that bid
prices are sensitive to cash flow throughout the sample period (mid 1960s to late 1990s). But in the later
years of our sample (post-1985), the profitability of tracts bought when cash flow is high does improve.
This last fact at least matches the prior belief of an improvement in corporate governance.4
    While our results support a free cash flow model of bidders’ behavior (especially prior to the mid
1980s), there is one important caveat. Free cash flow models often also assume that managers seek to build
empires (Jensen 1986). Yet, in our data, we find no evidence that bidders attempt to increase the scale of
their operations when cash flow increases: they are not bidding on more tracts or more total acreages of
land. Instead, they simply appear to be making worse decisions and dissipating cash through higher bid
prices. In this sense, our results appear to be most consistent with “quiet life” models of free cash flow, in
which managers use cash on hand to make their job easier (Hicks 1935, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003).
One simple model that would fit the facts uncovered in our empirical analysis would involve a trickling
down of extra cash flow through the organizational hierarchy. When cash flow is high, top management
may increase investment budgets throughout the firm, either explicitly or by being more lenient towards
budgetary requests. This increased budget gives lower-level management the ability to spend cash to make
their jobs easier. Overpaying for leases can occur either because these lower-level managers want to avoid
the private costs of generating information about the tracts or the private costs of finding new tracts if
their earlier bids fail.5
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief overview of the industry.
We describe the data in Section 3. Section 4 proposes a simple theoretical framework aimed at guiding
the interpretation of the empirical analysis. Our main findings are presented in Section 5. We address
possible alternative interpretations in Section 6.1. Section 6.2 discusses how our findings might or might
not generalize to other industrial contexts. We conclude in Section 7.
    3
      As we will discuss in more detail below, diminishing returns cannot explain why the overall number of productive leases
fail to rise with cash flow.
    4
      Though of course this change could be driven by many other aggregate time shocks, such as changes in exploration
technology.
    5
      As we discuss in Section 6.2, our findings may therefore more directly generalize to other investment projects decided
upon lower down in the organizational hierarchy.




                                                             4
2        Description of Industry Context

Since 1954, the U.S. Department of Interior has been auctioning off leases that give mineral exploration
rights to tracts of federal land. These tracts are located in Alaska, offshore in the Pacific and offshore in
the Gulf of Mexico. For data availability reasons, we will focus in this paper on sales in the Gulf of Mexico.
Each sale is a simultaneous auction of typically more than a hundred tracts and there are several sales
taking place each year. The auction format is first-price, sealed bid. The highest bidder for each tract is
usually awarded the lease in exchange for the amount bid, unless the government deemed the amount bid
as insufficient. These leases represent fairly large investment projects. The average lease in our sample is
sold for $12.5 million dollars (in 2000 dollars). Firms who bid on these tracts vary dramatically in size,
from subdivisions of large publicly traded firms to small partnerships bidding on a couple of tracts every
few years.
        In order to inform their bidding decisions, firm often conduct seismic surveys or purchase such surveys
from geophysical companies. Each firm uses this survey data to identify geologically attractive tracts and
then conducts an in-depth evaluation of these tracts (Hendricks, Pinske and Porter 2003). In addition,
because tracts located within the same area are likely to share common geological features, firms can also
rely on the publicly observed successes or failures of previously auctioned nearby tracts. Finally, firms may
also have some private information if they own some nearby successful tracts.6
        When a firm wins a tract, it can explore the tract for the length of the lease (typically five years).
A rent, typically of $3 per acre, is paid by the firm each year of the lease until discovery of minerals or
until the lease expires. Exploration typically involves drilling boreholes and testing for the presence of
gas, oil, or other minerals. If the lease expires without discovery of any major oil and/or gas reserves, the
government regains ownership of the tract. If minerals are discovered before the expiration date, the lease
is automatically renewed for as long as the tract is producing minerals. So exploration leases effectively give
monopoly rights to extraction as well. Once production begins, the government receives a fixed fraction
of production revenues (typically 16.7 percent) as a royalty payment. Royalty rate, rental rates and lease
length are known prior to bidding.
    6
    As described below, firms typically have a five year window from purchase to report of any mineral findings or the lease
reverts to the government. Since such reports are public, this limits the time horizon in which firms can keep successes private.




                                                               5
3    Data

The Minerals Management Service (MMS) keeps detailed information on all leases auctioned off in the Gulf
of Mexico since 1954. For each lease, the data contain, among other things: complete bidding information
(all recorded bids with name of the bidding companies), tract characteristics (size, maximum and minimum
depth, location), contract characteristics (rental rate, royalty rate, length of lease), and whether or not the
lease ended up being found productive at the end of the exploration period.
    We merge this lease-level information to firm-year balance sheet information from COMPUSTAT.
Because the MMS and COMPUSTAT do not share the same company identifiers, we merge the two data
sets by hand based on company names. One operational difficulty is the treatment of subsidiaries. Indeed,
large publicly traded oil companies often appear in the MMS data through fully or partly owned subsidiaries
that specialize in exploration activities. We use company directories (such as One Source) to match a given
subsidiary to its parent company. About 40 percent of all bids in the MMS data belong to privately held
stand-alone firms. Such firms are not covered in COMPUSTAT and therefore not included in our final
sample. Also, while the MMS data is available from 1954 on, COMPUSTAT data only starts in 1963. Our
final dataset covers about 120 firms over the 1963-1999 period.
    We use COMPUSTAT to measure cash flow and investment opportunities for the firms in our sample.
We define cash flow as the sum of earnings before extraordinary items (COMPUSTAT item 18) and
depreciation (item 14); we deflate this measure by capital, which is measured as net property, plant and
equipment (item 8) at the beginning of the fiscal year. We measure average Tobin’s Q as the market value
of assets divided by the book value of assets (item 6). The market value of assets is defined as the book
value of assets plus the market value of common equity less the sum of the book value of common equity
(item 60) and balance sheet deferred taxes (item 74). We calculate average Tobin’s Q at the beginning of
the fiscal year. From COMPUSTAT, we also extract total capital expenditures for the firms in our sample
(item 128), which we deflate by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year.
    Summary statistics are reported in Table 1. The unit of observation is a bid (placed by a given company
on a given lease). We present summary statistics for all bids (column 2) as well as for the sub-sample of
winning bids (column 3). The average size of a tract is about 5000 acres and the average bid price per acre
is $2,500 (in 2000 dollars). About 30 percent of the bids were on tracts that were later found productive.
Because we exclude smaller private bidders for lack of balance sheet data, the firms included in our final
sample are very large. Total assets for the median firm is $2 billion (in 2000 dollars). Firms in our sample




                                                      6
bid on average for 9 different tracts every year and win on average 7.7 We calculated that expenditures
on these tracts represent on average about 5 percent of total capital expenditures for the firms included in
our sample.


3.1     Overall Investment

Since we are focusing on a specific industry and specific type of investment projects, two preliminary
questions come to mind. First, do the firms in our sample display the usual positive correlation between
cash flow and balance sheet capital expenditures? Second, how does spending on the leases that will be
the focus of our detailed project-level data relate to overall capital expenditures? We address the first
question in Panel A of Table 2 and the second in Panel B of that table.
      In column 1 of Panel A, we regress the logarithm of capital expenditures on the logarithm of cash flow
for the panel of all firms ever present in our sample, whether or not this is a bidding year for these firms.8
We further control for firm and year fixed effects. Also, in this table, as well as in all following tables,
standard errors are estimated allowing for correlation of the error term at the firm level.
      We find a positive and statistically significant relationship between total investment and cash flow
for the firms in our sample. A 1 percent increase in cash flow leads to .4 percent increase in capital
expenditures. In column 2, we further control for Tobin’s Q. We find a positive relationship between
capital expenditures and Tobin’s Q. The inclusion of this additional control for investment opportunities
however barely alters the investment-cash flow sensitivity estimated in column 1. In the remaining columns
of Panel A, we replicate the specification of column 2 but only include those firm-year observations that
correspond to bidding years (column 3) or winning years (column 4) for a given firm. We obtain results
qualitatively similar to those in column 2 for these two unbalanced panels.
      In Panel B of Table 2, we examine how bidding and spending on the leases covered in our project-level
data relates to balance sheet capital expenditures. In column 1, the dependent variable is a dummy variable
that equals 1 if a firm places at least one bid in that year. We regress this dummy variable on the logarithm
of total capital expenditures, further controlling for firm and year fixed effects. We find a positive and
statistically significant relationship. The same holds in column 2 where the dependent variable is now a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm wins at least one auction in that year. In the rest of Panel B, we
relate total amount bid (conditional on bidding on at least one lease in that year) and total amount spent
  7
    Such high success rates raise questions of collusion, an issue we return to in Section 6.
  8
    Similar results follow if we use a level-level rather than a logarithm-logarithm specification. We however focus on a
logarithm-logarithm specification throughout the paper since it fits the data best. This results in us dropping the small
fraction of observations (about 4 percent) where cash flow is negative.



                                                           7
(conditional on winning at least one lease in that year) to total capital expenditures. Both total amount
bid and total amount spent are deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal
year. A 1 percent increase in capital expenditures is associated with a .52 percent increase in the amount
bid (column 3) and a .45 percent increase in the amount spent (column 4) on oil and gas leases.
    Whether the results we document below generalize to other industries or other types of investment
projects is of course an empirical question. But the findings in Table 2 suggest that we are at the very least
not focusing on a particularly atypical case. Panel A shows that firms in this industry display the positive
correlation between cash flow and total capital expenditures that has been empirically observed in other
sectors of the economy. Panel B shows that the particular type of capital expenditures we are focusing on
co-moves with the other types of capital expenditures these firms undertake.


4     Framework

In order to guide the empirical work below, we present a simple model of investment. The goal of this
framework is not to elucidate optimal bidding behavior but instead to clarify what the different theories
of the investment-cash flow sensitivity would imply for the project-level data we study.
    Whenever a firm wins a lease, the profits generated by this single lease is defined to be:


                                                   p(R − C) − I − E,

where p is the probability of finding minerals, R is the revenue generated by the lease (conditional on
finding minerals), C are production/extraction costs (conditional on finding minerals), I is the price paid
for the lease and E are exploration costs.
    In principle, each of these variables may potentially depend on cash flow, and we make two simplifying
assumptions in the empirical work below. First, we assume that production and extraction costs for a
given lease are not related to cash flow. This assumption seems validated, at least anecdotally, by the
fact that extraction technologies are fairly uniform within sets of tracts sharing the same basic geological
features (depth, location) and within time periods, variables that we control for in the empirical analysis.9
By the same token, we assume that exploration costs do not vary with cash flow.
   9
     We directly investigated whether cash flow relates to some physical characteristics of the tracts bid on that might be
associated with lower costs (such as tract depth). We found no evidence for this. Also, one may argue that, even holding
tract characteristics and year constant, costs may vary firm by firm based on the location of the tracts they have won in the
past. For example, a firm may have relatively lower costs on a tract if that firm is already exploring or producing in several
neighboring tracts. However, as we show in Table 7, we find no systematic evidence that cash rich firms are more likely to bid
on tracts located in areas where they already have a strong presence.



                                                              8
       Second, we also assume for now that that the revenues generated by a given lease, conditional on the
lease being productive, are not related to cash flow. Of course this needs not be the case. For example,
bidders with high cash flow may bid on riskier projects. In practice, we will explicitly test this simplifying
assumption in the last part of the paper (for a subset of productive leases) and find that this assumption
holds in the data.10
       Bid price (I) and probability of success (p) are assumed to vary with cash flow. We also assume that
the number of leases bought, which we denote N , vary with cash flow.11 Because of diminishing returns,
we also assume that the probability of finding minerals on any one lease may change with the number of
leases bought. Given the assumptions above, we can now express profit per lease and total profits as:

                                  π(CF ) = p(CF, N )(R − C) − I(CF ) − E

                                  Π(CF ) = N (CF )[p(CF )(R − C) − I(CF ) − E]

Differentiating with respect to cash flow shows how average and total lease profits vary with cash flow:

                                    πCF    = pCF (R − C) + pN NCF (R − C) − ICF                                               (1)
                                             ∂(p ∗ N )           ∂(I ∗ N )
                                   ΠCF     =           (R − C) −                                                              (2)
                                               ∂CF                 ∂CF

with pN ≤ 0, because of diminishing returns.
       What do the different theories of the investment-cash flow sensitivity say about how these different
variables respond to cash flow? Table 3 provides a summary of these predictions. Obviously, all three
theories, by definition, predict that I ∗ N will increase with cash flow.
       Consider now how total profits vary with cash flow: ΠCF . Liquidity constraint and mis-measurement
theories assume profit maximization and hence must imply that ΠCF ≥ 0: total profits must rise with
cash flow. Since expenditures are increasing with cash flow, revenues must rise to offset this increase. This
in turn implies within our framework that the total number of successes p ∗ N must rise with cash flow.
Under the free cash flow theory, however, profit maximization is not assumed by definition. Consequently,
it is only under this theory that the total number of successes, p ∗ N , may not rise with cash flow. In fact,
p ∗ N may even fall under that theory if cash-rich managers end up buying worse tracts on average.
  10
     This assumption also fits well with earlier work showing that, while bid price is a strong predictor of whether a given tract
will be productive, it is not very predictive of how much resources will be found, conditional on positive output. In other
words, while bidders seem able to somewhat predict whether a given lease will be productive or not, they find it much harder
to predict its actual output.
  11
     In this simplified framework, we assume tracts are homogenous and firms increase quantity by increasing number of leases.
In practice, of course, other dimensions such as tract size may vary with cash flow. We will investigate this in detail in the
empirical section.



                                                                9
       Note that these predictions are only true for total profits and total number of successes. Because of
diminishing returns, a drop in average profit and average success rate as cash flow increases could be
reconciled with all three theories. To see this, note that in equation (1), πCF could be negative if NCF is
positive, as pN is less or equal to zero due to diminishing returns.
       In practice, we will empirically study each of the following factors. First, we will study the relationship
between total spending on leases (N ∗I) and cash flow (CF ). This first step is equivalent to the investment-
cash flow regressions previously estimated with more standard capital expenditures data. Obviously, as
mentioned above, all three views of the investment-cash flow sensitivity predict that I ∗ N increases with
cash flow.
       We will then decompose this total spending effect into a quantity effect (N ) and a price effect (I).12 A
study of the quantity response is relevant in at least two regards. First, as we discussed above, the profit-
maximization and free cash flow models have systematically different implications for average profit and
average success rate only in the absence of a quantity response. Indeed, without scale effects (NCF ≈ 0),
profit-maximization implies not only that total profits but also that average profit must rise with cash flow.
       A study of the quantity response is also interesting in its own right. If the presumption is that
higher cash flow proxies for higher investment opportunities or eases liquidity constraints, then one would
intuitively expect a positive quantity response. In contrast, under the free cash flow theory, the effect
of cash flow on number of leases bought depends purely on assumptions about managerial preferences.
While empire building theories might imply a positive quantity response, other theories (which we classify
together as “quiet life” theories) may imply no such response.13
       Next, we will study how cash flow affects the likelihood of success for the average tract. As noted
earlier, average probability of success and average profit can theoretically not increase with cash flow in
all three models: because of diminishing returns in the profit-maximization models, and also because of
mismanagement and/or bad project choice in the free cash flow model. However, to preview on some our
results below, these average probability of success regressions will be theoretically informative because we
do not find any quantity response.
       Finally, to even more carefully differentiate between the different theories, we will directly study how
total number of successes, N ∗ p, varies with cash flow. As noted above, N ∗ p must increase with cash
flow under the mis-measurement and liquidity constraints models. Otherwise, total profits would also
  12
    In practice, we will consider two alternative quantity measures: total number of leases and total acreage of land.
  13
    Obviously, if one assumes that tracts vary in observable quality, then it is unclear what “quantity” means in this model.
Scale of operations could increase by simply buying fewer higher quality tracts. In fact, in the analysis below, we find neither
evidence of a response on number of tracts bought nor evidence that higher cash flow leads firms to bid on tracts that have
systematically better observable characteristics.


                                                              10
be decreasing with cash flow (as expenditures rise with cash flow), contradicting the profit maximization
assumption. Only under the agency-based free cash flow model may N ∗ p not be increasing with cash flow.


5         Results

5.1        Total Bids and Cash Flow

In Table 4, we study the relationship between total lease expenditures and cash flow. The first two columns
focus on total amount bid in a given year by a given firm (conditional on bidding on at least one lease); the
last two columns focus on total amount won in given year by a given firm (conditional on winning at least
one lease). Total amount bid and total amount won are deflated by net property, plant and equipment at
the beginning of the fiscal year.14 Both lease expenditures and cash flow are expressed in logarithms.
         Each regression in Table 4 controls for Tobin’s Q, as well as firm and year fixed effects. The year fixed
effects allow us to net out any aggregate shocks that might be correlated with firm cash flow and lease
expenditures, such as changes in the price of oil. Controlling for such year fixed effects is crucial since
oil price changes will likely affect both firms’ cash flow and the perceived profitability of leases.15 The
firm fixed effects net out any fixed differences between firms in cash flow and total lease expenditures. For
example, some firms may systematically have access to superior information, which could translate into
higher cash flow and higher investment level. The inclusion of firm fixed effects ensures that our estimates
are not driven by any such fixed differences across firms. Finally, to account for any dependencies across
observations caused by serial correlation, standard errors are estimated allowing for correlation of the error
term at the firm-level.16
         In columns 1 and 3, we find a positive and statistically significant relationship between amount bid or
spent on oil and gas leases and cash flow. The relationship is very similar in magnitude to that observed
for overall capital expenditures in Table 2. A 1 percent increase in cash flow increases amount bid and
amount won by about .4 percent.
         These regressions assume that a one percent change in cash flow has a uniform effect throughout the
cash flow distribution. However, it is possible that a one percent change at the bottom of the cash flow
distribution may differentially affect expenditures than a one percent change at the top of that distribution.
We investigate such a possibility in columns 2 and 4 where we rely on a more flexible functional form.
    14
      In case of joint bidding, total amount bid and total amount won are computed based on the fraction of ownership of the
firm in the joint bid.
   15
      When we move to the lease-level data below, we will also control for the monthly price of oil (in addition to the year fixed
effects) as we know the specific month a certain lease was auctioned off.
   16
      See Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004 for a simple discussion.


                                                               11
Specifically, we “spline” the cash flow variable and allow for different investment-cash flow sensitivities
at low cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of the cash flow distribution), medium cash flow levels
(between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution) and high cash flow levels (above 66th
percentile of the cash flow distribution).17
      Interestingly, the greatest sensitivity of lease expenditures to cash flow is in the middle cash flow range.
In fact, there is no sensitivity in the low cash flow range. Investment is positively related to cash flow in
the high cash flow range but the relationship is not precisely estimated.
      In summary, the findings in Table 4 confirm the positive relationship between lease expenditures and
cash flow ((N ∗ I)CF ≥ 0). We now proceed with exploiting the project-level nature of our data to better
understand what drives this relationship.


5.2      Decomposition into Price and Quantity Effects

What drives the observed positive relationship between cash flow and total lease expenditures? Do cash-rich
firms bid on and win more leases or do they spend more per lease?
      In Table 5, we propose to decompose the aggregate effects of Table 4 into such quantity and price
margins. In Panel A, we use as dependent variables the average price per lease bid on (columns 1 and 2)
and the average price per lease won (columns 3 and 4). In Panel B, we use as dependent variables the
number of leases bid on (columns 1 and 2) and number of leases won (columns 3 and 4). In columns 1 and
3 of both panels, we estimate a linear regression model between cash flow and these price and quantity
measures; in columns 2 and 4, we spline the cash flow variable to allow for non-linearity, as described
above. The control variables included in all regressions, in addition to cash flow, are Tobin’s Q, firm fixed
effects and year fixed effects.
      Interestingly, we find no statistically significant relationship between cash flow and number of leases
bid on or number of leases won (Panel B). The estimated coefficients on cash flow in columns 1 and 3,
while positive, are economically small and statistically insignificant. Only in the low cash flow range does
it appear to be a positive, albeit weak, relationship between cash flow and number of tracts bid on or won
(columns 2 and 4 of Panel B).
      The sensitivity of investment to cash flow observed in Table 4 is solely driven by an increase in the
price per lease as cash flow goes up (Panel A). When we allow for non-linearity in this price-cash flow
relationship (columns 2 and 4), we find that this price effect is especially strong in the medium and high
cash flow ranges. In fact, in the low cash flow range, increases in cash flow are not associated with higher
 17
      We chose this specification for simplicity. Allowing for more non-linearities in the functional form produces similar results.


                                                                 12
bid price per lease.
       In regressions not reported here, we performed an alternative decomposition into quantity and price
effects. Rather than using number of leases as the quantity measure, we used total acreage of land (either
bid on or won). We used average price per acre as the price measure under this alternative decomposition.
We found comparable results. In other words, there is no significant relationship between acreages of land
bid on or won and cash flow. Instead, the positive relationship between investment and cash flow appears
solely driven by an increase in bid price per acre as cash flow goes up.18
       In summary, the results in Tables 4 and 5 indicate that firms bid and spend more on oil and gas
leases when their cash flow increases. In fact, the investment-cash flow sensitivity we observe for these
specific projects is quantitatively very similar to the overall investment-cash flow sensitivity (as measured
from balance sheet data) for this subset of firms. Interestingly, though, we find no evidence that this
investment-cash flow sensitivity reflects an increase in the number of projects undertaken when cash flow
rises, except maybe in the lowest cash flow range. This apparent lack of a quantity response appears at
odds with a simple financing constraint interpretation of the investment-cash flow sensitivity. The lack of
a quantity response also appears at odds with a simple empire-building interpretation.19


5.3      Bid Price per Acre and Cash Flow

In Table 6, we re-examine the relationship between bid price per acre and cash flow. However, instead
of studying average price per acre across all recorded bids for a given firm in a given year, we now study
this relationship at the bid-level. This allows us to control for lease-specific characteristics that could
not as easily be included in the aggregate regressions described above. Controlling for such lease-specific
characteristics is important in order to start separating two main alternative interpretations of the price-
cash flow sensitivity observed above. Indeed, this sensitivity may reflect the fact that cash-rich firms
tend to bid on higher quality tracts. Alternatively, cash-rich firms may simply be paying more for tracts
of similar quality. Under the first interpretation, one would expect the price-cash flow sensitivity to be
weakened as one controls for lease-specific characteristics that are correlated with expected productivity.
  18
      This lack of a quantity response could in principle be driven by the specific nature of this investment project: bidding on
a fixed set of leases. As we discuss in Section 6, however, this is unlikely to be the case. While there are a fixed number of
tracts auctioned off in any given sale, many tracts go unbought. Expanding on the quantity margin should therefore be quite
feasible.
   19
      Obviously, and as noted earlier, such perceived contradictions rely on taking quite seriously our measurement of “quantity.”
It is possible that the easing of liquidity constraints allows firms to buy a different quality mix of tracts than they otherwise
could. Similarly, a more subtle interpretation of the empire-building model could be that managers care about increasing scale
through an increase in the “quality” of the projects they undertake. In the analysis below, we will however find no evidence
that higher cash flow leads firms to bid on “better” tracts, either as measured based on the ex-ante characteristics of these
tracts or based on their ex-post productivity.



                                                               13
       We focus on all bids in Panel A of Table 6 and on the sub-sample of winning bids in Panel B. The 2
panels follow the same structure, except for the last column of Panel B. All regressions in Table 6 include,
in addition of cash flow, Tobin’s Q, firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. Also, standard errors are
estimated accounting for the correlation of the error term at the firm-level.
       As a benchmark, column 1 shows that, absent any tract-level controls, a 1 percent increase in cash flow
increases bid price per acre by between .11 (Panel A) and .16 percent (Panel B). In column 2, we add as a
control the per barrel spot price of oil in the month the tract was auctioned off.20 Interestingly, there is a
strong positive correlation between oil price at auction time and bid price, with a 1 percent increase in oil
price raising bid price per acre by about .4 percent. The addition of this control however does not affect
the relationship between bid price and cash flow.
       In column 3, we further control for a set of tract-level characteristics capturing information that is
available to the bidders at the time of bidding and that is likely to be correlated with the expected
productivity of the tract. First, we control for the size of the lease, which we measure in number of acres.
It is a well-known fact from previous work that larger tracts are on average less likely to be productive
and tend to sell at a lower price (Hendricks and Porter 1996). Second, we control for the minimum and
maximum depth of the tract. Everything else equal, tract depth is likely to be negatively correlated with
expected profits as exploration and extraction costs increase with depth. Finally, also computable by firms
prior to bidding on a given tract is the observed productivity on previously auctioned off tracts that are
located in the same geographic area. We compute this area-specific productivity measure based on the
MMS data. For a given lease located within a given area (referred to as “county” in the MMS data) and
auctioned off at a given date, we compute the fraction of productive tracts among all the tracts that were
auctioned off in that area prior to that date.21
       As expected, larger tracts sell at a discount. A one percent increase in tract size leads to about a .25
percent drop in price. We also find (not reported in the table) that lower bids are recorded for deeper
tracts. Also, there is a strong positive correlation between bid price and observed past productivity in a
given area, everything else equal. Most important for our purpose, though, the inclusion of these three
sets of controls has no effect on the estimated price-cash flow sensitivity.
       In column 4, we further add controls for lease-specific contract characteristics. These include dummies
for royalty rate, rental rate and length of lease. The inclusion of these additional controls somewhat lowers
  20
    This monthly time series, titled “Spot Oil Price: West Texas Intermediate,” was obtained from Dow Jones Energy Service.
  21
    We prefer this measure to the inclusion of county fixed effects. Indeed, this measure is by definition only backward-looking
while county effects would be both backward- and forward-looking. We however obtain qualitatively similar results if we
include county fixed effects instead.




                                                              14
the point estimate on cash flow. However, the point estimate stays positive and statistically unchanged.
   Columns 5 and 6 respectively replicate columns 1 and 4 but spline the cash flow variable into three
groups, allowing for the price-cash flow sensitivity to differ in the low, medium and high cash flow ranges.
As before, we find that the positive association between price and cash flow is concentrated in the medium
cash flow range.
   Column 7 replicates column 6 but allows for the bid price-oil price relationship to vary by firm. The
countervailing hypothesis we mean to test for here is the possibility that the firms in our sample may be
differentially affected by variation in the price of oil. For example, a given firm may have a 100 percent
of its activities in the oil business while another firm may have a lower fraction of its activities in that
business. One may expect these 2 firms to respond differentially to a given increase in the price of oil. By
allowing for interactions between the firm fixed effects and oil price, we account for such possible differences
across firms. As our findings in column 7 indicate, though, the inclusion of these additional controls leaves
the estimated relationship between bid price and cash flow economically and statistically unchanged.
   Finally, we assess the robustness of our results to controlling for another tract characteristic that is
likely to be even more informative about expected tract quality than the physical characteristics discussed
above: the bid placed by the next highest bidder. In the last column of Panel B, we replicate columm 6
of that panel but further control for the logarithm of the second highest bid on that lease, when such a
second highest bid exists. If no second bid exists, we assume the logarithm of the second highest bid to
be zero; of course, we also include a dummy variable to identify these sole bidder auctions. As might have
been expected, the second highest bid is very predictive of the winning bid, everything else equal. But
its inclusion in the model does not statistically significantly alter the bid price-cash flow relationship. In
other words, when cash flow rises, bidders are not only bidding more per acre for observationally equivalent
tracts, they are also bidding more relative the next highest bidder.
   An alternative way to approach the issues discussed in Table 6 is to ask whether cash-rich firms are
systematically bidding on different kinds of tracts. Table 7 follows this alternative approach by directly
relating tract-level characteristics to firm-level cash flow. All regressions in Table 7 control for Tobin’s
Q, firm and year fixed effects. We also include the monthly price of oil in even columns and interactions
between firm fixed effects and the monthly price of oil in odd columns. As in all other tables, standard
errors are computed allowing for clustering of the error term at the firm level.
   The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is tract size (measured in number acres). We see that
cash-rich firms do not systematically bid on smaller tracts, which are expected to be of higher quality.
In columns 3 and 4, we ask whether cash-rich firms are more likely to bid on tracts located in counties


                                                      15
where they already have a strong presence. If this were true, one might argue that these firms may have
lower exploration and/or extraction costs, which may justify the higher bids. For a given firm bidding at a
given date on a given tract located in a given county, we construct based on the MMS data the number of
leases won by that firm in that county prior to that date. We also control in these regressions for the total
number of leases auctioned off in that county prior to that date. We do not find any systematic evidence
of cash-rich firms disproportionately bidding in areas where they are already engaged in more activity.
    In columns 5 and 6, we ask whether cash-rich firms bid more systematically on tracts located in areas
where higher success rates have been recorded in the past. We find no evidence for this. In fact, the point
estimate on cash flow in these regressions is negative (even though statistically insignificant).
    The dependent variable in columns 7 and 8 is the number of separate bids recorded for that tract. Our
goal here is to examine whether cash-rich firms are engaging in more differentiating behavior by bidding
on tracts that other firms are less likely to target. Interestingly, we find the exact opposite. When firms
are cash-rich, they are more likely to bid on tracts that other firms are also targeting. While we cannot
provide a definitive interpretation for this finding, one conjecture is that this reflects a higher reliance on
public information. Managers at cash-rich firms may spend less time trying to acquire private information
about the leases to be auctioned off (possibly for agency reasons) and instead herd on the behavior of other
bidders.22
    Finally, in columns 9 and 10, we examine whether cash-rich firms systematically bid on tracts that
other firms are willing to pay more for. Focusing on the sub-sample of leases that attracted more than one
bid (which we know to be a selected sample from our findings in columns 7 and 8), we regress the second
highest bid for that tract on the winning firm’s cash flow. We find no relationship.
    In summary, these results suggest that cash-rich firms pay more for leases that appear equivalent on
a set of publicly observable quality dimensions. In addition, the fact that cash-rich firms are more likely
to bid on leases that attract other bidders is a priori hard to reconcile with the idea that these firms are
relying more on private information to guide their bidding behavior. However, these facts per se are not
enough to say anything conclusive about how cash flow relates to the eventual productivity of these leases.
It may still be that the leases bid on when cash flow is high are intrinsically better along some unobservable
dimensions. Alternatively, even if these leases are not intrinsically better, perhaps positive shocks to cash
flow are associated with a higher intrinsic “ability” to find oil. The true test of whether the increased
expenditures reflect profitable investments or dissipated cash can only come from directly looking at the
  22
     An increased reliance on public information need not be a violation of profit maximization if tracts attracting a lot of
bidders are also on average more productive. The definitive test will come from assessing the eventual productivity of the
tracts bought when cash flow is high.



                                                             16
productivity of these tracts. This is the question we now turn to.


5.4       Tract-Level Productivity and Cash Flow

As we discussed above, included in the MMS data is an indicator for whether or not a given tract ended
up being declared productive before the lease expiration date.23 In Table 8, we relate this productivity
variable to bid price and cash flow.24
       In column 1, we regress a dummy variable for whether the tract was found productive on bid price per
acre, firm fixed effects and year fixed effects.25 We find that a higher bid price per acre is predictive of the
eventual productivity of a tract. This is a well-known fact in this literature. A one percent increase in bid
price per acre increases the likelihood that the lease will be productive by about .09 percentage point.
       Column 2 of Table 8 presents the IV equivalent of the OLS regression in column 1. More precisely, we
instrument bid price per acre with cash flow at the time of the bid, using the splined specification described
above. This IV regression allows us to ask whether cash flow driven increases in bid price per acre are
also positively related to tract productivity. We find no evidence for this. The point estimate on bid price
in column 2 is in fact negative and marginally significant (p = .097). A one percent increase in bid price
per acre due to a positive shock to cash flow reduces the likelihood that the tract will be productive by
about .13 percentage point. Column 3 presents the reduced form regression equivalent to the IV regression
in column 2. This reduced form regression shows that it is in the medium cash flow range that positive
shocks to cash flow are associated with lower productivity. There is no relationship between cash flow and
productivity in the bottom and top cash flow ranges.
       The remaining columns of Table 8 assess the robustness of these first results to controlling for additional
lease- and firm-level characteristics. OLS regressions are in even columns; IV regressions are in odd columns.
In columns 4 and 5, we add a control for the price of oil in the month the lease was auctioned off. Columns
6 and 7 further control for tract-level characteristics (minimum and maximum depths of the tract, size of
tract). Finally, columns 8 and 9 further add to the list of controls contract characteristics (dummies for
royalty rate, rental rate and length of lease) and Tobin’s Q.
  23
     More specifically, the MMS data include a variable called “lease qualifying date,” which is defined as the day, month, and
year that a lease is determined capable of production in paying quantities as established by the Minerals Management Service.
We define as “non-productive” those leases that do not have a lease qualifying date.
  24
     An alternative approach would be to explicitly calculate a tract level ex post return on investment as in Hendricks, Porter
and Boudreau (1987). We chose against this strategy since we are primarily interested in how this return varies with firm
cash flow and not with the level of that return. For that purpose, our binary variable (and the output data used below for the
subset of productive tracts) should capture much of the variation. This is especially true since the costs of exploration and
extraction that would have to be used to generate such a return calculation depend mostly on observable tract and timing
characteristics that we can directly control for.
  25
     We estimate a linear probability model. Similar results are found using tobit or probit models instead.



                                                              17
   The OLS and IV estimates of the coefficient on bid price per acre are remarkably stable across all these
different specifications. Interestingly, bid price per acre is still a strong positive predictor of productivity
even after the addition of all of these controls. This indicates that there is residual information in the
price data and thus further reinforces the need to perform the productivity-cash flow sensitivity analysis
reported in this table. Indeed, the positive price-cash flow sensitivity observed earlier may in part reflect
some private information cash-rich firms have about tract quality. The IV results in this table show no
evidence that this is the case.
   In summary, the average probability of finding mineral resources in a tract does not increase, and in
fact might well decrease, with cash flow. Recall from Section 4 that this could in principle happen under
all three interpretations of the investment-cash flow sensitivity if there are scale effects. Indeed, profit
                                  ∂p∗N
maximization only implies that    ∂CF    = pCF ∗ N + NCF ∗ p > 0. However, we have seen earlier that there
is no quantity response to cash flow, i.e. NCF ≈ 0. If NCF ≈ 0, then profit maximization must imply that
pCF > 0, which we find no evidence for in the data. Thus, we view this combined set of results to be in
contradiction with profit maximization. Put simply, our results so far state that firms, when cash rich: (i)
spend more on buying tracts, (ii) do not buy more tracts and (iii) buy tracts that are not more productive
on average.


5.5   Number of Productive Tracts and Cash Flow

A more direct way to test for a violation of profit maximization is to estimate the relationship between
cash flow and the total number of productive tracts (rather than average productivity). In Table 9, we
investigate how p ∗ N varies with cash flow. We regress total number of productive exploration projects
on firm cash flow in the year these projects were undertaken. In the first 2 columns of Table 9, we simply
sum all productive leases undertaken. In the last 4 columns, we weight each lease by the firm’s fraction
of ownership in this lease. Columns 1 and 3 estimate a linear regression model; columns 2 and 4 estimate
a splined regression model. Each regression includes Tobin’s Q, firm fixed effects and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are computed allowing for clustering of the error term at the firm level.
   While we know from Table 4 that total spending increases with cash flow, we find no evidence that
total revenue (as proxied by the number of productive tracts) increases with cash flow. In fact, the point
estimate on cash flow is negative, but not statistically significant (columns 1 and 3). When we replace the
linear model with a splined specification, we find that the negative correlation is again concentrated in the
middle cash flow range.




                                                      18
5.6      Total Resources Found in Productive Tracts and Cash Flow

In both the theoretical framework and the empirical work so far, we have assumed that the quantity
of minerals found in productive tracts does not systematically change with cash flow. Is this a realistic
assumption? One could imagine that cash-rich firms bid on tracts that are riskier: less likely to be
productive on average, but bigger amounts of resources found when the tract is productive. To analyze
this question, we turn in Table 10 to lease-level production data.
       We could only obtain such production data for leases auctioned off from 1978 on. For each of these
productive leases, we can measure reported gas production (columns 1 to 4) and oil production (columns 5
to 8). We regress the logarithms of these production figures on bid price and cash flow, controlling for year
and firm fixed effects, as before. The regressions also include a control for the price of oil in the month
the lease was auctioned off (columns 1, 2, 5 and 6) or interactions between the price of oil and firm fixed
effects (columns 3, 4, 7 and 8). Finally, since production on the leases in this sample started at different
points in time, one must also account for the length of time since production started. We implement this
by including dummy variables for the number of months a tract has been under production.
       Two interesting results emerge from Table 10. First, for both gas and oil outputs, bid price is an
economically small and statistically insignificant predictor of actual production amount (columns 1, 3, 5
and 7). The point estimates on bid price are in fact negative in all these regressions. In other words, while
bid price predicts whether a given tract will be productive, it does not predict the amount of minerals found
conditional on productivity. This is consistent with previous findings and suggests that bidders are not
able to accurately predict the amount of resources under the ground.26 Second, cash flow does not predict
amount of gas found. The coefficients are small and insignificant (columns 2 and 4). For oil production,
the estimated coefficient on cash flow is negative in both columns 6 and 8 and statistically significant in
column 6. This is quite the opposite of the risk-return explanation outlined at the beginning of this section
as an alternative interpretation for our findings.


5.7      Results Over Time

These results as a whole are suggestive of an agency problem in the oil industry. Yet our data stretches a
wide period: 1963 to 1999. During this time period, numerous commentators have argued that governance
has improved in this industry. Specifically, the takeover wave of the 1980s is purported to have led to
tighter governance. This naturally leads one to ask whether our findings vary over time. To answer this
  26
    Geologically, the total amount of minerals found depends on the depth of the well below the ground as well as its topology
well below the earth, both of which being hard to measure before exploration.



                                                             19
question, we pick a rather arbitrary cutoff date (1985) and re-examine our main findings before and after
this cutoff.27 It is obviously worth noting that many other factors besides governance may have changed
across these two time periods (such as technology, for example). In this regard, we view these regressions
as mainly descriptive, and certainly not causal.
         We first examine whether and how the bidding results of Tables 6 change before and after 1985. As
Table 11 indicates, there is a remarkable congruence across the two time periods. By this metric, at least,
governance has not improved: cash flow still strongly predicts bid price. In Table 12, we examine whether
and how the productivity results of Table 8 change before and after 1985. The findings in this table, while
somewhat noisy, do appear to suggest some contrasting patterns across the two time periods. Specifically,
the negative productivity findings are concentrated in the pre-1985 period. Hence, there is some suggestive
evidence that firms bidding on these leases may have altered their behavior after the mid-1980s, in a
way that is consistent with more profit maximization, and possibly due to an improvement in corporate
governance.


6         Interpretation

6.1        Confounds

Our findings in Section 5, interpreted through the simple framework of Section 4, support a free cash flow
interpretation of the investment-cash flow sensitivity in this industrial setting. The framework proposed in
Section 4 was however quite stylized. One may therefore ask whether any complication to that framework
may alter the current interpretation of our findings. We consider three potential complications. First,
we discuss the possible impact of introducing imperfect competition (or collusion) amongst bidders. Sec-
ond, we consider complications to the firm’s objective function. Finally, we consider whether managerial
overconfidence might better fit our findings.
         The stylized framework in Section 4 abstracts from the details of the bidding process. This is valid as
long as a bidder’s cash flow does not affect this bidding process, which would be the case if each auction had
numerous competing bidders. But, as we discussed in Section 2, most of the auctions in our data have very
                                                    7
few bidders, which is why firms win roughly         9   of all tracts they place bids on.28 Could collusive bidding
explain our findings? It would be possible to rationalize that higher cash flow gives a firm a greater financial
incentive to deviate from a collusive equilibrium. For example, cash-rich firms may be in a position where
    27
    Very similar results follow if we choose any other date in the 1980s as the cutoff.
    28
    Allegations of bidder collusion are sometimes made about oil and gas lease bidding. See for example Bajari and Summers
(2002) for an empirical discussion of collusion in such auctions.


                                                            20
they have a higher chance to win a bidding war with their competitors. This could explain one of our
results, i.e. the rise in bid price when cash flow increases (Table 6). This could also explain the fact that
high cash flow firms are more likely to bid on tracts that receive other independent bids (Table 7). Yet, if
a firm is rationally deviating from a collusive equilibrium, it should do so to increase its profits. We have
found, however, that the marginal tract bought when cash flow increases is not more productive (Table 8).
We find this last finding much harder to reconcile with a rational collusion breakdown interpretation.
    Our stylized framework also assumes that tract returns are independent, meaning that the productivity
of a tract completely captures the returns to investing in that tract. Yet interdependencies between tracts
can potentially exist. Firms may learn from their success (or not) on one tract which other tracts to bid
on (or not to bid on). This could potentially explain our productivity results if high cash flow leads firms
to experiment more, for example by bidding on tracts further away from the areas they know best. The
higher failure rate on such tracts may be offset by the higher profits they experience on future bids once
they have identified new productive areas. This interpretation, while fitting some of our basic facts, does
not fit several others. First, recall that in Table 7, we examined the relationship between a firm’s cash flow
and the characteristics of the tracts this firm bids on. There (columns 3 and 4), we found no systematic
relationship between firm cash flow and number of neighboring tracts (to the tract bid on) that are owned
by the firm. Second, this interpretation suggests that higher cash flow today should be predictive of higher
productivity among tracts bought in later years. We formally tested this idea. Specifically, we replicated
the reduced form specifications of Table 8 using as a dependent variable the productivity of tracts bought
in year t + 5 (while cash flow was still measured in year t). We found no systematic relationship between
tract productivity and cash flow in this case.29 This suggests that experimentation and between-tract
externalities could not easily explain our results.
    Finally, might managerial overconfidence help explain our pattern of findings?30 Perhaps high cash flow
induces managers to be overconfident about their abilities to find the right tract of land, causing them to
bid more on tracts that end up not being more productive.31 It is unclear under this explanation, however,
why managers do not bid on more tracts or buy more tracts. If they felt a greater ability to pick winners,
would they not take advantage of this ability by buying more tracts or expanding in some way the scale of
   29
      For example, a replication of column 3 of Table 8 led to the following coefficients (and standard errors) on the cash flow
variables: cash flow-spline 1: -.008 (.022); cash flow-spline 2: -.013 (.068); cash flow-spline 3: -.056 (.060). Note also that we
found no significant relationship between bid price and cash flow under this alternative lag structure. In other words cash flow
in year t does not predict bid price per acre in year t + 5.
   30
      Kahneman and Lavallo (1993) provide a useful psychological perspective on overconfidence. Roll (1986), Heaton (2002),
Hackbarth (2003) and Malmendier and Tate (forthcoming) provide some discussions and evidence within the field of corporate
finance.
   31
      Of course, one could also have said that overconfidence should lead them to bid less since they might also be overconfident
about their probability of winning.


                                                               21
operations? The lack of a quantity response, we believe, makes the overconfidence story less plausible in
this setting.
       Thus, while the framework we propose in Section 4 is quite stylized, the complications discussed above
do not clearly lead us to alter the interpretation of our findings. We believe that these findings are
best explained by a “quiet life” agency model: managers use cash to make their work easier, outbidding
competitors on tracts they are also vying for rather than looking hard to find productive tracts that others
are not bidding on. While a more detailed quiet life model is hard to test without greater organizational
data, we can speculate about what one might look like. When cash flow rises, top management may
increase budgets throughout the organization or be more lenient with budgetary requests. This in turn
gives lower-level managers greater slack. In an empire-building model, these lower-level managers may use
that slack to buy more tracts and expand the scale of operations. In a quiet life model, they may use that
slack to save on their private costs of effort. For example, instead of engaging in time-consuming research
to discover which tracts look more attractive, they may instead pick tracts that are publicly thought to be
attractive and outbid their competition on these tracts. Instead of risking the chance of failure (and hence
of having to start the search process again), they may overpay to ensure that they win a given auction.
The key feature of this model is that managers’ goal is to reduce effortful activities.


6.2      Generalization

Can these results generalize to other industries or to the economy as a whole? Of course, every industry
has its own features so it is unlikely that any single industry study could be used to paint a “general”
picture. Nevertheless, we find it useful to highlight a few distinctive features of the oil bidding process.
This may in turn help predict in which other contexts one could expect similar results.
       A first important feature, which we have just discussed, is that lower-level managers make most of
the specific investment decisions in this context. Except at smaller firms, top management is not involved
in the details of the exploration and bidding activities.32 Thus our results may more likely generalize to
other investment projects decided upon lower down in the corporate hierarchy rather to ones (such as
acquisitions or mergers) decided upon at the top of the hierarchy.33
       The lack of a quantity response is important to the “quiet life” interpretation we have proposed for
our findings. Could this be driven by the limited number of tracts that go for sale in every period? At
the extreme, one could imagine that this indeed contributes to the lack of a quantity response: it is harder
  32
    Though, of course, top management may set the overall budget for these activities.
  33
    See Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003, however, for evidence on “quiet life”-type behavior even for large investment decisions
(such as plant openings and closures) likely made at the top of the hierarchy.


                                                              22
to expand the number of tracts explored if the aggregate number of tracts for sale is capped. In practice,
though, this is unlikely to be a binding constraint since a large fraction of tracts goes un-bought in every
single sale. In other words, bidders could easily expand the scale of their operations by bidding on more
tracts, many of which would not be bid on and go unsold.34 Also, it is important to note that aggregate
scale constraint is a feature of investment in many other industries; it is simply more transparent here
because of the bidding process. Aggregate demand or limited resources (e.g. natural or land) all could
contribute to a similar constraint on the number of investment projects in other industries.
         Finally, this is a remarkably cash rich industry. Everything else equal, liquidity constraints are therefore
likely to be less important here than in other settings. While this does not undercut the evidence we have
presented, it does leave open the possibility that liquidity constraints may play a more central role in other
industrial sectors.


7         Conclusion

As a whole, our findings in this paper appear to support a free cash flow model of the investment-cash
flow sensitivity in the oil industry, with firms spending more on investment projects when cash flow is high
but not generating additional revenues from this additional spending. The specific form of the additional
spending (through a price margin rather than a quantity margin, and by bidding more systematically on
tracts that have also been identified and targeted by other bidders) is most consistent with a version of the
free cash flow model where richer managers prefer to lead a “quiet life” rather than to build “empires.” We
conjecture that the “quiet life” behavior exhibited in this industry takes the form of lower-level managers
expanding less personal effort in screening which tracts to bid on when their budget increases (because
of higher cash flow), and instead using cash to outbid competitors on tracts for which there is greater
public information. Obviously, further testing of this specific corporate response to higher cash flow would
require much finer information on the specific allocation of resources and responsibilities within firms. Such
detailed internal budgeting and organizational data is unfortunately not widely available at this point in
time.
         Finally, our results also suggest some behavioral changes over time. These changes are consistent with
investment decisions being more in line with profit maximization after the mid-1980s, a period over which
numerous observers suggested that corporate governance in the oil industry improved.



    34
         One could in principle argue that the number of “quality” tracts is capped, something we have no way of evaluating.


                                                                 23
References
Alti , Aydogan, 2003, “How Sensitive is Investment to Cash Flow when Financing is Frictionless?” Journal
      of Finance, 58, 707-722.
Bajari, Patrick and Garrett Summers, 2002, “Detecting Collusion in Procurement Auctions,” Antitrust
    Law Journal, 70(1), 143-170.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance
     and Managerial Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy, 111 (5), 1043-1075.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, “How Much Should We Trust Differences-
     in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1), 249-275.
Caballero, Ricardo, 1999, “Aggregate Investment,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John B.
    Taylor and Michael Woodford, North Holland.
Erickson, Timothy and Toni Whited, 2000, “Measurement Error and the Relationship between Investment
     and Q,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 108 (51), 1027-1057.
Fazzari, Steven R., R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints and Corporate
    Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 141-195.
Heaton, James Breckinridge, 2002, “Managerial Optimism and Corporate Finance,” Financial Manage-
    ment, 31, 33-45.
Hackbarth, Dirk, 2003, “Managerial Optimism, Overconfidence, and Capital Structure Decisions,” Working
    Paper, University of California, Berkeley.
Hendricks, Kenneth, Robert H. Porter and Bryan Boudreau, 1987, “Information, Returns, and Bidding
    Behavior in OCS Auctions: 1954-1969,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(4), 517-542.
Hendricks, Kenneth and Robert H. Porter, 1996, “The Timing and Incidence of Exploratory Drilling on
    Offshore Wildcat Tracts,” American Economic Review, 86, 388-407.
Hendricks, Kenneth, Joris Pinske and Robert H. Porter, 2003, “Empirical Implications of Equilibrium
    Bidding in First-Price, Symmetric, Common-Value Auctions,” Review of Economic Studies, 1, 115-
    145.
Hicks, John, 1935, “Annual Survey of Economic Theory: The Theory of Monopoly,” Econometrica, 3, 1-20.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,” American
     Economic Review, 76, 323-329.
Kahneman, D. and D. Lovallo, 1993, “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk
    Taking,” Management Science, 39, 17-31.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Meaningful
    Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 169-215.
Lamont, Owen, 1997, “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets,” Journal of
   Finance, 52, 57-82.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment,” Journal of
    Finance, forthcoming.
Poterba, James, 1988, “Comments on Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen,” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 1, 200-204.

                                                  24
Rauh, Joshua D., “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate Pension
    Plans,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Roll, Richard, 1986, “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers,” Journal of Business, 59, 197-216.
Shin, Hyun-Han and Rene Stultz, 1998, “Are Internal Capital Markets Efficient?,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 113, 531-553.
Stein, Jeremy, 2003, “Agency, Information, and Corporate Investment,” in Handbook of the Economics of
     Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, North-Holland.




                                                  25
                     Table I: Bid-Level Summary Statisticsa

                     Sample:                     All Bids     Winning Bids


                     Bid price per acre          1753.738       1822.439
                                                (5516.353)     (6219.530)

                     Log (bid price per acre)      5.532          5.384
                                                  (1.889)        (1.907)

                     Tract size (in acres)       5211.089       5224.442
                                                 (941.939)      (995.343)

                     Productive? (Y=1)              .306           .240
                                                   (.461)         (.427)

                     Log (total assets)            9.083          9.191
                                                  (1.689)        (1.654)

                     Log (cash flow)              -1.610          -1.635
                                                  (.423)          (.415)

                     Lagged Tobin’s Q              1.166          1.176
                                                   (.561)         (.600)

                     Sample size                   24363          16410


a
    Notes:
1. The unit of observation is a bid (placed by a given company on a given lease). This table presents
   means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for several bid, tract and firm-level characteristics.
   The sample in column 2 is all bids placed between 1963 and 1999 by companies (or subsidiaries of
   companies) covered in COMPUSTAT. The sample in column 3 is all winning bids placed between
   1963 and 1999 by companies (or subsidiaries of companies) covered in COMPUSTAT. Sample sizes
   reported at the bottom of columns 2 and 3 are maximum sample sizes: not all variables are available
   for each observation. Data sources: Mineral Management Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3
   for details).
2. All nominal figures are deflated using the CPI (base year is 2000).
                     Table II: Firm-Level Capital Expenditures,
                              Cash Flow and Biddinga

                   Panel A: Total Capital Expenditures-Cash Flow Correlation

                             Dep. var.: Total Capital Expenditures

                              All Years           All Years        Bidding Years       Winning Years

                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)

     Cash flow                   .448                .421               .369               .366
                                (.046)              (.046)             (.069)             (.070)

     Tobin’s Q                                       .141               .070               .072
                                                    (.048)             (.032)             (.035)

     Year F.E.?                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
     Firm F.E.?                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
     Sample size                2298                 2298               1017               960
     Adjusted R2                 .51                  .51                .59               .58


                    Panel B: Bidding-Total Capital Expenditures Correlation

     Dep. Var.:             Prob. Bidding     Prob. Winning        Amount Bid          Amount Won

                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)

     Capital expenditures        .047                .044               .515               .458
                                (.017)              (.016)             (.118)             (.112)

     Year F.E.?                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
     Firm F.E.?                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
     Sample size                2418                 2418               1041               980
     Adjusted R2                 .51                  .53                .70               .64


a
    Notes:
1. Panel A presents regressions of total capital expenditures on cash flow at the firm level. Panel B
   presents regressions of bidding probabilities, winning probabilities and total amount bid and won at
   the firm level. The firms included in the sample are those COMPUSTAT firms that have placed at
   least one bid in the MMS data between 1963 and 1999. Observations for these firms are included for
   all years in columns 1 and 2, only bidding years in column 3 and only winning years in column 4.
   Data sources: Mineral Management Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Total capital expenditures, cash flow, amount bid and amount won are all deflated by net property,
   plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. All are expressed in logarithms.
3. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm-level.
              Table III: Predicted Effect of Cash Flow:
                    Different Theoretical Models

                                           VARIABLE

                 Bid Price      Quantity     Success Probability            Profits

              Average   Total                Average        Total   Average           Total
                 I      N ∗I       N            p           N ∗p      π                Π
MODEL

                 ?       +         +             -           +          -              +
Credit                                      Diminishing
Constraints                                Returns (DR)    π-Max.     DR          π-Max.

                 ?       +         +           ?             +         ?               +
Mis-                                        DR and                  DR and
Measurement                                 Quality ↑      π-Max.   Quality ↑     π-Max.


                 ?       +         ?           -              -       -                 -
Free                                         DR and                 DR and
Cash Flow                                    Agency        Agency   Agency        Agency
                           Table IV: Firm Level Biddinga

                     Dep. Var:              Amount Bid          Amount Won

                                              (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)

                     Cash flow               .383                .381
                                            (.129)              (.132)

                     Cash flow-spline 1                .084                .007
                                                      (.159)              (.155)

                     Cash flow-spline 2                .898                1.04
                                                      (.346)              (.370)

                     cash flow-spline 3                .579                .634
                                                      (.379)              (.393)

                     Tobin’s Q               .029      -.01      .060      .006
                                            (.089)    (.102)    (.072)    (.093)

                     Year F.E.?              Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
                     Firm F.E.?              Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
                     Sample size             1031      1031      973       973
                     Adjusted R2              .69       .69      .636      .639


a
    Notes:
1. The table presents regressions of total amount bid and total amount won on cash flow at the firm
   level. The firms included in the sample are those COMPUSTAT firms that have placed at least one
   bid in the MMS data between 1963 and 1999. Observations for these firms are included only for
   bidding years in columns 1 and 2, and only for winning years in columns 3 and 4. Data sources:
   Mineral Management Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Cash flow, amount bid and amount won are all deflated by net property, plant and equipment at
   the beginning of the fiscal year. All are expressed in logarithms. We use a linear spline of the
   cash flow variable in columns 2 and 4. “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash flow-spline 2,” and “cash flow-
   spline 3” respectively correspond to the 1ow cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of the cash
   flow distribution), the medium cash flow levels (between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash flow
   distribution) and the high cash flow levels (above 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution).
3. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm-level.
                            Table V: Price versus Quantity
                                  Firm Level Dataa

                                     Panel A: Price Effect

       Dep. Var.:               Amount Bid/                          Amount Won/
                            Number of Tracts Bid On               Number of Tracts Won

                             (1)              (2)                   (3)                (4)

       Cash flow             .300                                  .336
                            (.085)                                (.087)

       Cash flow-spline 1                     -.129                                -.136
                                             (.104)                               (.114)

       Cash flow-spline 2                     .901                                 .993
                                             (.229)                               (.246)

       Cash flow-pline 3                      .810                                 .985
                                             (.226)                               (.253)

       Tobin’s Q             .069             -.008                .053            -.048
                            (.055)           (.059)               (.051)          (.0549)

       Year F.E.?            Yes             Yes                   Yes             Yes
       Firm F.E.?            Yes             Yes                   Yes             Yes
       Sample size           1031            1031                  973             973
       Adjusted R2           .858            .862                  .856            .836


a
    Notes:
1. Panel A presents regressions of total amount bid (total amount won) per bid on (won) tract on cash
   flow at the firm level. The firms included in the sample are those COMPUSTAT firms that have
   placed at least one bid in the MMS data between 1963 and 1999. Observations for these firms are
   included only for bidding years in columns 1 and 2, and only for winning years in columns 3 and 4.
   Data sources: Mineral Management Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Cash flow, amount bid and amount won are deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the
   beginning of the fiscal year. Cash flow, amount bid per number of tracts bid on, and amount won per
   number of tracts won are all expressed in logarithms. We use a linear spline of the cash flow variable
   in columns 2 and 4. “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash flow-spline 2,” and “cash flow-spline 3” respectively
   correspond to the 1ow cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of the cash flow distribution), the
   medium cash flow levels (between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution) and the high
   cash flow levels (above 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution).
3. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm-level.
                      Table V (cont.): Price versus Quantity
                                Firm Level Dataa

                                   Panel B: Quantity Effect

                    Dep. Var.:                    Number of Tracts
                                               Bid On          Won

                                             (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)

                    Cash flow               .083                   .044
                                           (.122)                 (.115)

                    Cash flow-spline 1                .213                  .143
                                                     (.139)                (.128)

                    Cash flow-spline 2                -.003                 .049
                                                     (.297)                (.287)

                    Cash flow-spline 3                -.231                 -.351
                                                     (.273)                (.274)

                    Tobin’s Q               -.039     .002         .007     .054
                                           (.060)    (.067)       (.048)   (.058)

                    Year F.E.?              Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes
                    Firm F.E.?              Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes
                    Sample size             1031      1031         973       973
                    Adjusted R2             .608      .608         .576     .576


a
    Notes:
1. Panel B presents regressions of number of tracts bid on (won) on cash flow at the firm level. The
   firms included in the sample are those COMPUSTAT firms that have placed at least one bid in the
   MMS data between 1963 and 1999. Observations for these firms are included only for bidding years in
   columns 1 and 2, and only for winning years in columns 3 and 4. Data sources: Mineral Management
   Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. Cash
   flow, number of tracts bid on and number of tracts won are all expressed in logarithms. We use a linear
   spline of the cash flow variable in columns 2 and 4. “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash flow-spline 2,” and
   “cash flow-spline 3” respectively correspond to the 1ow cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of
   the cash flow distribution), the medium cash flow levels (between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash
   flow distribution) and the high cash flow levels (above 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution).
3. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm-level.
                                  Table VI: Tract Level Bidsa

                                              Panel A: All Bids

                                Dependent Variable: Bid Price Per Acre

                                        (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)

           Cash flow                    .108     .099     .102     .062
                                       (.049)   (.049)   (.048)   (.045)

           Cash flow-spline 1                                               .013     .023     .015
                                                                           (.060)   (.053)   (.054)

           Cash flow-spline 2                                               .503     .512     .513
                                                                           (.210)   (.204)   (.226)

           Cash flow-spline 3                                               .244     -.117    -.372
                                                                           (.244)   (.191)   (.198)

           Tobin’s Q                    -.095    -.102    -.101    -.092    -.118    -.083   -.041
                                       (.044)   (.045)   (.045)   (.044)   (.052)   (.054)   (.05)

           Monthly oil price                     .412     .397     .290              .280
                                                (.102)   (.122)   (.108)            (.107)

           County success rate                           .504      .494              .493     .458
                                                         (.11)    (.093)            (.093)   (.095)

           Tract size                                    -.254     -.241             -.241    -.240
                                                         (.04)    (.037)            (.037)   (.038)
           Tract depth?                 No        No      Yes       Yes     No        Yes      Yes
           Contract characteristics?    No        No      No        Yes     No        Yes      Yes
           Firm F.E.*
           Monthly oil price?            No        No      No       No       No       No      Yes
           Year F.E.?                   Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
           Firm F.E.?                   Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
           Sample Size                 21340     20972   20188    19184    21340    19184    19184
           Adjusted R2                  .700      .701    .710     .717     .700     .717     .725

  a
      Notes:
   1. The sample in Panel A are all bids by COMPUSTAT firms between 1963 and 1999. The sample in
      Panel B are all winning bids by COMPUSTAT firms between 1963 and 1999. Data sources: Mineral
      Management Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
   2. Tract depth includes control for the minimum and maximum depth of the tract. Contract charac-
      teristics include dummy variables for royalty rate, rental rate and length of lease. Monthly oil price
      refers to the price of a barrel of oil in the month the tract was auctioned off. Country success rate
      is defined as the fraction of productive tracts among all the tracts that were auctioned off in that
      county prior to that tract. “2nd highest bid” refers to the second highest bid on the tract. It is set
      to zero if there are no other bids. “Sole bidder” is a dummy variable that equals 1 if there were no
      other bids.
Notes continued on next page.
                           Table VI(cont.): Tract Level Bidsa

                                          Panel B: Winning Bids

                             Dependent Variable: Bid Price Per Acre

                                  (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)

     Cash flow                    .159      .154     .159     .117
                                 (.062)    (.064)   (.059)   (.049)

     Cash flow-spline 1                                                .069     .078    .054      .038
                                                                      (.063)   (.057)   (.06)    (.046)

     Cash flow-spline 2                                                .589     .564     .788     .499
                                                                      (.245)   (.223)   (.269)   (.209)

     Cash flow-spline 3                                                .280     -.085    -.270    -.093
                                                                      (.265)   (.214)   (.248)   (.181)

     Tobin’s Q                    -.124     -.137    -.139    -.137    -.148    -.125    -.104    -.115
                                 (.046)     (.05)   (.047)   (.047)   (.058)   (.058)   (.054)   (.049)

     2nd highest bid                                                                              .415
                                                                                                 (.012)

     Sole bidder                                                                                 1.294
                                                                                                 (.077)

     Monthly oil price                      .178     .242     .140              .131              -.069
                                           (.114)   (.154)   (.153)            (.153)            (.146)

     County success rate                             .638     .575              .573     .539     .537
                                                    (.166)   (.130)            (.131)   (.133)   (.092)

     Tract size                                      -.218    -.210             -.210    -.209    -.260
                                                    (.041)   (.039)            (.039)   (.039)   (.041)

     Tract depth?                 No         No      Yes      Yes      No       Yes      Yes      Yes
     Contract characteristics?    No         No      No       Yes      No       Yes      Yes      Yes
     Firm F.E.*
     Monthly oil price?            No        No       No       No       No       No      Yes       No
     Year F.E.?                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
     Firm F.E.?                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
     Sample size                 14032     13668    13104    12765    14032    12765    12765    12765
     Adjusted R2                  .715      .717     .723     .729     .715     .729     .733     .733
a
    Notes (continued):
3. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. Bid
   price per acre and monthly oil price are expressed in $2000. Tract size is measured in acres. Cash flow,
   bid price per acre, tract size, monthly oil price and 2nd highest bid are all expressed in logarithms.
   We use a linear spline of the cash flow variable in columns 5 to 7 (Panel A) and 5 to 8 (Panel B).
   “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash flow-spline 2,” and “cash flow-spline 3” respectively correspond to the
   1ow cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of the cash flow distribution), the medium cash flow
   levels (between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution) and the high cash flow levels
   (above 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution).
4. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm level.
                                 Table VII: Tract Level Characteristicsa

     Dep. Var.:            Tract Size          Presence             County               Number              Next
                                              in County             Success              of Bids             Bid

                           (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)         (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)

     Cash flow             .010     .018      .145      .344      -.010    -.011        .163     .149     -.005    .001
                          (.015)   (.015)    (.940)    (.549)    (.013)   (.012)       (.070)   (.061)   (.082)   (.089)

     Tobin’s Q             .005     -.001    3.683     2.038      -.022    -.013        -.102    -.070    -.160    -.113
                          (.006)   (.007)   (1.381)    (.528)    (.010)   (.010)       (.081)   (.060)   (.111)   (.130)

     Monthly oil price     -.034             1.683                -.029                1.123             1.072
                          (.028)            (1.548)              (.036)                (.174)            (.260)

     Firm F.E.*
     Monthly oil price?     No      Yes        No       Yes        No      Yes           No      Yes      No      Yes
     Year F.E.?            Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
     Firm F.E.?            Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
     Sample size          20984    20984     20408     20408     20199    20199        20984    20984    3736     3736
     Adjusted R2           .060     .066      .519      .576      .285     .298         .317     .321    .707     .715


a
    Notes:
1. The sample is all bids by COMPUSTAT firms between 1963 and 1999 in columns 1 to 8 and all winning bids in auctions
   where there was a second bidder in columns 9 and 10. Data sources: Mineral Management Services and COMPUSTAT
   (see Section 3 for details).
2. “Presence in county” represents the number of tracts previously won by that firm in that county in prior auctions (we
   also control in columns 3 and 4 for the total number of tracts auctioned off in that county in prior auctions). “County
   success” is defined as the fraction of productive tracts among all the tracts that were auctioned off in that county prior
   to that tract. “Number of bids” is the number of independent bids the tract received. “Next bid” refers to the second
   highest bid on the tract. “Monthly oil price” refers to the price of a barrel of oil in the month the tract was auctioned
   off.
3. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. Tract size is measured
   in acres. Cash flow, tract size, next bid and monthly oil price are all expressed in logarithms.
4. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm level.
                                Table VIII: Tract Level Productivitya

                               Dependent Variable: Productive Tract? (Y=1)

                              OLS        IV      Reduced       OLS        IV      OLS        IV       OLS        IV
                                                  Form

                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)

         Bid price            .088      -.137                  .089      -.145     .089     -.126     .088      -.161
         per acre            (.004)    (.082)                 (.004)    (.090)    (.004)   (.087)    (.004)    (.115)

         Cash flow-                                 .013
         spline 1                                 (.015 )

         Cash flow-                                -.118
         spline 2                                 (.052)

         Cash flow-                                .018
         spline 3                                 (.049)

         Monthly oil price                                     .080      .177      .062     .142      .032      .085
                                                              (.033)    (.049)    (.035)   (.045)    (.039)    (.042)

         Tobin’s Q                                                                                    -.025     -.041
                                                                                                     (.012)    (.014)

         Tract char’s?        No        No          No         No        No        Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
         Contract char’s?     No        No          No         No        No        No        No       Yes       Yes
         Year F.E.?           Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
         Firm F.E.?           Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
         Sample size         21340     21374       21340      20972     20972     20972     20972    19946     19946
a
    Notes:
1. The table presents regressions of tract-level productivity on bid price and cash flow. The sample is all bids by COM-
   PUSTAT firms between 1963 and 1999. The dependent variable in all columns is a dummy variable that equals 1 if
   the tract was designated as productive before the end of the exploration period. Data sources: Mineral Management
   Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Tract characteristics include tract size, minimum and maximum depth. Contract characteristics include dummy vari-
   ables for royalty rate, rental rate and length of lease. Monthly oil price refers to the price of a barrel of oil in the month
   the tract was auctioned off. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal
   year. Tract size is measured in acres. Cash flow, bid price per acre, tract size, monthly oil price are all expressed in
   logarithms.
3. We use a linear spline of the cash flow variable as control in the reduced form regression (column 3) and as instrument
   for bid price per acre in the IV regressions (columns 2, 5, 7 and 9). “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash flow-spline 2,” and
   “cash flow-spline 3” respectively correspond to the 1ow cash flow levels (below the 33rd percentile of the cash flow
   distribution), the medium cash flow levels (between 33rd and 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution) and the high
   cash flow levels (above 66th percentile of the cash flow distribution).
4. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm level except in the IV regressions.
                        Table IX: Firm Level Productivitya

                         Dep. Var.: Number of Productive Leases

                                               Unweighted         Ownership
                                                                  Weighted

                                               (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)

                      Cash flow               -.243              -.219
                                             (.681)             (.331)

                      Cash flow-spline 1                .342               -.128
                                                       (.867)             (.451)

                      Cash flow-spline 2                -5.96              -1.99
                                                       (4.99)             (2.80)

                      Cash flow-spline 3                .776               .415
                                                       (1.50)             (.952)

                      Year F.E.?              Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes
                      Firm F.E.?              Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes
                      Sample size             1033     1033      1033     1033
                      Adj. R2                 .510     .520       463     .462
a
    Notes:
1. The table presents regressions of total number of productive leases on cash flow at the firm level. The
   dependent variable is the number of tracts bid on in a given year that ended up being productive.
   Cash flow is measured in the year the bids for these tracts were placed. Columns 1 and 2 present
   simple counts; columns 3 and 4 present ownership-weighted counts, where ownership is the fraction
   of ownership the firm has in each bid. The firms included in the sample are those COMPUSTAT
   firms that have placed at least one bid in the MMS data between 1963 and 1999. Observations for
   these firms are included only for bidding years. Data sources: Mineral Management Services and
   COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
2. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. Cash
   flow is expressed in logarithm.
3. We use a linear spline of the cash flow variable in columns 2 and 4. “Cash flow-spline 1”, “cash
   flow-spline 2,” and “cash flow-spline 3” respectively correspond to the 1ow cash flow levels (below the
   33rd percentile of the cash flow distribution), the medium cash flow levels (between 33rd and 66th
   percentile of the cash flow distribution) and the high cash flow levels (above 66th percentile of the
   cash flow distribution).
4. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm-level.
                        Table X: Total Resources Found in Tract a

Dep. Var. :                                Gas Production                               Oil Production

                                    (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Bid price                          -.005               -.024                  -.146                 -.035
Per acre                          (.044)              (.044)                 (.228)                (.237)

Cash flow                                    .026                -.071                   -5.098              -.320
                                             (.16)              (.175)                  (1.967)             (1.962)

Monthly oil price                  -.068     -.162                            -2.648     -8.220
                                   (.56)    (.832)                           (3.496)     (4.87)

Months producing dummies?           Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
Firm F.E.*                          No       No        Yes       Yes           No         No        Yes          Yes
Monthly oil price?
Year F.E.?                         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
Firm F.E.?                         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
Sample Size                        1845      1260      1845     1260           493        316        493          316
Adjusted R2                        .367      .374      .365     .372          .428       .473       .528         .671
 a
     Notes:
 1. The table presents regressions of tract-level gas and oil production on bid price and cash flow. The
    sample is productive tracts bid on by COMPUSTAT firms since 1978. Data sources: Mineral Man-
    agement Services and COMPUSTAT (see Section 3 for details).
 2. Monthly oil price refers to the price of a barrel of oil in the month the tract was auctioned off. Months
    producing dummies are dummy variables for the number of months of reported production.
 3. Cash flow is deflated by net property, plant and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal year. Cash
    flow, bid price per acre, monthly oil price and production of gas and oil are all expressed in logarithms.
 4. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the error term at the firm level.
                  Table XI: Bidding Before and After 1985 a

                                         Dep. Var.: Bid Price Per Acre

                  Sample:                  All Bids           Winning Bids


                                       Pre-85   Post-85   Pre-85     Post-85

                                        (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)

                  Cash flow-spline 1    -.128    .037      -.133       .061
                                       (.103)    (.06)    (.174)      (.065)

                  Cash flow-spline 2    .618     .591     .884         .765
                                       (.307)   (.339)    (.41)       (.356)

                  Cash flow-spline 3    -.163    -.277     -.038       -.213
                                       (.208)   (.244)    (.282)      (.266)

                  Year F.E.?           Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
                  Firm F.E.?           Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
                  Sample size          8848     10336     5106         7659
                  Adj. R2              .398      .177     .453         .197

a
    Notes:
1. This table replicates the regressions in column 5 of Panels A and B of Table 6 but breaks down the
   sample into pre and post 1985. See notes to that table for details.
              Table XII: Productivity Before and After 1985a

                            Dep. Var.: Productive Tract? (Y=1)


                                              Pre-85                 Post-85

                                          OLS       IV      OLS            IV

                                           (1)      (2)      (3)           (4)

              Bid price                    .104     -.149    .061         .109
              per acre                    (.004)   (.221)   (.006)       (.123)

              Monthly oil price            .256     .448     -.106        -.103
                                          (.069)   (.182)   (.037)       (.041)

              Contract characteristics?    Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes
              Tract characteristics?       Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes
              Year F.E.?                   Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes
              Firm F.E.?                   Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes
              Sample size                 9528     9528     10418        10418
              Adj. R2                     0.190             0.129


a
    Notes:
1. This table replicates the regressions in columns 8 and 9 of Table 8 but breaks down the sample into
   pre and post 1985. See notes to that table for details.
