                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PROPRIETARY VS. PUBLIC DOMAIN LICENSING OF
                         SOFTWARE AND RESEARCH PRODUCTS

                                          Alfonso Gambardella
                                            Bronwyn H. Hall

                                          Working Paper 11120
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11120


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




Conversations with Paul David on this topic have helped greatly in clarifying the issues and problems. Both
authors acknowledge his contribution with gratitude; any remaining errors and inconsistencies are entirely
our responsibility. We are also grateful to Jennifer Kuan for bringing some of the open source literature to
our attention. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Alfonso Gambardella and Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Proprietary vs. Public Domain Licensing of Software and Research Products
Alfonso Gambardella and Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 11120
February 2005
JEL No. O310, O340, L220, L860

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the production of knowledge when many researchers or inventors are involved, in a setting

where tensions can arise between individual public and private contributions. We first show that

without some kind of coordination, production of the public knowledge good (science or research

software or database) is sub-optimal. Then we demonstrate that if "lead" researchers are able to

establish a norm of contribution to the public good, a better outcome can be achieved, and we show

that the General Public License (GPL) used in the provision of open source software is one of such

mechanisms. Our results are then applied to the specific setting where the knowledge being produced

is software or a database that will be used by academic researchers and possibly by private firms,

using as an example a product familiar to economists, econometric software. We conclude by

discussing some of the ways in which pricing can ameliorate the problem of providing these products

to academic researchers.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California-Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

Alfonso Gambardella
Università Commerciale L. Bocconi
gambardella@unibocconi.it
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004



1     Introduction

In the modern academic research setting, many disciplines produce software and

databases as a by-product of their own activities and also use the software and data

generated by others. As Dalle (2003) and Maurer (2002) have documented, many of these

research products are distributed and transferred to others using institutions that range

from commercial exploitation to “free” forms of open source. Many of the structures

used in the latter case resemble the traditional ways in which the “Republic of Science”

has ensured that research spillovers are available at low cost to all. But in some cases,

moves toward closing the source code and commercial development take place, often

resulting either in the disappearance of open source versions or in “forking”, where an

open source solution survives simultaneously with the provision of a closed commercial

version of the same product. This has also created tensions between the reward systems

of the “Republic of Science” and the private sector, especially when the production of

research software or the creation of scientific databases are carried out in academic and

scientific research environments (see also Hall, 2004).

        As these inputs to scientific research have become more essential and their value

has grown, a number of questions and problems have arisen surrounding their provision.

How do we ensure that incentives are in place to encourage their supply? How does

market and non-market production of these knowledge inputs interact? In this paper, we

address some of these questions. We develop a framework that highlights the difficulties

to sustain the production of knowledge when it is the outcome of a collective enterprise.

Since the lack of coordination among the individual knowledge producers is typically

seen as the culprit for the under-provision of public knowledge, the latter can be

sustained by institutional devices that encourage such a coordination. A key idea of the

paper is that the General Public License (GPL) used in the provision of open source


                                                  1
Gambardella and Hall                                                                      November 2004


software is one of such mechanisms. We then discuss another limitation in the

production of this type of knowledge. To make it useful for commercial or other goals,

one needs complementary investments (e.g. development costs). If the knowledge is

freely available there could be too many potential producers of such investments which

reduces the incentives of all of them to make the investments in the first place.

Paradoxically, if the knowledge was protected, its access would be more costly, which

may produce the necessary rents to enhance the complementary investments. But

protecting upstream knowledge has many drawbacks, and we argue that a more effective

solution is to protect the downstream industry products. Finally, we discuss how our

framework and predictions apply to the provision of scientific software and databases.

         An example of the difference between free and commercial software solutions

that should be familiar to most economists and scientific researchers is the scientific

typesetting and word processing package Tex.1 This system and its associated set of

fonts was originally the elegant invention of the Stanford computer scientist Donald

Knuth, also famous as the author of the Art of Computer Programming, the first volume of

which was published in 1969. Initially available on mainframes, and now widely

distributed on UNIX and personal computer systems, TeX facilitated the creation of

complex mathematical formulas in a word-processed manuscript and the subsequent

production of typeset camera-ready output. It uses a set of text-based computer

commands to accomplish this task rather than enabling users to enter their equations via

the graphical WYSIWYG interface now familiar on the personal computer.2 Although



         1   This brief history of TeX is drawn from the TeX User’s Group website, http://www.tug.org. In

giving a simplified overview, we have omitted the role played by useful programs based on TeX such as

LaTeX, etc. See the website for more information.
         2   WYSIWYG is a widely used acronym in computer programming design that stands for “What

You See Is What You Get”.

                                                         2
Gambardella and Hall                                                              November 2004


straightforward in concept, the command language is complex and not easily learned,

especially if the user does not use it on a regular basis. Although many academic users

still write in raw TeX in spite of the fact that they work on a system with a graphical

interface such as Windows, there now exists a commercial program, Scientific Word,

which provides a WYSIWYG environment for generating TeX documents, albeit at a

considerable price when compared to the freely distributed original.

        This example illustrates several features of the academic provision of software

that we will discuss in this paper. First, it shows that there is willingness to pay for ease

of software use even in the academic world and even if the software itself can be

obtained for free. Second, the most common way in which software and databases are

supplied to the academic market is a kind of hybrid between academic and commercial,

where they are sold in a price-discriminatory way that preserves access for the majority of

scientific users. Such products often begin as open source projects directed by a “lead”

user, because the culture of open science is quite strong in the developers and

participants. Nevertheless, they are eventually forced into the private sector as the market

grows and non-developer users demand support, documentation, and enhancements to

the ease of use.

        In the next section we discuss some basic aspects of the problem of creating

incentives for the production of knowledge when many producers are involved. Section

3 discusses our analytic framework which shows that without some kind of coordination,

production of the public knowledge good (science or research software or database) is

sub-optimal, and that the GPL can solve at least in part the problem. Section 4 focuses

on complementary investments. Sections 5 and 6 apply our framework to the specific

setting where the knowledge being produced is software or a database that will be used

by academic researchers and possibly also by private firms, using as an example a product

familiar to economists, econometric software. We conclude by discussing some of the

                                                   3
Gambardella and Hall                                                              November 2004


ways in which pricing can ameliorate the problem of providing these products to

academic researchers. The Appendix develops the technical details of our model in

Section 3.


2     Incentives for Knowledge Production with Many Producers

The design of incentive systems that reward inventors and knowledge producers and

encourage dissemination of their output has been a familiar issue to economists and

other scholars for a long time (e.g., Nelson, 1959; Arrow, 1962; Scotchmer, 1991). If

anything, the issue has become more important today with the advent of the internet and

other computer networking methods. The principal effect of the increase in computer

networking and internet use is that it lowers the marginal cost of distributing codified

knowledge to the point where it is essentially zero. This in turn has the potential to

reduce incentives for production of such knowledge or to increase the demands of the

producers for protection of their property rights to the knowledge. Hence there is a felt

need for undertaking additional efforts to understand the production of knowledge, and

for thinking about new approaches to policy.

        To address these issues, we must first ask what motivates the producers of

knowledge. Key factors identified in the literature are curiosity and a taste for science,

money, the desire for fame and reputation, and as a secondary goal, promotion or tenure

(Stephan 1996). The latter two goals are usually achieved via priority in publication, that is,

being the first to get a discovery into print. Although monetary income is clearly a partial

motivation in the search for reputation and promotion, considerable evidence exists that

for researchers in universities and public research organizations with some level of

guaranteed income, the first motive − intellectual curiosity − is of overriding importance

(e.g., Isabelle 2004). For this type of researcher, the desire for financial rewards is often

driven by the desire to fund their own scientific research (Lee 2000) rather than by


                                                   4
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


consumption per se. Scientists’ motivations also are coloured by the culture in which they

are embedded, with traditional norms giving way to a more market-oriented view among

some younger scientists today (Isabelle 2004, Owen-Smith and Powell 2001).

        Several scholars (e.g., Merton, 1957 and 1968; David 1993) have described the

two regimes that allocate resources for the creation of new knowledge: one is the system

of granting intellectual property rights, as exemplified by modern patent and copyright

systems, the other is the “open science” regime, as often found in the realm of “pure”

scientific research and sometimes in realm of commercial technological innovation, often

in infant industries (Allen 1983). Today we also see this system to a certain extent in the

production of free and open source software. The first system assigns clear property

rights to newly created knowledge that allow the exclusion of others from using that

knowledge, as well as the trading and licensing of the knowledge. As is well-known, such

a system provides powerful incentives for the creation of knowledge, at the cost of

creating temporary monopolies that will tend to restrict output and raise price.

Additionally, in such systems, the transaction costs of combining pieces of knowledge or

building on another’s knowledge may be rather high, and in some cases achieving first or

even second best incentives via ex post licensing may be impossible (Scotchmer 1991).

The use of other firms’ knowledge output will often require payment or reciprocal cross-

licensing, which means negotiation costs have to be incurred. Finally, obtaining IP rights

usually requires publication, but only of codified knowledge, and trade secrecy protection

is often used in addition.

        The second set of institutional arrangements, sometimes referred to as the norms

governing the “Republic of Science,” generates incentives and rewards indirectly: the

creation of new knowledge is rewarded by increased reputation, further access to

research resources, and possible subsequent financial returns in the form of increased

salary, prizes, and the like (Merton 1957, 1968). This system relies to some extent on the

                                                 5
Gambardella and Hall                                                                        November 2004


fact that individuals often invent or create for nonpecuniary reasons like curiosity.

Dissemination of research results and knowledge is achieved at relatively low cost,

because assigning the “moral rights” to the first publisher of an addition to the body of

knowledge gives creators an incentive to disseminate rapidly and broadly. Therefore, in

this system the use of others’ output is encouraged and relatively cheap, with the cost

being appropriate citation and possibly some reciprocity in sharing knowledge. But it is

evident that this system cannot capture the same level of private economic returns for

the creation of knowledge. Inventors must either donate their work or receive

compensation as clients of public or private patrons.3

         Hall (2004) highlights the tension that arises when these two systems come up

against each other. For example, it is common for the difference in norms and lack of

understanding of the potential partner’s needs and goals to produce breakdowns in

negotiations between industry and academe. These breakdowns can have an economic as

well as cultural cause, as shown by Anton and Yao (2002) in a study of contracting under

asymmetric information about the value of the knowledge to be exchanged. In addition

there is the simple fact that both systems rely on reciprocal behaviour between both

parties to a knowledge exchange, so that contracting between participants in the two

difference systems becomes subject to misunderstanding or worse. This is illustrated by

the reaction of the genomic industry in the U.S. when asked to take out licenses to

university-generated technology: once the university starts acting like a private sector

firm, there is a temptation to start charging them for the use of the outputs of industry

research, and consequent negative effects on researchers who still believed themselves

part of the “open science” regime.



         3
             We can subsume both cases as instances of “patronage” – self patronage of the donated efforts

is a special case of this. See David (1993) and Dasgupta and David (1994).


                                                          6
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


        In fact, notice should also be taken of an important variation of the “open

science” regime for the sharing of knowledge production outputs, one which has existed

many times in the development of industry throughout history: the free exchange and

spillover of knowledge via personnel contact and movement, as well as reverse

engineering, without resort to intellectual property protection. This has become known

as the system for “collective invention”. Examples include the collective invention in the

steel and iron industry described by Allen (1983) (see also Von Hippel, 1987), the

development of the semiconductor industry in Silicon Valley (Hall and Ziedonis 2001),

the silk industry in Lyons during the ancien regime that was described by Foray and Hilaire-

Perez (2004), and the collective activities of communities of users who freely distribute

information to the manufacturers (Harhoff, Henkel, and Von Hippel, 2003). In these

environments, most of which are geographically localized innovation areas with social as

well as business relationships that build trust (or at least knowledge of whom to trust),

the incentive system for the production and exchange of knowledge is somewhat different

than in either of the other two systems.

        The first and most obvious difference is that the production of “research” in the

industry setting is supported not by public or private patronage but by commercial firms

that finance it by the sale of end products that incorporate their discovery. Because

rewards come from the sale of products rather than information itself, as they do in the

conventional IP-based system, the sharing of information about incremental innovations

is motivated by different considerations than in the case of the OS regime. Although

priority is not per se valuable except in the sense that it may confer lead time for

production, shared knowledge, especially about incremental improvements to a complex

product, is perceived to be useful and essential for the progress of the entire industry

including the firm that shares the knowledge. When an industry is advancing and growing

rapidly, the desire to exclude competitors from the marketplace is not as strong as when

                                                  7
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


an industry reaches maturity. An implication is that this form of free exchange of

knowledge tends to collapse, or is unstable over time, as has happened in many of the

historical examples. In the next section we will try to capture this idea and discuss some

conditions under which the academic or industry-based OS regime might break down.


3     “Public Domain” vs. “Proprietary” Research

3.1     Configuration of the Open Source Equilibrium

When do the different systems of knowledge generation and sharing discussed in the

previous section develop, and when they might be expected to break down? In this

section we address these questions. To make our argument more precise we provide a

simple formalization in the Appendix. Below we discuss the intuitions and the

implications of our model.

        As discussed in the previous section, many researchers face a trade-off. They can

put a given research outcome in the public domain or seek private profits from it. As a

stylized representation, in the former case they enjoy no economic rents, while in the

latter they restrict public diffusion of their findings, seek property rights on them, and

gain monetary income. We label the first mode as “public domain” (PD), and the second

as “proprietary research” (PR). As also noted earlier, this framework encompasses many

situations, such as academic scientists who could publish their research findings vis-à-vis

holding patents or other property rights on them (Dasgupta and David, 1994); software

developers who contribute to open source software as opposed to patenting their

programs (Lerner and Tirole, 2002); user-inventors who transfer their inventions to the

producers rather than protecting them as intellectual property and then selling them

(Von Hippel, 1988; Von Hippel and Von Krogh, 2003; Harhoff, Henkel, and Von

Hippel, 2003); communities of technologists who coordinate to share their “collective”




                                                  8
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


inventions, as opposed to keeping their knowledge secret (Allen, 1983; Nuvolari, 2004;

Foray and Hilaire-Perez, 2004).

        Like any individuals, researchers gain utility from monetary income, but their

utility also increases with the stock of public domain (PD) knowledge. Their benefits

from this knowledge are from two sources: their own contributions and other

contributions. First, they enjoy utility from the fact that they contribute to public

knowledge. This is because they “like” contributing to PD knowledge per se, or because

they enjoy utility from a larger stock of public knowledge and hence they wish to

contribute to its increase. There could also be instrumental reasons. Contribution to

public knowledge makes their research visible, which provides fame, glory or potential

future monetary incomes in the form of increased salary, funding for their research, or

consultancy. Second, the researchers gain utility from the fact that others contribute to

PD knowledge. Again this could be because they care about the state of public

knowledge. In addition, a greater stock of public knowledge provides a larger basis for

their own research, which implies that, other things being equal, they would like others

contribute to it.

        We assume that the benefits from the contributions of other researchers to

public knowledge will be enjoyed whether one works under PD or in the proprietary

research regime (PR). This implies that a researcher will operate under PD if the benefit

that she enjoys from her public contribution is higher than the foregone monetary

income from not privatizing her findings. In the Appendix we show that in equilibrium

this is true of all the researchers that operate under PD, while the opposite is true of the

researchers that operate under PR. In general, the equilibrium will involve a share of

researchers operating under PD or PR that is between 0 and 1. The first prediction of

our analysis is then that the two regimes can co-exist, as we shall also see with some

examples in the following sections.

                                                  9
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


          Our model also predicts that new profit opportunities common to all the

researchers in a field reduce the share of PD researchers in equilibrium, while a stronger

taste for research (e.g. because of particular systems of academic values) raises it. There is

fairly widespread evidence that in fields like software or biotechnology there are

pressures on academic researchers to place their findings in a proprietary regime. Also,

our examples in the later sections show that shifts from academic to commercial

software are more prominent when the market demand for the products increase, which

raises the profitability of the programming efforts. Finally, there are several accounts of

the fact that tension between industrial research and academic norms become higher if

university access to IPRs is increased (Cohen et al 1998; Hall, Link, and Scott 2001;

Hertzfeld, Link, and Vonortas 2004; Cohen, Florida, and Randazzese 2004). As these

authors report, such tension has already been observed in the US, as the latter country

has pioneered the trend towards stronger IPRs and the use of intellectual property

protection by universities, but it is becoming more pronounced in Europe as well, as

European universities follow the path opened up by the US system (Geuna and Nesta

2004). Collins and Wakoh (1999) describe similar changes in Japan and describe how the

regime shift to patenting by universities is inconsistent with the previous system of

collaborative research with industry in that country, implying increasing stress for the

system.


3.2       Instability of Open Source Production

Our model also shows that the only way to get a stable equilibrium configuration with

individuals operating under open sharing rules is when there is coordination among

them. Otherwise, the sharing (cooperative) equilibrium tends to break down because

some individuals find it in their interest to defect. The instability of the open sharing

equilibrium is just an application of the famous principle by Mancur Olson (1971) that


                                                  10
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


without coordination the collective action is hard to sustain. Our contribution is simply

to highlight that Mancur Olson’s insight finds application to the analysis of the instability

of open systems. When many researchers contribute to PD knowledge, an individual

deviation to PR is typically negligible compared to the (discrete) jump in income offered

by proprietary regime. Thus, individually, the researchers always have an incentive to

deviate.

           Another way to see this point is that some of the tensions that are created in the

open research systems can be attributed to the asymmetry between the open and the

proprietary mode. The researchers shift to proprietary research only if individually

profitable. By contrast, in the collective production of knowledge, a desirable individual

outcome depends on the actions of others. In our framework this is because the

individuals care about the fact that others contribute to the stock of knowledge, and

because this may affect their benefits from their own contribution as well. As we show in

the Appendix, this creates situations in which the lack of coordination produces

individual incentives to deviate in spite of the fact that collectively the researchers would

like to produce under PD. The intuition is that a group of individuals can produce a

sizable increase in the stock of public knowledge if they jointly deviate from the PR

regime. Thus, if there was commitment among them to stay with the PD rules, they

could be better off than with private profits. In turn, this is because the larger the group

of people who deviate in a coordinated fashion, the higher the impact on the public

knowledge good, while the private profits, which do not depend as much on the

collective action, are not affected substantially by the joint movement of researchers

from one regime to the other. But even if they all prefer to stay with the PD system,

because of the larger impact of their PD contributions as a group, individually they have

an incentive to deviate because if the others stay with PD, the individual deviation does

not subtract that much from public knowledge, while it does produce a discrete jump in

                                                   11
Gambardella and Hall                                                                            November 2004


the individual’s private income. Since everyone knows that everyone else faces this

tension, and could deviate, it will be difficult to keep the researchers under the PD

system unless some explicit coordination or other mechanism is in place.

         Ultimately, this asymmetry in the stability of the two configurations suggests why

there may be a tendency to move from public to private production of knowledge, while

it is much harder to move back from private to public.. The implication is that there is

little need for policy if more proprietary research is desirable, as the latter is likely to arise

naturally from the individual actions. By contrast, policy or institutional devices that

could sustain the right amount of coordination is crucial if the system underinvests in

knowledge that is placed in the public domain.


3.3      Generalized Public License (Copyleft) as a Coordination Device

The Generalized Public License (GPL) used in open source software can be an effective

mechanism for obtaining the required coordination. As discussed by Lerner and Tirole

(2002) inter alia, with a GPL the producer of an open source program requires that all

modifications and improvements of the program is subject to the same rules of

openness, most notably the source code of all the modifications ought to be made

publicly available like the original program.4 To see how a GPL provides the

coordination to solve the Mancur Olson problem, imagine the following situation. There

is one researcher who considers whether to launch a new project or not. We call her the

“originator”. She knows that if she launches the project, others may follow with

additional contributions. The latter are the “contributors”. If the originator attaches a



         4   There are many variants of a GPL, with different possibilities of privatizing future contributions.

See for example Lerner and Tirole (2005). However, in this paper we want to focus on some broad

features of the effect of a GPL as a coordinating device, and therefore we simply consider the extreme case

in which the GPL prevents any privatization of the future contributions.


                                                            12
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004


GPL to the project, the contributors can only join under PD. If no GPL is attached they

have the option to privatize their contribution. Of course, once (and if) the project is

launched, the contributors always have the option not to join the project and work on

some alternative activities. Given the expected behavior of the contributors, the

originator will choose whether to launch the project or not. She also has potential

alternatives. If she decides to launch it she will choose whether to put her contribution

under PD or PR, and if the former she considers whether to attach a GPL to the project.

We can safely rule out the possibility that the originator operates under PR and attaches a

GPL to the project. It will be odd to think that she can enforce open source behavior

given that she does not abide by the same rules.

        The key implications of a GPL is that it increases the number of contributors

operating under PD. The intuition, which we formalize in the Appendix, is simple.

Without a GPL the contributors have three choices: work on the project under PD or

under PR, or not join because they have better alternatives. PD contributors to the

project will still choose PD if a GPL is imposed. If they preferred PD over both PR and

other alternatives, they will still prefer PD if the PR option is ruled out. Those who did

not join the project will not join with a GPL either. They preferred their alternatives over

PD and PR, and will still prefer them if PR is not an option. Finally, some of those who

joined under PR will join under PD instead, while others who joined under PR will no

longer join the project. As a result, a GPL reduces the total number of researchers who

join the project, but raises the number of researchers working under PD. The reduced

number of participants is consistent with the fact that the GPL is a restriction on the

behavior of the researchers. However, this is a small cost to the public diffusion of

knowledge because those who no longer participate would have not joined under PD. By

contrast, the GPL encourages some researchers who would not have published their

results without the GPL to do so.

                                                 13
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004


        Given the behavior of the contributors, will the originator launch the project and

issue a GPL? We know that the originator, like any other researcher, enjoys greater utility

from a larger size of the public knowledge stock. At the same time, she enjoys utility

from monetary income or, as we noted, from alternative projects. Here we want to

compare her choice when she can employ a GPL vis-à-vis a world in which there is no

GPL. With a GPL she knows that the number of contributors to public knowledge

increases, which in turn increases the size of the expected public knowledge stock when

compared to a no-GPL case. As a result, when choosing whether to launch the project

under PD with a GPL, under PD and no GPL, under PR, or work on alternative

projects, she knows that the GPL choice raises the future public knowledge stock in the

area while not raising her monetary income from the project or her utility from

alternatives. This makes it more likely that the originator will choose to work on the

project under PD cum GPL. More generally, a GPL will increase the number of projects

launched under PD and the size of the public knowledge contributions.

        To summarize, the way the GPL works is by giving rise to an implicit

coordination among a larger number of researchers to work on PD. The originator

knows that there will be researchers who would prefer PR but choose PD if the former

opportunity is not available, while all those who would choose PD will stick to it in any

case. This enlarges the number of expected PD researchers, thereby placing greater

advantages on the PD choice. Our intuition is that those with a strong taste for PD

research will always work under PD, whether there is a GPL or not. By contrast, those

with a high opportunity cost will never join the project. But those who have a small

opportunity cost, and a weak taste for PD research might contribute via PD if a GPL is

introduced. The GPL then lures people who are on the border between doing PD

research on the project or not. For example, a GPL may be crucial to enhance the

participation under PD of young researcher, who do not have significant opportunity

                                                14
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004


costs (e.g. because they do not yet have high external visibility), but who do not have a

strong taste for PD research either, and hence would privatize their findings if profitable

to do so. There might also be dynamic implications − e.g. the GPL helps young

researchers to “acquire” a taste for PD research. This might help create a system of

norms and values for public research that could sustain the collective action. We leave a

more thorough assessment of such dynamic implications to future research.


3.4     Nature and Consequences of the GPL Coordination

A GPL is most effective as a coordination device when the opportunity cost of the

individual researchers and the private profits from contributing to the project, are not

positively correlated. Suppose that they were. This could arise because there is some

common element between the two factors. For example, an individual researcher could

be effective in commercializing knowledge in any field because he belongs to institutions

(university or other) that encourage the commercialization of knowledge. In this case, the

contributors to the project, who have low opportunity costs, also have low private profits

from contributing to the project via PR. A GPL would not make a big difference because

a very large fraction of the contributors to the project will do so under PD since their

private rewards are low in any case. Hence, a GPL induces few researchers to switch

from PR to PD. In turn, this has a small effect on the choice of the originator to launch

the project under PD vis-à-vis PR because the number of additional PD contributors

with a GPL is small. By contrast, if they are not positively correlated, some of the

contributors to the project, who have low opportunity cost, will have high private

rewards from PR. They could be encouraged by a GPL to switch to PD. As a result, the

number of PD contributors could be sizably different with a GPL, with implied greater

opportunities for PD rather than PR research.




                                                15
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


        The independence between the opportunity cost and the private rewards, as

opposed to positive correlation, may be associated with the novelty of the project. When

the projects are in new areas, the opportunities of the individuals may change

substantially, and the researchers who might profit the most from the new projects can

be different from those who benefited in the old projects. New skills, or new forms of

learning are necessary in the new fields, and the people who have made substantial

investments in the old projects may have greater difficulties in the new areas. (See, for

example, Levinthal and March, 1993.) In these cases, researchers with low opportunity

costs may instead find that they have great opportunities to commercialize knowledge in

the new fields (high private rewards). Thus, the GPL is more likely to be a useful

coordination device when the project is in a new field rather than an incrementally

different one from previous projects, and when it is socially desirable to run these

projects under PD.

        Our mechanism relies on the fact that there is enforcement of the GPL. But can

the copy left system be enforced? In some settings people seem to abide by the copyleft

rules, as Lerner and Tirole (2002) have noted, in spite of the lack of legal enforcement. In

many situations, there may be a reputation effect involved when the copyleft agreement

is not complied with. In this respect, the reason why a copyleft license may be useful is

that without it, it may not be clear to the additional contributors whether the intention of

the initial developers of the project was to keep it under PD or not. But if the will is

made explicit, deviations may be seen as an obvious and explicit challenge to the social

norms, and this may be sanctioned by the community. The GPL then acts as a signal that

clears the stage from potential ambiguities about individual behavior and the respect of

the social norms. Even in science, if a researcher developed a certain result, others may

build on it, and privatize their contributions. This might be seen as a deviation from the

social norms. While this behavior could be sanctioned, according to the strength with

                                                 16
Gambardella and Hall                                                              November 2004


which the norms of open science are embedded in and pursued by the community, with

no explicit indication that the original contributor did not want future results from her

discoveries to be used for private purposes, the justification for the sanctions or the need

for them can be more ambiguous.

        A GPL removes ambiguity about the original intentions of the developers, and

any behavior that contradicts the GPL is more clearly seen as not proper. This reduces

privatization of future contributions compared to a situation with no GPL, increases the

expectations that more researcher will make their knowledge public, and, other things

being equal, creates greater incentives to make projects public in the first place. It is in

this respect that we think that explicit indications of the norms may be a stronger signal

than the mere reliance on the unwritten norms of open science or open source software.

        A related point is that the literature has typically been concerned with the need to

protect the private property of knowledge when this is necessary to enhance the

incentives to innovate. The inherent assumption is that when it is not privately protected,

the knowledge is by default public, and it enriches the public domain. Yet, our model

points out that this is not really true. The public nature of knowledge needs itself to be

protected when commitments to the production of knowledge in the public domain is

socially desirable. In other words, there is a need for making it explicit that the

knowledge has to remain public, and this calls for positive actions and institutions to

protect it. By not allowing for private property rights on some body of knowledge is not

equivalent to assuming that the knowledge will be in the public domain. One may then

need to assign property rights not just to private agents, but also to the public. For

example, the IPRs are typically thought as being property rights to private agents. But we

also need to have institutions that preserve the public character of knowledge. The

copyleft license is a beautiful example of this institutional device. A natural policy



                                                  17
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


suggestion is therefore to make it legal and enforceable as copyright, patents and other

private-based IPRs.


4     Complementary investments in open source production

Another feature of traditional open source or academic software production that we

alluded to in the introduction is that it normally requires additional investments that

enhance the usefulness and value of the scattered individual contributions, or it simply

requires investments to combine them. For example, while several individuals can

contribute to the development of a whole body of scientific knowledge, there must be

some stage in which the “pieces” are combined into useful products, systems, or

transferable knowledge. Some scientists or most likely some specialized agents, i.e.

academic licensing offices or firms, normally perform this function. A typical example is

when scientific knowledge needs substantial downstream investments to become

economically useful technologies or commercializable products. Thursby, Jensen, and

Thursby (2001) report that this is often the case for university research outputs. The

latter activities are normally performed by firms. In software, additional investments are

often required to enhance the usability of the software for those who did not develop it,

and to produce documentation and support. The need for additional investments in open

source production, or more generally in tasks that rely on public domain knowledge, has

some specific implications that we want to discuss in this section.

        The problem is that the (downstream) “assembling” agent needs some profits in

order to carry out the investments that are necessary to produce the complementary

downstream assets of the good. Since the downstream assembling agents are typically

firms, we now refer to them as the latter. There are two questions. First, the firm needs

to obtain some economic returns to finance its investment. Clearly, there are many ways

to moderate its potential monopoly power so that the magnitude of the rents will be


                                                 18
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


sufficient to make the necessary investments but not high enough to produce serious

extra-normal profits. However, it would be difficult for the firm to obtain such rents if it

operated under perfect competition, or if it operated under an open, public domain

system itself.

        The second question is more subtle. The firm uses the public domain

contributions of the individual agents (software programmers, scientists, etc.) as inputs in

its production process. If these contributions are freely available in the public domain,

and particularly they are not available on an exclusive basis, many downstream firms can

make use of them. As a result, the downstream production can easily become a free

entry, perfectly competitive world, with many firms having access to the widely available

knowledge inputs. If so, each firm could not make enough rents to carry out the

complementary investments. This would be even harder for the individual knowledge

producers who are normally scattered and have no resources to cover the fixed set-up

costs for the downstream investments. The final implication is that the downstream

investments will not be undertaken, or they will be insufficient. Of course, there can be

other factors that would provide the firms with barriers to entry, thereby ensuring that

they can enjoy some rents to make their investments. However, in productions where the

knowledge inputs are crucial (e.g. software), the inability to use them somewhat

exclusively can generate enough threats of widespread entry and excessive competition to

discourage the complementary investments.

        Paradoxically, if the knowledge inputs were produced under proprietary rules, the

producers of them could charge monopoly prices (e.g. because they could obtain an

exclusive license), or at least enjoy some positive price cost margins. This raises the costs

of the inputs. In turn, this heightens barriers to entry in the downstream sector, and

adjusts the level of downstream investment upward. In other words, if the inputs are

freely available there could be excessive downstream competition, which may limit the

                                                 19
Gambardella and Hall                                                                          November 2004


complementary investments. If they are offered under proprietary rules, the costs of

acquiring the inputs are higher, which curbs entry and competition, and allows the

downstream firms to make enough rents to carry out such investments.5

         But the privatization of the upstream inputs has several limitations. For one, as

Heller and Eisenberg (1998) have noted, the complementarity among the “pieces” of

upstream knowledge produced by the different individuals can give rise to the so-called

problem of the anti-commons. That is, after all the other rights have been collected

under a unique proprietorship, the final owner of a set of complementary inputs can

enjoy enormous monopoly power. This is because by withholding his own contribution,

he can forestall the realization of the whole technology, especially when the

complementarity is so tight that each individual contribution is crucial to make the whole

system work. The possibility of ex-post hold-up can discourage the effort to collect all

the complementary rights ex-ante, and therefore prevent the development of the

technology. Another limitation of the privatization of the upstream inputs is the one

discussed in the previous section. With copyleft agreements, more people can contribute

to the public good. The decentralized nature of the process by which scientists or open

source software producers operate has typically implied that the network of public

contributors to a given field can be so large that the overall improvements can be higher

than what can be obtained within individual organizations, including quite large ones.

Some evidence that open source projects also increase the quality of software output has

been supplied by Kuan (2002).

         One solution to the problem of paying for complementary downstream

investment is allowing for property rights, and particularly intellectual property rights, on



         5   This argument should be familiar as it is the same as the argument used by some to justify Bayh-

Dole and the granting of exclusive licenses for development by universities.


                                                           20
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


the innovations of the downstream producer. This would of course raise its monopoly

power and therefore curb excessive competition. At the same time, it avoids attaching

IPRs to pieces of upstream knowledge thereby giving rise to the problems of the anti-

commons, or to reduced quality of the upstream knowledge. In addition, the downstream

producer would enjoy rights on features of the innovation that are closer to his own real

contribution to the project, that is the development of specific downstream investments.

Clearly, this also implies that the IPRs thus offered are likely to be more narrow, as they

apply to downstream innovations as opposed to potentially general pieces of knowledge

upstream. At the same time, they are not likely to be as narrow as in the case of small

individual contributions to an open software module or a minor contribution to a

scientific field, which can give rise to the fragmentation and hold-up problems discussed

earlier.


5      Academic software and databases

In this section we draw some implications for the provision of scientific software and

databases from the model and discussion in the previous two sections and then go on to

discuss the possible modes in which they could be provided. First, this type of activity is

more likely to be privatized than scientific research itself because there is greater and

more focused market demand for the product, because norms are weaker due to weaker

reputation effects, and because there are more potential users who are not inventors (and

do not participate in the production of the good). Second, there could easily be both

public and private provision at the same time, because such an equilibrium can be

sustained when there are different communities of researchers with different norms.

Third, as the market for a particular product grows, privatization is likely simply because

the individual’s discrete return to privatization has increased. Finally, when the

components to a valuable good are produced under public domain rules, free entry in the


                                                  21
Gambardella and Hall                                                                           November 2004


downstream industry producing a final good based on those components implies too few

profits for those undertaking investments that will enhance the value of the good. The

final producers have to earn some rents to be able to make improvements beyond the

mere availability of research inputs.

         The privatization of scientific databases and software has both advantages and

disadvantages. With respect to the latter, David (2002) has emphasized the negative

consequences of the privatization of scientific and technical data and information. One

of the most important drawbacks is the increase in cost, sometimes substantial, to other

scientists, researchers or software developers for use of the data in ways that might

considerably enhance public domain knowledge. A second is that the value of such

databases for scientific research is frequently enhanced by combining them or using them

in their entirety for large scale statistical analysis, both of which activities are frequently

limited when they are commercially provided.6 Maurer (2002) gives a number of

examples of privatized databases that have somewhat restricted access for academic

researchers via their pricing structure or limitations on reuse of the data, such as Swiss-

PROT, Space Imaging Corporation, Incyte, and Celera. In this issue, David (2004) cites

the case of the privatization of Landsat images under the Reagan administration, which

led to a tenfold increase in the price of an image. In terms of our model, the potential to

privatize scientific and technical data and information implies that a smaller number of

researchers will contribute to the public good, with implied smaller stock of public

knowledge being produced, which frustrates the launch of projects undertaken under

public diffusion rules.



         6   The usual commercial web-based provision of data is based on a model where the user

constructs queries to access individual items in the database, like looking up a single word in the dictionary.




                                                           22
Gambardella and Hall                                                                               November 2004


          At the same time, a common argument in favor of the privatization of databases

is that it helps in the development of a database producing industry, and more generally

of an industry that employs these data as inputs. A similar argument can be used more

broadly for software. For example, the recent European Directive that defines the terms

for the patenting of software in Europe (European Commission, 2002) was largely

justified by the argument that it would encourage the formation of a software industry in

niches and specialized fields. Although it is sometimes true that exclusivity can have

positive effects on the provision of information products, it is also true that there can be

drawbacks like those suggested earlier (fragmentation of IPRs, little contribution to

public domain knowledge, restricted access when welfare would be enhanced with

unlimited access) to the privatization of knowledge inputs. At times, one can obtain

similar advantages by allowing for the privatization of the outputs that can be generated

using the database or software in question. That is, discovery of a useful application

associated with a particular gene that is obtained by use of a genomic database is

patentable in most countries. Or, in the case of the econometric software example used

later in the paper, consulting firms such as Data Resources, Inc. or Chase Econometrics

marketed the results of estimating econometric models using software whose origins

were in the public domain. Following our earlier argument, by allowing for the

privatization of the downstream output we make it possible for the industry to obtain

enough rents to make the necessary complementary investments, while avoiding the

limitations of privatizations in the upstream knowledge.

          There are, however, limits to this particular strategy for ensuring that scientific

databases and software remain in the public domain while downstream industries based



The pricing of such access reflects this design and is ill-suited (i.e., very costly) for researcher use in the

case where research involves studying the overall structure of the data.


                                                             23
Gambardella and Hall                                                                            November 2004


on these freely available discoveries can earn enough profit to cover their necessary

investments. The difficulty of course is that in the case of generally useful information

products, a firm selling a particular product, one whose inputs is an upstream academic

product, has no reason to undertake the enhancements to the upstream product that

would make it useful to others, unless the firm can sell the enhanced product in the

marketplace. But this is what we were trying to avoid, and what is ruled out by a GPL.

         In fact, we now turn to a discussion of an alternative way in which such goods

can be provided. The production of information products including software and

databases has always been characterized by large fixed costs relative to marginal cost, but

the cost disparity has grown since the advent of the internet. In practice, the only real

marginal costs of distribution arise from two sources: the support offered to individual

users (which in many cases has been converted into a fixed cost by requiring users to

browse knowledge bases on the web) and the congestion costs that can occur on web

servers if demand is too great.7 Standard economic theory tells us that when the

production function for a good is characterized by high fixed costs and low marginal

costs, higher welfare can often be achieved by using discriminatory pricing, charging

those with high willingness to pay more in order to offer the good to others at lower

prices, thus increasing the overall quantity supplied. The problem with applying this

mechanism generally is the difficulty of segmenting the markets successfully and of

preventing resale.




         7   This can be a real cost. The U.S. Patent Office, which provides a large patent database free to

the public at large on its web server, has a notice prominently posted on the website saying that use of

automated scripts to access large amounts of this data is prohibited and will be shut down, because of the

negative impact this has on live individuals making queries.


                                                           24
Gambardella and Hall                                                                         November 2004


         In the case of academic software and databases, however, it is quite common for

successful price-discriminating strategies to be pursued.8 There are several reasons for

this: 1) segmentation is fairly easy because academics can be identified via addresses and

institutional web information; 2) resale is difficult in the case of an information product

that requires signing on to use it and also probably not very profitable; 3) the two

markets (academic and commercial) have rather different tastes and attitudes toward

technical support (especially towards the speed with which it is provided) so the

necessary price discrimination is partly cost-based.


6      Case Study: Econometric Software Packages

As an illustration of the pattern of software development in the academic arena, we

present some evidence about a type of product familiar to economists that has largely

been developed in a university research environment but is now widely available from

commercial firms: packaged econometric software. Our data are drawn primarily from

the excellent surveys on the topic by Charles Renfro (2003a, b). We have supplemented it

in places from the personal experience of one of the co-authors, who participated in the

activity almost from its inception. The evidence supplied here can be considered

illustrative rather than a formal statistical test of our model, since the sample is relatively

small. To form a complete picture of the phenomenon of software and database

commercialization in academia, it would be necessary to augment our study with other

case studies. For example, see Maurer (2002) for a good review of methods of database

provision in scientific research.



         8   Another type of academic information product deserves mention here, academic journals. The

private sector producers of these journals fact the same type of cost structure and have pursued a price

discrimination strategy for many years, discriminating between library and personal use, and also among

the income levels of the purchasers in some cases, where income level is proxied by country of origin.

                                                         25
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004


        Econometric software is very much a by-product of the empirical economic

research activity, which is conducted largely at universities and non-profit research

institutions and to a lesser extent in the research departments of banks and brokerage

houses. It is an essential tool for the implementation of statistical methods developed by

econometric theorists, at least if these methods are to be used by more than a very few

specialists. To a great extent, this type of software originated during the 1960s, when

economists began to use computers rather than calculating machines for estimation, and

for the first time had access to more data than could comfortably be manipulated by

hand. The typical such package is implemented using a simple command language and

enables the use of a variety of modeling, estimating and forecasting methods on datasets

of varying magnitudes. Most of these packages are now available for use on personal

computers, although their origins are often a mainframe computer implementation. For a

complete history of the development of this software, see Renfro (2003b).

        Like most software, econometric software can be protected via various IP

measures. The most important is a combination of copyright (for the specific

implementation in source code of the methods provided) and trade secrecy (whereby

only the “object” code, or machine-readable version of the code, is released to the

public). This combination of IP protection has always been available but has only

become widely used during the personal computer era. Prior to that time, distributors of

academic software usually provided some form of copyrighted source code for local

installation on mainframes, and relied on the fact that acquisition and maintenance were

performed by institutions rather than a single individual to protect the code. This meant

the source code could be modified for local use, but because the size of the potential

market for “bootleg” copies of the source was rather small, piracy posed no serious

competitive threat. The advent of the personal computer, which meant that in many

cases software was being supplied to individuals rather than institutions changed this

                                                 26
Gambardella and Hall                                                                            November 2004


situation, and today the copyright-trade secrecy model is paramount.9 Thus it is possible

to argue that developments in computing have made the available IP protection in the

academic software sector stronger at the same time that the potential market size grew,

which our model implies will lead to more defection from public domain to proprietary

rules.

         In Table 1, we show some statistics for the 30 packages identified by Renfro. The

majority (20 of the 30) have their origins in academic research, either supported by grants

or, in many cases, written as a by-product of thesis research on a student’s own time.10 A

further 5 were written specifically to support the modeling or research activities of a

quasi-governmental organization such as a central bank. Only 5 were written with a

specific commercial purpose in mind. Two of those 5 were forks of public domain

programs, and in contrast to those of academic origin (whose earliest date of

introduction was 1964 and whose average date was 1979), the earliest of the commercial

programs was developed in 1981/82, a date that clearly coincides with the introduction

of the non-hobbyist Personal Computer. Notwithstanding the academic research origin

of most of these packages, today no less than 25 out of the 30 have been

commercialized, with an average commercialization lag of 9 years.




         9   In principle, in the aftermath of the (1981) Diamond v. Diehr decision, patent protection might

also be available for some features of econometric software. In this area, as in many other software areas,

there is tremendous resistance to this idea on the part of existing players, perhaps because they are well

aware of the nightmare that might ensue if patent offices were unacquainted with prior art in econometrics

(as is no doubt currently the case).
         10   Unfortunately, it is not possible to identify precisely the nature of the seed money support for

many of the packages from the histories supplied in Renfro (2003a), other than the simple fact that the

development took place at a university.


                                                            27
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


        Reading the histories of these packages supplied in Renfro (2003b), it becomes

clear that although many of them had more than one contributor, normally there was a

“lead user” who coordinated development, the identity of the “lead user” occasionally

changing as time passed. Most of the packages had their origins in the solution of a

specific research problem (e.g., the development of LIMDEP for estimation of the

Nerlove and Press logit model, or the implementation of Hendry’s model development

methodology in PCGive), but were developed, often through the efforts of others

besides the initial inventor, into more general tools.

        These facts clearly reflect the development both of computing technology and of

the market for these kinds of packages. As predicted by our model, growth in the market

due to the availability of personal computers and the growth of the economics profession

as whole has caused the early largely open source development model of the 1960s to

become privatized. Nevertheless, there remain five programs that are supplied for free

over the internet; of these three had their origins prior to 1980 and the other two are very

recent. As our model in Section 3 suggests, not all of the individuals in the community

shift to the private system, and the share of PD activities can well be between zero and 1.

Interestingly, only one of the five is explicitly provided with a GPL attached. A quote

from one of the author’s websites summarizes the motivation of those who make these

programs available quite well:


                Why is EasyReg free?

                EasyReg was originally designed to promote my own research. I came

        to realize that getting my research published in econometric journals is not

        enough to get it used. But writing a program that only does the Bierens' stuff

        would not reach the new generation of economists and econometricians.

        Therefore, the program should contain more than only my econometric

        techniques.


                                                 28
Gambardella and Hall                                                                  November 2004


                   When I taught econometrics at Southern Methodist University in Dallas

        in the period 1991-1996, I needed software that my graduate students could use

        for their exercises. The existing commercial software was not advanced enough,

        or too expensive, or both. Therefore, I added the econometric techniques that I

        taught in class first to SimplReg, and later on to EasyReg after I had bought

        Visual Basic 3.


                   Meanwhile, working on EasyReg became a hobby: my favorite pastime

        during rainy weekends.


                   When I moved to Penn State University, and made EasyReg

        downloadable from the web, people from all over the world, from developing

        countries in Asia and Africa as well as from western Europe and the USA, wrote

        me e-mails with econometric questions, suggestions for additions, or just saying

        "thank you". It appears that a lot of students and researchers have no access, or

        cannot afford access, to commercial econometrics software. By making EasyReg

        commercial I would therefore let these people down.


                   There are also less altruistic reasons for keeping EasyReg free:


                    * By keeping EasyReg free my own econometric work incorporated in

        EasyReg will get the widest distribution.


                    * I will never be able to make enough money with a commercial

        version of EasyReg to be compensated for the time I have invested in it.


                    * Going commercial would leave me no time for my own research.11




        11   This quotation is from Hermann Bierens’ website at

http://econ.la.psu.edu/~hbierens/EASYREG.HTM


                                                        29
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


        Indeed, the second statement suggests that one reason to leave the software in

the public domain was that the researcher’s commercial profits were not large enough.

Likewise, the third statement suggests that the researcher cared about research and this

was an important reason for not privatizing it. This is suggestive of the fact that the

individual displayed a relatively low utility of commercial profits vis-à-vis his preference

for research, which in turn affected his choice of staying public. In sum, the model’s

prediction that both private and public modes of provision can co-exist when at least

some individuals adhere to community norms is borne out, at least for one example.

        We also discussed explicitly the role of complementary services or enhanced

features for non-inventor users in the provision of software. This is clearly one of the

motivations behind commercialization, as was illustrated by the example of TeX. Table

2, which is drawn from data in Renfro (2003a) attempts to give an impression of the

differences between commercialized and non-commercialized software, admittedly using

a rather small sample. To the extent that ease of use can be characterized by the full

WIMP interface, there is no difference in the average performance of the two types of

software. The main differences seems to be that the commercialized packages are larger

and allow both more varied and more complex methods of interaction. Note especially

the provision of a macro facility to run previously prepared programs, which occurs in 84

per cent of the commercial programs, but only in 2 out of the 5 free programs. Such

programs are likely to require more user support and documentation, because of their

complexity, which increases the cost of remaining in the PD system. In short, as our

earlier discussion suggested, a commercial operation, which is likely to imply higher

profits, also provides a greater degree of additional investments beyond the mere

availability of the research inputs.

        To summarize, the basic predictions of our model, which are that participants in

an open science community will defect to the private (IP-using) sector when profit

                                                 30
Gambardella and Hall                                                                        November 2004


opportunities arise (e.g. the final demand for the product grows, or IP protection

becomes available), are confirmed by this example. We also find some support for the

fact that commercial operations are likely to undertake more complementary investments

than pure open source operations. We do not find widespread use of the GPL idea in

this particular niche market yet, although use of such a license could evolve. In the

broader academic market, Maurer (2002) reports that a great variety of open source

software licenses are in use, both viral (GPL, LPL) and non-viral (BSD, Apache-CMU).

         Finally, our model in Section 3 does not explicitly incorporate all the factors that

are clearly important in the case of software and databases. Specifically, one area seems

worthy of further development. We did not model the competitive behaviour of the

downstream firms in the database and software industries. In practice, in some cases,

there is competition to supply these goods, and in others, it is more common for the

good to be supplied at prices set by a partially price-discriminating monopolist. We

report the evidence on price-discrimination for our sample briefly here.

         Table 3 presents some very limited data for our sample of 30 econometric

software packages. Of the 30, 5 are distributed freely and a further 8 are distributed as

services, possibly bundled with consulting (such sales are essentially all commercial); this

is the “added value” business model discussed earlier. Of the remaining 17, we were able

to collect data from their websites for 15. Of these only 2 did not price discriminate, 3

discriminate by the size and complexity of the problem that can be estimated, and 10 by

the type of customer, academic or commercial.12 A number of these packages were also



         12   The average ratio of commercial to academic price was 1.7. Assuming an iso-elastic demand

curve with elasticity η and letting s=share of commercial (high demand) customers, one can perform some

very rough computations using the relationship ∆Q/Q = -η ∆P/P or (1-s) = η 0.7. If η=1, then the

implied share of academic customers is 70 per cent. If the share of academic customers is only 30 per cent,

then the implied demand elasticity is about 0.42.

                                                         31
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


offered in “student” versions at substantially lower prices, segmenting the market even

further. This evidence tends to confirm that in some cases, successful price

discrimination is feasible and can be used to serve the academic market while covering

some of the fixed costs via the commercial market.

        Although price discrimination is widely used in these markets, it does have some

drawbacks as a solution to the problem of software provision. The most important one is

that features important to academics or even programs important to academics may fail

to be provided or maintained in areas where there either a very small commercial market

or no market, because their willingness to pay for them is much lower. Obviously this is

not a consequence of price discrimination per se, but simply of low willingness to pay;

the solution is not to eliminate price discrimination, but to recognize that PD production

of some of these goods is inevitable. For example, a database of elementary particle data

has been maintained by an international consortium of particle physicists for many years.

Clearly such a database has little commercial market.


7     Conclusions

Among the activities that constitute academic research, the production of software and

databases for research purposes is likely to be especially subject to underprovision and

privatization. The reason is that like most research activities, the public good nature of

the output leads to free-riding, but that the usual norms and rewards of the “Republic of

Science” are less available to their producer and maintainers, especially the latter. In this

paper we presented a model that illustrates and formalizes these ideas and we used the

model to show that the GPL can be a way to ensure provision of some of these goods, at

least when the potential producers also want to consume them.

        Although in this paper we have emphasized the beneficial role of the GPL as a

coordination device for producing the public good, in these conclusions we also want to


                                                  32
Gambardella and Hall                                                                November 2004


point out that the GPL is not a panacea that works in all situations, and one of those

situations may indeed be the production of scientific software and databases. One reason

is that in practice it is difficult to distinguish between the “upstream” activities, which, as

we discussed, ought to be produced under public domain, and the “downstream” ones.

As we noted in the paper, the latter may entail important complementary investments.

Therefore, they could be more effectively conducted under private rules that enable the

producers to raise the rents that are necessary to perform such investments. But the GPL

“forces” the contributors to work under public domain rules. If one cannot properly

distinguish between upstream and downstream activities, the downstream activities, with

implied complementary investments, will also be subject to public domain rules. This

makes it more difficult to raise the resources to make the investments, with implied lower

quality of the product.

          To return to the example of the introduction, the TeX User’s Group reports the

following on their website in answer to the FAQ “If TeX is so good, how come it's

free?”:

          It's free because Knuth chose to make it so. He is nevertheless apparently happy

          that others should earn money by selling TeX-based services and products.

          While several valuable TeX-related tools and packages are offered subject to

          restrictions imposed by the GNU General Public License ('Copyleft'), TeX itself

          is not subject to Copyleft. (http://www.tug.org)


Thus part of the reason for the spread of TeX and its use by a larger number of

researchers than just those who are especially computer-oriented is the fact that the lead

user chose not to use the GPL to enforce the public domain, enabling commercial

suppliers of TeX to offer easy-to-use versions and customer support.

          The so-called “lesser” GPL (LGPL) or other similar solutions can in part solve

the problem. As discussed by Lerner and Tirole (2002), among others, the LGPL and

                                                     33
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


analogous arrangements make the public domain requirement less stringent. They allow

for the mixing of public and private codes or modules of the program. As a result, the

outcome of the process is more likely to depend on the private incentives to make things

private or public, and this might encourage the acquisition of rents in the downstream

activities. But following the logic of our model, as we allow for some degree of

privatization, the efficacy of the license as a coordination mechanism is likely to diminish.

We defer to future research a more thorough assessment of this trade-off. Here,

however, we want to note that when the importance of complementary investments is

higher, one would expect LPGL to be socially more desirable. The benefits of having the

downstream investments may offset the disadvantage of a reduced coordination in the

production of the public good. By contrast, when such investments are less important, or

the separation between upstream and downstream activities can be made more clearly

(and hence one can focus the GPL only on the former), a full GPL system is likely to be

socially better.




        References

        Allen, R.C., 1983, Collective Invention, Journal of Economic Behavior and

Organization 4 (1): 1-24.

        Anton, J.J. and D.A. Yao, 2002, The Sale of Ideas: Strategic Disclosure, Property

Rights, and Contracting, Review of Economic Studies 67 (4): 585- 607.

        Arrow, K., 1962, Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for

Invention, in R.R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton,

NJ, Princeton University Press: 609-625.




                                                 34
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004


        Cohen, W. M., R. Florida, and L. Randazzese, 2004, For knowledge and profit:

university-industry research centers in the United States, Oxford University Press,

Oxford, forthcoming.

        Cohen, W. M., R. Florida, L. Randazzese, and J. Walsh, 1998, Industry and the

academy: uneasy partners in the cause of technological advance, in: Noll, R. (Editor), The

Future of the Research University, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D. C.

        Collins, S., and H. Wakoh, 1999, Universities and technology transfer in Japan:

Recent reforms in historical perspective, University of Washington and Kanagawa

Industrial Technology Research Institute, Japan.

        Dalle, J.-M., 2003, Open source technology transfer, paper presented to the Third

EPIP Conference, Maastricht, The Netherlands, November 22/23, 2003.

        Dasgupta, P., and P. A. David, 1994, Toward a new economics of science,

Research Policy 23, 487-521.

        David, P., 1993, Knowledge, Property, and the System Dynamics of

Technological Change, in Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on

Development Economics 1992, The World Bank, Washington DC.

        David, P. A., 2002, The economic logic of open science and the balance between

private property rights and the public domain in scientific data and information: a primer,

National Research Council Symposium on The Role of the Public Domain in Scientific

and Technical Data and Information (Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences).

        David, P. A., 2004, A tragedy of the public knowledge ‘commons’? Global

science, intellectual property and the digital technology boomerang, this issue.

        European Commission, 2002, Draft directive on the patentability of computer-

implemented inventions (20 February), available at

http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/en/indprop/comp/index.htm



                                                35
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


        Foray, D. and L. Hilaire-Perez, 2004, The Economics of Open Technology:

Collective Organization and Individual Claims in the ‘Fabrique Lyonnaise’ During the

Old Regime, in C. Antonelli, D. Foray, B. H. Hall and W. E. Steinmueller (eds.), Essays

in Honor of Paul A. David.

Guena, A., and L. Nesta, 2004, University patenting and its effects on academic research:

the emerging European evidence, this issue.

        Hall, B. H., 2004, On copyright and patent protection for software and databases:

a tale of two worlds, in O. Granstrand (Editor), Economics, Law, and Intellectual

Property, (Boston/Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

        Hall, B.H., and R. Ziedonis, 2001, The Determinants of Patenting in the U.S.

Semiconductor Industry, 1980-1994, Rand Journal of Economics 32: 101-128.

        Hall, B. H., A. N. Link, and J. T. Scott, 2001, Barriers inhibiting industry from

partnering with universities, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 87-98.

        Harhoff, D., J. Henkel, and E. von Hippel, 2003, Profiting from voluntary

information spillovers: How users benefit by freely revealing their innovations, Research

Policy 32, 1753-1769.

        Heller, M.A. and R.S. Eisenberg, 1998, Can Patents Deter Innovation? The

Anticommons in Biomedical Research, Science 280, May, 698-701.

        Hertzfeld, H. R., A. N. Link, and N. S. Vonortas, 2004, Intellectual property

protection mechanisms and research partnerships, this issue.

        Isabelle, M., 2004, “They invent (not patent) like they breathe: what are their

incentives to do so? Short tales and lessons from researchers in a public research

organisation,” Paper presented at the Third EPIP Workshop, Pisa, Italy, April 2/3.

        Kuan, J., 2002, Open source software as lead user’s make or buy decision: a study

of open and closed source quality, Stanford University.



                                                 36
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004


          Lee, Yong S, 2000, The Sustainability of University-Industry Research

Collaboration, Journal of Technology Transfer 25 (2): 111-133.

          Lerner, J. and J. Tirole, 2002, Some simple economics of open source, Journal of

Industrial Economics L, 197-234.

          Lerner, J. and J. Tirole, 2005, The Scope of Open Source Licensing, Journal of

Law, Economics and Organization 21, forthcoming (currently NBER Working Paper

9363)

          Levinthal, D. and J. G. March, 1993, The myopia of learning, Strategic

Management Journal 14, 95-112

          Maurer, S. M., 2002, Promoting and disseminating knowledge: the public/private

interface, Working Paper (September).

          Merton, R.K., 1957, Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology

of Science, American Sociological Review 22(6): 635–59.

          Merton, R.K., 1968, The Matthew Effect in Science, Science 159 (3810, Jan. 5):

56–63.

          Nelson, R. R., 1959, The simple economics of basic scientific research, Journal of

Political Economy 77, 297-306.

          Nuvolari, A., 2004, Collective invention during the British Industrial Revolution:

The Case of Cornish Pumping Engine, Cambridge Journal of Economics 28, 347-363.

          Olson, M., 1971, Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of

Groups (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts).

          Owen-Smith, J. and W.W. Powell, 2001, To Patent or Not: Faculty Decisions and

Institutional Success at Technology Transfer, Journal of Technology Transfer 26 (1/2):

99-114.




                                                  37
Gambardella and Hall                                                             November 2004


          Renfro, C. G., 2003a, A compendium of existing econometric software packages,

Journal of Economics and Social Measurement 29, forthcoming.

          Renfro, C. G., 2003b, Econometric software: the first fifty years in perspective,

Journal of Economics and Social Measurement 29, 1-51.

          Scotchmer, S., 1991, Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research

and the Patent Law, Journal of Economic Perspectives 5: 29-41.

          Stephan, P. E., 1996, The Economics of Science, Journal of Economic Literature

XXXIV: 1199-1235.

          TeX User’s Group website, http://www.tug.org

          Thursby, J., R. Jensen, and M.C. Thursby, 2001, Objectives, characteristics and

outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S. universities, Journal of

Technology Transfer 26, 59-72.

          Von Hippel, E., 1987, Cooperation between Rivals: Informal Know-How

Trading, Research Policy 16, 291–302.

          Von Hippel, E., 1988, The Sources of Innovation (Oxford: Oxford University

Press).

          Von Hippel, E, and G. von Krogh, 2003, Open source software and the private-

collective innovation model: issues for organization science, Organization Science 14 (2),

209-223.




                                                  38
Gambardella and Hall                                                           November 2004




                                        Appendix

                 A Model of Public Domain vs. Proprietary Research

■ Set-up and equilibrium. The total (indirect) utility of a researcher is U = z+θ·X(n-1),

where X(n-1) is the stock of PD knowledge when n-1 other researchers work under PD,

and θ ≥ 0 is a parameter that measures how much they care about the fact that others.

Also, z = x(n) if they work under PD, and z = π if they work under PR, where x(n) is the

utility that the researcher gains from her public contribution (assumed to be a function of

the number of PD researchers n) and π is the utility from the monetary income. We

assume that x(n) ≥ 0, and we make no assumption about the impact of n on x. There

could be diminishing returns, that is a larger n implies smaller utility from one’s own

contribution (e.g. because fewer important discoveries can be made), or there could be

externalities, viz. x increases with n, or both. Note that we assume that the researchers

enjoy the public contribution of the others even if they work under PR. We could make

more complicated assumptions, e.g. the impact of X(n-1) on utility is different according

to whether the individual operates under PD or PR, but this will not affect our main

results.

           A researcher will produce under PD if π ≤ x(n). We assume that the individuals

are heterogeneous in their preferences of PD vs. PR, viz. [π – x(n)] ∼ F(·|n), where the

distribution function F depends on n because of x(n). In principle, the support of π – x(n)

is the whole real line. The share of individuals working under PD is then F(0|n), and the

equilibrium number of researcher ne working under PD is defined by F(0|ne) = ne/N,

where N is the total number of researchers in the community. This condition says that in

equilibrium the share of researchers working under PD is equal to the share of



                                                  39
Gambardella and Hall                                                               November 2004


researchers whose utility from π is not larger than the utility of their contribution x(ne) to

PD.

        Figure 1 depicts our equilibria. Point E in Figure 1 is an equilibrium because if

the number of researchers working under PD increases beyond ne, the share of

researchers with π – x(n) ≤ 0 increases by less than the share of researchers working

under PD. But this is a contradiction because for some of the researchers who have

moved to PD it was not profitable to do so. The reasoning is symmetric for the

deviations from PD to PR in equilibrium. Stability of the equilibrium requires that the

F(ne) curve cuts the ne/N line from above. This ensures that whenever an individual

deviates from the equilibrium, moving from PD to PR, the share of individuals with π ≤

x (ne – 1), i.e. those who find it profitable to operate under PD, is higher than the actual

share of individuals working under PD after the move, viz. (ne – 1)/N. Hence, the move

is not profitable. Similarly, whenever an individual moves from PR to PD in equilibrium,

the share of researchers with π ≤ x(ne + 1) becomes smaller than the share of researchers

who now work under PD, viz. (ne + 1)/N. The stability conditions are then F(0| ne – 1) >

(ne – 1)/N and F(0|ne+ 1) < (ne + 1)/N. Multiple equilibria are also possible. There may

be more than one ne that satisfies (1) with F(n) cutting n/N from above, as shown by

Figure 1.

        [Figure 1 about here]

        The share of researchers working under PD decreases if the economic

profitability of research increases relatively to the researchers’ utility from their public

contributions. This can be thought of as a first order stochastic downward shift in F(·)

which would stem from an increase in π – x(n) for all the individuals. Likewise, a stronger

taste for research would be represented by an upward shift in F as π – x(n) decreases for

all the individuals. This raises ne.

                                                   40
Gambardella and Hall                                                               November 2004


■ Instability of PD Knowledge Production. To see why the production of knowledge

under PD is unstable, suppose that ne is an equilibrium and v researchers working under

PR coordinate to work under PD. If ne is an equilibrium, then π > x(ne + v), for at least

one of these researchers, otherwise ne + v would be an equilibrium. Yet, it is possible that

x(ne + v) + θ·X(ne + v – 1) > π + θ·X(ne – 1) for all the v researchers; viz., if the v

researchers coordinate, they are better off than in equilibrium. To see this recall that x(n)

≡ X(n) – X(n-1). Therefore x(ne + v) + θ·X(ne+v– 1) – θ·X(ne – 1) =

            v
x(ne+v)+θ ∑ x ( n e + v − j ) . But the expression in the summation sign is non-negative
           j =1



because x ≥ 0. Hence, this expression can be greater than π in spite of the fact that π >

x(ne + v). If the v researchers working under PR coordinate to work under PD, the system

is unstable because at least one of them can find it profitable to deviate since he exhibits

π > x(ne + v). Once he deviates, at least one of the remaining v-1 researchers has an

incentive to deviate because ne + v –1 is not an equilibrium, and so on till all the v

researchers have deviated. At that point nobody else has an incentive to deviate because

ne is an equilibrium.

■ The GPL model. Let B be an opportunity cost faced by an originator and any

potential contributor to a project, with [B – x(n)] ∼ G(·|n). We assume that even if the

contributors do not join the project they still enjoy θX(n) from the project if n

researchers work on it under PD. That is, their indirect utility is B + θX(n). Let nG and

nNG be the equilibrium number of contributors joining the project under PD if the

originator launches the project, works under PD and attaches a GPL or not. Finally, let

n NG be the number of contributors under PD if the originator launches the project under

PR (and cannot attach a GPL to it).



                                                   41
Gambardella and Hall                                                               November 2004


        If the originator launches the project, works under PD and does not issue a GPL,

the contributors working under PD will exhibit π ≤ x(nNG+1) and B ≤ x(nNG+1). If Γ(·) is

the joint distribution function of π – x and B – x, in equilibrium we have Γ(0, 0 | nNG) =

nNG/N. With no GPL, the condition becomes less restrictive, because only B ≤ x is

required. As a result, with a GPL, G(0|nNG) > nNG/N. This will induce some researchers

to join under PD, because the share of researchers with B ≤ x is smaller than the share of

researchers actually working under PD, i.e. nNG/N. Provided that the stability conditions

discussed above hold, the movement towards PD will stop at nG such that G(0|nG) =

nG/N. This implies nG ≥ nNG, that is a GPL induces more researchers to work under PD.

        If the originator launches the project under PR, the contributors can still join

under PD. These will be all those with π – x( n NG ) ≤ 0 and B – x ( n NG ) ≤ 0 . The

difference with the previous no-GPL case is only that the originator does not join the

project under PD. More generally, the same reasoning as above applies here, and nG ≥

n NG . As a matter of fact, if n is large enough, n NG ≈ nNG.

        Given the behaviour of the contributors, will the originator who launches the

project working under PD issue a GPL? With PD-GPL his utility will be

x(nG+1)+θX(nG). With PD and no GPL it will be x(nNG+1)+θX(nNG). By using the fact

that x(n) ≡ X(n) – X(n-1), the former will be higher than the latter if X(nG+1) – (1-θ)X(nG)

≥ X(nNG+1) – (1-θ)X(nNG). A sufficient condition for this inequality to hold is that θ ≥ 1.

This follows from nG ≥ nNG and the fact that X(n) increases with n, which in turn follows

from x(n) ≥ 0. Thus, if the originator chooses to work under PD, setting a GPL will be a

dominant strategy unless θ is close to zero (i.e. the impact of the others’ behaviour is not

that important) and some special conditions occur. For simplicity, we assume that θ is




                                                     42
Gambardella and Hall                                                               November 2004


large enough, and therefore choosing a GPL always dominates when the originator

chooses PD.

        If the originator chooses PR his utility will be π + θX( n NG ). As a result, the

originator will choose to work on the project under PD (and issue a GPL) if

x(nG+1)+θ·X(nG) ≥ B, and x(nG+1)+θ·X(nG) ≥ π + θ·X( n NG ). If there was no GPL, the

condition would be the same with nNG in lieu of nG. Since nG ≥ nNG, with no GPL the

condition becomes more restrictive. As a result, the possibility to use a GPL implies not

only that more researchers will join under PD, but also that more projects will be

launched under PD with a GPL.

        As discussed in the text, the GPL is least effective when there is a strong positive

correlation between B and π. This implies that many individuals with small B tend to

have a small π as well. As a result, the restriction π ≤ x associated with B ≤ x does not

restrict the set of PD researchers much more than B ≤ x alone, which means that nG is

close to nNG, and the additional set of PD researchers created by the GPL is not large. In

turn, this implies that the GPL does not encourage a more intensive coordination than

without it.

        The GPL raises the number of contributors working under PD in spite of the

fact that the total number of contributors to the project decreases. To see this, assume

for simplicity that x is roughly constant with respect to n, so that x(nNG) ≈ x(nG) ≡ x.

Consider the following table




                                                  43
Gambardella and Hall                                                         November 2004



Researchers Set                 Action under no GPL              Action under GPL


B ≤ x; π ≤ x                    Join under PD                    Join under PD


B ≤ x; π ≥ x (π ≥ B)            Join under PR                    Join under PD


B ≥ x; π ≤ x (π ≤ B)            Not join                         Not join


                                Join under PR if π ≥ B
B ≥ x; π ≥ x                                                     Not join
                                Not join if π ≤ B




Thus, with a GPL, some researchers who joined under PR switch to PD, while the

opposite is not true. The researchers who no longer join the project with the GPL are

only those who joined under PR. Thus, they do not affect n in equilibrium.




                                                44
Gambardella and Hall                                                          November 2004




                       Table 1: Econometric Software Packages

                                 Total                                           Average
                              number of    Number        Average lag to           date of
Type of seed funding           products commercialized commercialization       introduction
Research grants or own
research                          20             16                9.4             1979
quasi-governmental
organization                      5               4               16.4             1974
private (for profit)              5               5               0.8              1984
Total or average                  30             25               9.0              1979



                   Table 2: Comparing Non-commercial and
                             Commercial software
                                               Share of non-       Share of
           Features                             commercial       commercial
           Full windows, icons, menus
           interface (WIMP)                        60%              60%

           Interactive use possible                60%              68%

           Macro files can be executed             40%              84%
           Manipulate objects with
           icons/menus                             60%              88%
           Generate interactive
           commands with icons/menus               20%              60%



                          Table 3: Price Discrimination in
                              Econometric Software
                       Price discriminate?             No. of packages
                       by size or complexity                   3
                       academic/commercial                    10
                       no discrimination                       2
                       NA                                      2
                       Sold as a service                       8
                       Free                                    5
                       Total                                  30




                                                  45
Gambardella and Hall                                                            November 2004




                                   Figure 1: Equilibria




    F(n); n/N                                     F(n); n/N

1                                             1
                    n/N
                                                                       E2
             E                                         n/N
                                                                F(n)
                       F(n                        E1

                              N                                             N
      One stable equilibrium (E)                  Two stable equilibria (E1 and E2)




                                               46
