                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SMART INSTITUTIONS, FOOLISH CHOICES?
                      THE LIMITED PARTNER PERFORMANCE PUZZLE

                                              Josh Lerner
                                            Antoinette Schoar
                                              Wan Wong

                                          Working Paper 11136
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11136


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




We thank Nick Lau and Brian Zingale for research assistance. John Hand, Thomas Hellmann, Dirk Jenter,
Steven Kaplan and Per Stromberg provided helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at
Harvard University and the University of North Carolina for many helpful comments. Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research provided financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

 © 2005 by Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices? The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle
Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 11136
February 2005
JEL No. G1, G2

                                            ABSTRACT

The returns that institutional investors realize from private equity investments differ dramatically

across institutions.   Using detailed and hitherto unexplored records of fund investors and

performance, we document large heterogeneity in the performance of different classes of limited

partners. In particular, endowments’ annual returns are nearly 14% greater than average. Funds

selected by investment advisors and banks lag sharply. These results are robust to controlling for

the type and year of the investment, as well as to the use of different specifications. Analyses of

reinvestment decisions and young funds suggest that the results are not primarily due to

endowments’ greater access to established funds. Finally, we examine the differences in the choice

of intermediaries across various institutional investors and their relationship to success. We find that

LPs that have higher average IRRs also tend to invest in older funds and have a smaller fraction of

GPs in their geographic area, and that the performance of university endowments is correlated with

measures of the quality and loyalty of the student body.

Josh Lerner                                             Wan Wong
Harvard Business School                                 Sherman Hall
Morgan Hall, Room 395                                   Graduate School of Business Administration
Cambridge, MA 02163                                     Harvard University
and NBER                                                Boston, MA 02163
josh@hbs.edu

Antoinette Schoar
Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-455
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
schoar@mit.edu
1.     Introduction

       Over the past three decades, institutional investors have controlled an increasing

share of the U.S. equity markets: Gompers and Metrick (2001) calculate that their share

of U.S. public equity markets exceeded the 50% threshold in 1995.1                There is a

significant and growing literature in financial economics that seeks to understand the

investment decisions of institutional investors and the differences between the various

classes of investors. Gompers and Metrick (2001) document that institutional investors

prefer stocks that have greater market capitalizations, are more liquid, and with higher

book-to-market ratios and lower returns in the prior year.2 This literature thus far has

been focused on the differences between institutional and individual investors.



       One question that has attracted much less scrutiny, however, is the heterogeneity

in investment strategies and sophistication across different types of institutional

investors. (Table 2 of Gompers and Metrick (2001) is a rare exception.) This neglect is

surprising because of the large differences in organizational structure, investment

objectives, or even the perceived level of sophistication across various institutions.

Moreover, recent theoretical literature highlights the extent to which differences in the

sophistication about financial markets as well as agency problems between the ultimate

1
 Their calculation only examines institutions with greater than $100 million of securities
under discretionary management that are required to file a 13F form with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, and thus excludes hedge and private equity funds
and those with less than $100 million in assets. Thus, their estimate is a lower bound on
institutional holdings.
2
 Other studies have suggested that institutional investors are less likely to buy stocks on
days with high trading volume (Barber and Odean (2003)) or to herd into particular
stocks (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) and Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1995)) and that their investments fall into a few well-defined styles (Froot and Teo
(2004)).
investors and financial institutions can have profound implications for investment

decisions, portfolio allocations, and ultimately investment returns.3



       Moreover, many institutions do not invest all—or even most—of their funds

directly, but rather do so through intermediaries. While there has been a growth of

research into investment style of intermediaries in recent years,4 the choices that

institutions make when selecting intermediaries, what we may term "intermediary style,"

are poorly understood.



       This paper looks at a specific class of investment decisions made by institutions:

their investments in private equity funds. We analyze investment styles and performance

across several different classes of investors, known as limited partners (LPs). We begin

with the identification of a puzzle: different classes of investors in private equity have

enjoyed dramatically different returns over the past two decades.         Using detailed

records—hitherto unexplored by academics—of the composition and performance of

funds that are selected by different classes of investors, we document very substantial

differences across the returns that investors enjoy. On average, endowments’ average




3
 For example, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) suggest that information asymmetries between
investors and intermediaries create limits to arbitrage that can affect the portfolio
strategies and eventually the returns of the latter. (Similarly, see Gromb and Vayanos
(2002).) Because the extent of agency problems may differ dramatically across
institutions, considerable differences in the behavior of institutional investors could be
expected.
4
 For example, Barberis and Shleifer (2003) theoretically discuss investors’ choices
between value and growth stocks and their implications.

                                             2
annual returns from private equity funds are nearly 14% greater than the average investor.

Funds selected by investment advisors and banks lag sharply.



       Next we explore the importance of LPs’ reinvestment strategies in explaining the

differences in LP performance. This is the central means by which LPs can adjust their

portfolio and exert governance pressure on the fund, since private equity is a very illiquid

industry where investors have little recourse to their investment once the capital has been

committed. We find that endowments and public pension funds generally are much less

likely to reinvest in a given partnership than all other LP classes. Moreover, these two

classes of LPs are better at forecasting the performance of follow-on funds. Follow-on

funds in which endowments (and to a lesser extent, public pension funds) decide to

reinvest show much higher performance than those funds where they decided not to

reinvest. Other LP classes do not display these performance patterns. Corporate pension

funds and advisors are more likely to reinvest if the current fund had high performance,

but this often does not translate into higher future performance. These findings suggest

that endowments proactively use the information they gain as inside investors to improve

their investment decisions, while other LPs seem less willing or able to use this

information.



       A natural concern is whether these substantial performance differences between

LP classes could be driven by other factors than variations in ability or sophistication.

First, we want to assess whether these differences are driven by differences in the time

periods in which the investments were made and other observable characteristics. Earlier




                                             3
studies have shown that the private equity industry is subject to large cyclicality in

returns. (See, for example, Gompers and Lerner (1998, 2001) and Kaplan and Schoar

(2004).) Moreover, many endowments began investing in private equity funds before

other investors. Even after controlling for fund type and the vintage year in which the

investment was made, we continue to see superior annual performance of between 9 and

12 percent by endowments. The results are robust to examining patterns at the fund,

rather than the investment, level: performance is positively related to the number of

endowments investing in the fund, but negatively related to the number of banks

investing. We also find that within the different groups, older LPs tend to have better

performance than LPs that enter the industry at a later time. These differences are

particularly significant for corporate pension funds, advisors, and insurance companies.

We suggest that this may at least partially due to the fact that younger LPs are less

experienced in private equity investing and also might have inferior access to established

and successful funds.



       A second important concern is whether these variations in performance could be

due to systematic differences in the risk profiles of the funds that different classes of LPs

choose. For example, endowments could be systematically investing in riskier funds and

therefore have higher returns. To address this concern, we control for a number of

observable characteristics that are often considered risk factors, such as the focus and

maturity of the investments selected by the fund and the fund’s size, age, and location.

While our results are robust to these controls, we cannot completely rule out the

possibility that unobservable differences in risk profiles are affecting our results based on




                                             4
these tests. Therefore, we undertake an additional set of tests to see if the ex-post

variation in portfolio returns is larger for those classes of LPs that have higher average

returns. If endowments achieve their superior returns by taking on more risky

investments, we should expect that they have a higher variation in performance across

their private equity investments. When we compare the standard deviations of returns

across the different LP classes, we indeed find that endowments are among the LP classes

with higher variance, though they are not the highest. However, this variance is entirely

driven by the positive skewness of the return distribution of endowments. Once we

condition on the lower 75% of the funds across all LPs, we see that endowments in fact

have the lowest variation across all LP classes. These results do not support the idea that

endowments achieve their superior performance by relying on riskier investment

strategies.



        An alternative story is that performance differences across LPs could in part be

the result of differences in the objectives that LPs pursue when investing in private equity

(and not necessarily their ability). For example, Hellmann, Lindsey, and Puri (2004)

suggest that banks as limited partners might diverge from maximizing returns on

investments in order to maximize future banking income from the portfolio firms in

which they invested. We find, however, that banks under perform the other LPs not only

in the buyout industry (where considerations about future business might be important),

but even in VC deals where the benefits from selling future services seem much smaller.




                                             5
          We also explore the possibility that the superior performance of endowments or

public pension funds results from historical accident: i.e., that these LPs through their

early experience as limited partners may have greater access to established private equity

groups (also known as general partners (GPs)) that manage high performing funds. To

test this hypothesis, we examine investments in young private equity groups (those

established after 1990) across all classes of LPs. If the performance difference is mainly

driven by the superior access that older LPs have in established private equity groups,

conditioning on younger GPs should erase the difference in performance between the

different classes of LPs. When we repeat our analysis conditioning on young GPs, we

still find a performance premium for endowments and public pension funds, though the

difference is much smaller than in the analysis using all GPs. While this finding does not

support the idea that the superior performance of these LPs is merely driven by historical

accident, we cannot rule out that some of the performance difference is due to their early

access to superior funds.



          Next, we examine the LP-specific differences in the selection of intermediaries.

For that purpose we undertake an analysis of LP specific fixed effects.          We find

significant differences in investment styles across LPs in the sample. Moreover, these

investment styles are significantly correlated with the performance differences among

LPs. LPs that have higher IRR fixed effects also tend to concentrate their investments in

the funds of older GPs and have a smaller fraction of GPs in the same geographic area as

the LP.




                                             6
       These results support the idea that intermediary style seems to be important, as

has often been highlighted by practitioners. One of the clearest examples is the Yale

endowment. The fundamental characteristics of their investments vary dramatically: in

hedge funds, for instance, they prefer value-oriented funds while they heavily back

technology-focused venture funds in private equity. But they have a consistent style in

selecting intermediaries, whatever the investment style they employ: they favor long-term

relationships with seasoned groups based in the United States which have well-aligned

incentives (Lerner, Hardymon, and Leamon (2004)).



       Finally, in the last part of the paper, we perform a simple cross-sectional analysis

of the performance of university endowments. We find strong correlations between the

LP specific fixed effects from IRR regressions and academic ranking measures. In

particular, proxies for selectivity from applicant pools and for alumni loyalty exhibit

strong correlations with the performance of university endowments, suggesting that the

top-performing schools benefit from their close ties to accomplished alumni.



       This paper is related to the literature on the establishment of private equity funds.

Poterba (1989) and Gompers and Lerner (1998) explore how tax and other public policies

affect venture capital (VC) fundraising. Gompers and Lerner (1996) and Lerner and

Schoar (2004) examine the contracts entered into between investors and funds, and how

they are affected by the nature of the targeted investments and the limited partners.

Mayer, Schoors, and Yafeh (2003) examine the sources of VC financing across countries,

and how these are correlated with investment choices. Kaplan and Schoar (2004) study




                                            7
how the level of returns affects the ability of private equity groups to raise follow-on

funds. But the drivers and consequences of the decisions by individual LPs to invest in

private equity funds have been hitherto unexplored, largely because the data has been

unavailable until very recently.



       The results shed light on the large cycles in the private equity market that a

number of papers, including Gompers and Lerner (1998, 2000) and Kaplan and Schoar

(2004), have documented. The work of Lerner and Schoar (2004) implies that, optimally,

LPs would use their inside information to screen out poorly performing general partners

(GPs). The fact that many LPs appear not to be using their information optimally distorts

the resulting equilibrium. The presence of inefficient LPs allows poorly performing GPs

to raise new funds and thus makes the governance mechanism of exit by sophisticated

LPs less effective.



       The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the

selection of private equity funds by institutional investors. Section 3 summarizes the data

used in the analysis.    Section 4 presents the analysis of performance.       Sections 5

examines reinvestment decisions; Section 6, the performance of young funds. Section 7

presents the LP-level analysis. Section 8 examines how the cross-sectional performance

among endowments varies with observable characteristics. The final section concludes

the paper.




                                            8
    2. Institutions and Private Equity5

         Institutional investors frequently choose to invest in private businesses through

funds. This choice is largely driven by the difficulties of directly investing in private

firms. The selection of appropriate direct investments requires intensive relationships

and excellent due diligence skills, which few institutional investors have. Similarly, most

institutional investors do not have the resources to intensively monitor a portfolio of

private firms. Efforts to jointly invest in private firms with private equity groups have

frequently encountered agency problems. Moreover, the limited partnership structure

protects the investors from potential liability issues that could arise if they were to invest

directly in a firm.



         As a result, the bulk of institutional investment in private equity is done through

funds.    These funds are raised for a specified period (typically a decade, though

extensions may be possible) and are governed by an agreement between the investors (the

limited partners) and the principals in the fund (the general partners), which specifies the

nature of the fund’s activities, the division of the proceeds, and so forth. Private equity

groups will typically raise a fund every few years, beginning the fundraising process as

the process of investing the previous fund is being completed.



         Institutional investors are reputed to widely differ in their sophistication in their

approach to private equity investments. University and foundation endowments are often

regarded as being on average the most sophisticated investors, while public pension funds


This section is largely based on the industry notes and cases in Lerner, Hardymon, and
5

Leamon (2004).

                                              9
are considered the least. Universities and foundations began many of the earliest private

equity investment programs. These groups thus frequently have a deeper understanding

of private equity investments, as well as “grandfather” rights that allow them to continue

to invest in subsequent funds of private equity groups that are closed to new investors.



       By way of contrast, the investment boards at many public pension funds are often

dominated by political appointees. These directors frequently have little understanding of

the private equity industry, and may in some cases be seeking to direct investments in

ways that are personally advantageous to themselves.          These problems, while not

unknown, are less severe at other classes of institutions. Moreover, many public pension

funds offer compensation levels that are very modest by the standards of the financial

services industry. As a result, there frequently is high turnover among their investment

professionals, and average level of experience is modest. In some cases, career concerns

may shape the investment decisions of some pension fund investors. Some universities

have been very successful at preventing turnover by offering a variety of financial and

non-pecuniary benefits to their investment professionals.



       Two other classes of investors also deserve discussion. An increasingly important

LP is the investment advisor, sometimes known as a “fund-of-funds.” Consultants

typically help institutions assess the past performance of previous funds by private equity

groups, as well as evaluate the groups’ future prospects. In recent years, as more public

pension funds and individual investors have begun investing in private equity, funds-of-




                                            10
funds have become more prominent. These groups will aggregate capital from a number

of limited partners, and then invest it in a variety of private equity funds.



       Banks have long been important private equity investors. The motivations for

their investment activity, however, are frequently more complex than those of other LPs.

While they also seek to earn high returns, their investment decisions are often shaped by

indirect considerations as well. For instance, many banks garner substantial profits from

lending to firms undergoing leveraged buyouts or else from advising on these

transactions. As a result, they may invest in a buyout fund that they do not expect to

yield high returns, if the investment will increase the probability that they will generate

substantial fee income from the group’s transactions.



   3. The Data

       As noted in the introduction, the primary barrier to research of this question has

been data availability.     The greater disclosure in recent years of private equity

investments has allowed us to overcome this barrier. This section describes the data

sources we employ.



       Investment decisions. To ascertain which institutional investors had invested in

which private equity funds, we employ two sources. The first comes from the investors

themselves. Numerous public pension funds disclose the funds in which they have

invested. In some cases, this information was contained in annual reports that were

posted on the Internet; in other cases, these were provided by funds after a written




                                              11
request. In addition, a number of private investors with whom the authors had personal

relationships provided us with confidential listings of the funds in which they had

invested. We obtained detailed information about these portfolio allocations from 20

different institutional investors.



        The second source was the compilation of private equity investors by Asset

Alternatives. Since 1992, Asset Alternatives has sought to compile the investors in

private equity funds though informal contacts with the funds and investors themselves.

This information is included as part of their Directory of Alternative Investment Sources,

though the underlying data has not been made hitherto available to researchers. While

their database is not comprehensive, it covers a large and diverse fraction of the private

equity industry.



        Fund characteristics. We collected information on the fund size, stage, the

previous funds raised, etc., from the Asset Alternatives funds database (included as part

of their Galante’s Venture Capital and Private Equity Directory, though typically again

not shared with researchers) and Venture Economics’ online funds database. These two

databases were merged and discrepancies reconciled. We distinguished between the

overall count of the fund and the sequence of this particular family of funds. In addition,

we used the data on management fees and carried interest of funds from Gompers and

Lerner (1999), updated through the review of the records of a number of limited partners

who gave us access to their files. In total, our database covers 1,398 separate funds that

belong to an LP portfolio in our sample.




                                            12
       Fund returns. Our primary source for return data was Private Equity

Intelligence’s 2004 Private Equity Performance Monitor, which presents return data on

over 1,700 private equity funds. This information is compiled by Mark O’Hare, who

over the past five years has created a database of returns from public sources (e.g.,

institutional investors who have posted their returns online), Freedom of Information Act

requests to public funds, and voluntary disclosures by both general and limited partners.6

We supplemented this with the return data that we had previously gathered from public

sources. Note that we will only use IRR data in our sample for funds established prior to

1999 (and we verify the results for a sample of funds raised prior to 2002), since this

performance metric is unlikely to be very meaningful for younger funds. IRRs are

reported net of fees and carried interest. As Gompers and Lerner (1999) shows, the

majority of funds have a fee structure with carried interest of 20% and management fees

of 1.5% to 2.5%.



       Institutional investor characteristics. We compiled information on the overall size

of the assets managed by the limited partner, the length of each institution’s experience

with private equity investing and location from Venture Economics’ Directory of Private

Equity Investors and Asset Alternatives’ Directory of Alternative Investment Sources.



    4. Analysis

       4. 1. Descriptive Statistics

6
 O’Hare has been highly successful at gathering data not only on the returns of new
funds, but also many of the most established in the industry.

                                           13
       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the 1,398 funds and 417 limited partners

in our main sample. Data on characteristics of interest were not always available. We

indicate in Table 1 the number of non-missing observations. Panel A of Table 1 shows

statistics of the funds, broken down into three categories: early-stage venture capital,

later-stage venture capital, and buyout funds. Our sample is split relatively evenly across

these three types of funds. We have a limited amount of data on carried interest and

management fees, while we have fund performance data for close to half of the funds in

our sample.



       Fund Characteristics. The average fund in our sample that LPs invested in is

$406 million, but there is large heterogeneity between funds. The smallest fund is $4.5

million dollars, while the largest one is $6.1 billion. Not surprisingly, buyout funds are

much larger with an average size of $660 million, while later-stage venture funds average

$330 million and early-stage VC funds $210 million. The average fund is a fourth fund

(the average sequence number is 3.7), but there is substantial variation ranging from

partnerships that are in their first fund to those that have raised 32 funds. Our sample

contains funds that were raised between 1991 and 2001, and the average fund in our

sample was closed in 1997. We find that venture capital funds tend to be somewhat older

(average sequence number of later-stage VC funds is 4.2), reflecting the longer history of

this segment of the private equity market.



       Performance. In terms of performance, we find that the average fund in our

sample has an (unadjusted) IRR of 6.7 percent, but again with a great amount of




                                             14
dispersion: the worst fund returned negative 94 percent while the best performing fund

had an IRR of more than 500 percent. The average performance in this sample might

seem very low. But it is important to note that this sample includes all funds up to 2001,

which might include a fair number of funds that have not been fully liquidated.

Therefore we also report the average performance for all funds that were raised prior to

1999 (and thus had at least 5 years to realize returns). If we condition on this sample, we

see that the average IRR across all funds in the sample is 24% (excess returns of 11%).

This performance is comparable in magnitude (but a little higher) to the average

performance found in Kaplan and Schoar (2004) or in Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003).

Over the entire period, we also find that early and later stage venture funds in our sample

had significantly higher performance than the buyout funds; 14 percent and 8 percent

versus 0 percent, respectively (on an unadjusted basis).



       Geographic Distribution. Finally, we see that the funds in our sample are

concentrated on the East and West Coasts, with 47 percent and 31 percent of the U.S.

funds in the sample respectively. Only 23 percent of the funds are based in the South or

the Midwest. When differentiating by type of fund, we see that the majority of early-

stage venture capital funds are based in the western United States (56 percent), while 50

percent of later-stage VC and 62% of buyout funds are based in the northeastern region.

This is not surprising since the buyout industry tends to be concentrated around New

York and early-stage venture funds around Silicon Valley.




                                            15
       Composition of Limited Partners. Panel B of Table 1 shows the distribution of

limited partners in our sample and their characteristics.      Endowments comprise the

largest group, with 100 LPs, followed by public pension funds (74) and corporate pension

funds (72). When we differentiate among the different sub-classes of endowments we

find that the majority of endowments in our sample are private university endowments

(63), followed by foundations (27) and public university endowments (10). There are 66

advisors in the sample, 32 insurance companies, 30 commercial and investment banks,

and 43 LPs that cannot be classified in any of the above categories. (Among such LPs

are investment agencies of foreign governments, corporate venturing departments of

large corporations, and religious organizations.) Advisors and public pension funds

constitute the largest amounts of capital committed to the industry overall (averaging

$3.6 billion and $2.2 billion committed to private equity investments, respectively).



       Sample Period. Panel C shows the breakdown of vintage years for the funds in

our sample. The number of funds in our sample increases over the 1990s. This is due to

two different phenomena.      First, the coverage of the Galante’s database appears to

become more comprehensive in the later part of the sample period. Second, the 1990s

represent a period of massive growth of the private equity industry, in terms of the

number of funds raised and the number of investors participating in the industry. To

alleviate concerns that sample selection issues due to improved coverage of LPs over

time might drive our result, we replicate our findings for the sample of 20 LPs where we

have their complete investment history.




                                            16
       Availability of fund performance data. Finally, Panel D shows characteristics of

funds for which we were able to collect performance data, compared to the entire sample.

IRR data is available for just over 40% of all funds in the sample across the various fund

categories (early-stage VC, later-stage VC, and buyout funds). The funds for which we

have performance data tend to be slightly larger in size, have higher sequence numbers,

and have more LPs investing in them.



       4.2. Performance Differences across LP Classes

       Table 2 provides an overview of the investments made by each type of limited

partner in the different fund categories.        There is enormous heterogeneity in the

performance of funds in which different groups of institutions invest. The funds that

endowments invested in have by far the best overall performance. The average IRR of

funds that endowments invested in is 20 percent. This high performance is, however,

entirely driven by their VC investments. On average, early- and later-stage VC funds that

endowments invested in returned an IRR of 35 and 19 percent, respectively. In contrast,

the buyout investments of endowments only had an IRR of less than one percent.

Overall, endowments had a very positive average, since they invested in many more

venture capital than buyout funds.



       If we again break down endowments into the different types of endowments

(public, private, and foundations) we find that foundations and private university

endowments have higher IRRs than public endowments.             This difference becomes

particularly large when we form the weighted average IRRs where each fund is weighted




                                            17
by its asset size. Public endowments have a weighted average IRR of 3.2% while private

university endowments and foundations have a weighted average IRR of 19.1% and

23.3%, respectively. Interestingly, public university endowments perform much worse

across all different types of private equity classes than the other endowments once we

weight by size. This might partly be a reflection of the fact that these endowments are

much larger and thus forced to place the bulk of their investments in larger and less

profitable funds. Moreover, all endowments perform relatively poorly in the buyout

arena.



         This difference in performance across different forms of private equity

investments might suggest that endowments have specific human or organizational

capital that allows them to outperform in the VC investments, rather than a model where

endowments have fewer agency problems. Since we do not see the same performance

differential for their buyout investments, the data suggest that endowments have

specialized knowledge in the venture industry. In section 8 we will analyze in more

detail what can explain this superior performance.



         The picture looks quite different for public and corporate pension funds (and to

some extent, insurance companies). On average, the funds that these classes of LPs

invested in had more moderate IRRs (eight percent and five percent, respectively). But

the drivers of positive returns are less skewed for this group. The average VC fund these

LPs invested in had an IRR of slightly over 10 percent, while their buyout funds had an

IRR of two percent. Finally, we see that the funds picked by advisors and banks on




                                            18
average had very poor performance (IRRs of negative two and negative three percent,

respectively).   This trend seems to hold across all different types of private equity

investments.     Interestingly, bank and finance companies picked particularly poor

performing funds among the early-stage VC funds (IRR of negative 14 percent). We

must be careful not to interpret these findings as the overall performance of the private

equity portfolio of these groups, however, since this calculation does not reflect the

actual size of the allocations to each of the different funds. This exercise represents the

ability of different groups of LPs to identify (good) funds on average.



       We also estimated the LPs’ investment performance by assigning weights to each

LP’s portfolio constituents as follows.      For investments where the dollar amount

committed to the fund and the overall private equity commitments by the LP are

available, we weighted the returns from each fund by the amount committed to the fund

in relation to the LP’s total private equity commitments. For all remaining funds in an

LP’s portfolio for which the commitment amount was not known, we simply assumed

that the LP invested an equal amount in each fund. The results of this exercise indicate

that the performance changes little.7



       4. 3. Are these Performance Patterns Robust?


7
 Panel A also reveals that public and corporate pension funds tend to invest in larger
funds, whereas endowments and insurance companies invest in smaller funds. Public
pension funds also tend to invest in funds with higher sequence numbers. Interestingly,
we see that the smaller fund size for endowments is driven by their allocations to small
buyout funds and the greater share of venture capital funds in their portfolio: the VC
funds they invest in are larger on average. We find that insurance companies and banks
tend to invest in early funds (lower sequence number) across all fund categories.


                                            19
       A natural question is whether these univariate results are robust to controlling for

the time period when the investments were made, or the choice between venture and

buyout funds. We address this concern through regression analyses of fund returns.



       For these and subsequent analyses, we will analyze investments at the LP-fund

level (except for Table 4, which is conducted at the fund level): that is, we will use each

investment by a limited partner in a fund as a separate observation. We control for the

fact that we have multiple observations by clustering the standard errors at the fund level.

We regress the realized IRR of a fund on a set of dummies for the different classes of LPs

and control variables for year fixed effects, fund category fixed effects, the year the LP'
                                                                                          s

private equity investment program was launched,8 and the geographical co-location of the

fund and LP. Public pension funds are the omitted category from the set of LP dummies.

We only include funds that were started before 1999 to guarantee that a majority of the

returns of the funds have already been realized.



       In Table 3, column (1), we find that only funds in which endowments invest

outperform public pension funds, while other LPs on average pick funds that under

perform relative to those groups. In particular, corporate pension funds and banks invest

in funds with significantly lower IRRs. To understand the difference in the performance

of endowments in more detail we also replicate this regression where we distinguish

between private university endowments, public university endowments, and foundations.

We find (not reported in the table) the superior performance of endowments overall is


8
 The vintage is expressed relative to that of the median LP in the sample, which began its
private equity program in 1987. Thus, a program begun in 1991 would be coded as +4.

                                            20
predominantly driven by the private universities. The public universities and foundations

have positive but not statistically significant coefficients.



        In column (2), we include a dummy equal to one if the LP and GP are in the same

region of the United States and a control for the age of the private equity program of the

LP. We also add a number of other LP-specific controls such as the logarithm of the LP

size (measured as committed capital) and dummies for the region the LP is located in.

We find that the main results described above are not affected by the inclusion of these

controls.   The relationship between LP size and performance is negative but not

significant. When we include a squared term for log of size in an unreported regression,

however, we see that the average performance of the funds they invest in is concave. The

direct effect of size is positive while the coefficient on the squared term is negative

although not statistically significant, i.e., those LPs that are very big tend to under

perform the average.9



        The geographical proximity factor is negatively associated with fund

performance, which might suggest that LPs are willing to invest in funds with lower

performance if they are in the same local area. In unreported regressions, we also interact

the dummy for whether LP and GP are in the same region with the dummies for different



9
 One could imagine that there are severe capacity constraints in the industry, for example,
in terms of how much an LP can invest in a given fund and at what pace new fund
managers enter. Under this model, larger endowments might be forced to experiment
more and invest into new fund managers to secure the future choice of GPs. The need for
this type of investment might further depress the performance of large funds, since we
know from Kaplan and Schoar (2004) that first-time funds on average under perform the
industry.

                                              21
LP classes and we find that the negative effect is entirely driven by the public pension

funds. Only these display a large negative coefficient on the interaction term. We also

differentiate whether LP and GP are in the same region or in the same state. We find that

public pension funds continue to display poor performance when investing in funds that

are in the same state, while funds in the same broad region of the U.S. but not in the same

state do not under perform. When we disaggregate the endowments as above, there is

also a strong negative effect for public universities. These findings are consistent with

the idea that public pension funds and public endowments face politically motivated

pressures or constraints to invest in their local areas despite possibly unfavorable effects

on performance.



       The coefficient on LP vintage is positive but insignificant. We then interact the

LP type dummies with the vintage of the LP’s private equity investment program to find

out whether, within the different classes of LPs, those that started investing in private

equity earlier display different performance from those that started to invest later. We

find negative coefficients on the interaction terms for most LP classes. In particular,

among corporate pension funds, those LPs that started investing in private equity earlier

have significantly higher IRRs.



       4. 4. Importance of Market Cycles

       To analyze how sensitive fund returns are to market cycles, in column (4) of

Table 3 we replace year fixed effects with a measure of the aggregate annual inflow of

capital into the industry. From earlier papers by Gompers and Lerner (1998, 2001) and




                                            22
Kaplan and Schoar (2004) we know that capital flows and returns in private equity are

very cyclical. Therefore, our measure of industry capital flows can be interpreted as a

proxy for the ability of funds to time the market. The coefficient on the aggregate inflow

of capital is negative and highly significant.10 Parallel to before, we now interact the LP

dummies with the measure of aggregate capital inflow. Column (5) shows that the

coefficient on the interaction term between LP type and aggregate inflow of capital is

negative and highly significant in general, but particularly so for advisors (at the 1%

level) and for endowments and insurance companies (at the 5% level). These results

suggest that advisors have significantly lower returns if they invest during periods of high

capital inflows into the industry. This result is consistent with an interpretation where the

latter LPs tend to display more herding behavior when the market is “hot,” which leads to

investments in lower return funds.



       To test the robustness of this finding we also sort our data into two sub-samples,

funds with vintage years from 1991-1994 and those from 1995-1998, and repeat the

regressions described in Table 3 (not reported). Consistent with the herding story above,

we find that the poor performance of corporate pension funds and banks are

predominantly driven by their investments in the 1995-1998 period, which is usually

considered the beginning of the bubble period. By way of contrast, endowments show a

positive performance difference in both periods. In fact, the private endowments show




10
 This pattern continues to hold when we employ other proxies, such as the inflows into
venture capital funds only or the level of the NASDAQ. We employ similar alternative
controls in subsequent analyses.

                                             23
no difference in performance across the two periods, but the public endowments have a

more significant positive performance in the earlier period.



       4. 5. Robustness Checks

       We replicate the results in Table 3 using excess IRR as the performance measure.

Excess IRR is measured as the fund’s own IRR minus the median IRR of all private

equity funds in that year and category. These results are reported in the appendix

Table 3A. The results are equivalent to the results reported above. We also repeat our

analysis for the full sample of LP investments, including those made after 1999. Again,

the overall picture is very similar. We also repeat the analysis using median regressions

to reduce the importance of extreme values and the results are qualitatively similar. The

interaction terms between the different LP classes and industry capital flows become

statistically more significant, while the interaction terms with LP age become less

significant. The other results are unchanged.



       Lastly, in Table 3, we used the individual investment decisions by LPs as an

observation. We might be concerned that this overstates the amount of independent

variation we have in the sample despite the fact that we are clustering at the fund level.

Therefore, in Table 4 we now turn to an alternative empirical approach where we

collapse the data at the fund level. We use the number of LPs of each class that invested

in a given fund in our sample as explanatory variables for fund performance, together

with fund size and controls for year fixed effects and fund category effects. We again use

two measures of fund performance, IRR and excess IRR. As in Table 3, we find a




                                            24
significant positive correlation between the performance of a fund and the number of

endowments that invest in it. For all other classes of LPs, the coefficient is again

negative, but it is only significantly negative for banks and corporate pension funds.

Overall these results reconfirm our earlier findings in Table 3.



    5. Differences in Reinvestment Decisions of LPs

        In the subsequent analyses, we will try to explain what drives these differences in

the performance of LPs. One of the most important decisions for LPs is whether they

reinvest in the next fund of a partnership or not. Reinvestment decisions of LPs are

particularly important in the private equity industry, where information about the quality

of different private equity groups is more difficult to learn and is often restricted to

existing investors (see Lerner and Schoar (2004) for a discussion of asymmetric

information in private equity). Moreover, LPs have very few governance tools except for

exit, i.e., not reinvesting in the next fund.



        For each fund in our sample, we identify whether the private equity organization

raised a follow-on fund of the same type. For each LP investing in the fund, we then

determine whether the same LP reinvested in the follow-on fund. In this way, we make

sure that we do not miscode situations where no follow-on fund was raised as a decision

not to reinvest.



        Panel A of Table 5 shows the reinvestment outcomes by class of LP and fund

type. Public pension funds and insurance companies reinvest in roughly 60 percent of the




                                                25
funds where a next fund was raised. They are followed by endowments and advisors,

who reinvest in about 50 percent of the cases, while corporate pension funds and banks

reinvest in only 39 percent of the cases. Interestingly, endowments and advisors differ in

their reinvestment rates across different fund categories. They are both more likely to

reinvest in venture funds than in buyout funds.        Most other LPs do not show a

pronounced difference in reinvestment rate across fund categories. Moreover, funds in

which endowments choose to reinvest have much higher average IRR than those of other

classes of LPs. Again these higher average IRRs are especially driven by investments in

venture capital funds. By way of contrast, the funds banks and advisors reinvested in

show particularly poor performance.



       Panel B of Table 5 explores some of the consequences of reinvestment decisions.

We find that, across all LP classes, there are significant performance (IRR) differences

between funds in which LPs did and did not reinvest. We see that LPs tend to reinvest in

the next fund of the partnership if the current fund has a high IRR (on average these

funds have an IRR of 25 percent). In those instances where LPs decided not to reinvest,

the current fund on average had a significantly lower IRR of 17 percent. The same

pattern holds when we look at the IRRs of the subsequent fund. Funds in which LPs

reinvested have significantly higher performance than those in which they did not

reinvest (seven versus negative two percent respectively).



       In Panel C, we now break out the reinvestment decisions differentiated by class of

LP. The difference in the average current fund performance between reinvested and




                                           26
discontinued funds we found in Panel B is largely driven by the reinvestment decisions of

public and corporate pension funds and advisors, who tend to reinvest when the current

fund performance is higher.      Interestingly, endowments do not show a significant

difference in the current performance of partnerships in which they decided to reinvest

versus those they did not (39 versus 37 percent). This picture reverses when we look at

the performance of the next fund. Funds in which endowments decided to reinvest have

much higher performance than those they decided not to (31 versus 7 percent). They

appear to be able to select funds that maintain their high performance and avoid those

that will have lower performance going forward. Moreover, they tend to re-invest when

current funds are smaller in size.     Public pension funds show a similar ability to

differentiate between good and bad performers, but at, however, a much lower average

performance level. Funds they reinvested in on average have six percent returns, while

those they passed on had negative 2 percent. Advisors also appear to follow a similar

approach of reinvesting when the current fund is smaller, but are less successful at

picking the better performing next funds. In short, some investors appear far more able

to benefit from and/or act on the inside information that being a limited partner provides.



       In Table 6, we present the results from a linear probability model of reinvestment.

The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if an LP decided to reinvest in the next

fund of a given partnership (conditional on a next fund being raised) and zero otherwise.

In column (1), we find a positive but barely significant relationship between reinvestment

and the past performance of the prior fund.        Once we control for overall industry

conditions (measured as aggregate inflows of capital into the industry), LP vintage, and a




                                            27
dummy for whether LP and GP are in the same area, this relationship becomes slightly

more significant (see column (2)). By way of contrast, market cycles have a much more

significant effect on reinvestments: in times when more capital flows into the private

equity industry, LPs are also more likely to reinvest. Moreover, we see that the LPs’

vintage has no significant effect on the reinvestment decision, but LPs tend to be more

likely to reinvest if the GP is geographically proximate. We add dummies for the

different classes of LPs in Column (3).       We see that corporate pension funds and

endowments are less likely to reinvest on average. This might indicate that these groups

follow a more proactive investment strategy, in which they exercise their exit right if they

are not happy with the relationship.



       In column (4), we now add interaction terms between the LP class dummies and

the LP vintage. This allows us to test whether older LPs in different LP classes are more

likely to reinvest. We find that among corporate pension fund and banks, older LPs are

more likely to reinvest in a GP. This result could suggest that corporate pension funds

and banks tend to be less proactive in their investment strategy. Of course one could also

conjecture that these older LPs tend to have valuable long-standing relationships with

their GPs. Given the lower performance results we documented for these types of LPs in

Table 3, however, this interpretation seems less plausible.



       Finally we also interact LP types with fund IRR or aggregate capital inflow (not

reported in the table). By doing so, we hope to test whether different types of LPs are

more sensitive to the past performance of a fund or the market conditions when deciding




                                            28
whether to reinvest. While across most funds the coefficient on this interaction term is

positive, it is not significant. We also repeated all the analyses in Table 6 using logit

specifications with qualitatively the same results (not reported).



     6. Are the Patterns Driven by Fund Access?

        One possible explanation is that the superior performance of endowments is an

accident of history. As Kaplan and Schoar (2004) document, private equity funds display

a concave relationship between fund size and performance: the best funds apparently

limit their size, even if they could raise far more capital. Typically, these limitations are

implemented by restricting access to existing limited partners, who are given the right to

reinvest a set amount, and not accepting new investors. These facts may imply that

endowments enjoy superior returns not because of better fund selection, but because their

early experience gave them a “seat at the table” among superior groups. To explore the

possibility that the results simply reflect superior access, we analyze recent investment

decisions in young private equity groups. In these cases, access to the funds is much less

critical: existing limited partners should have little preferential access.11



        Table 7 summarizes the performance of different classes of LPs for funds

managed by recently established private equity groups. We use the median founding year

(1990) of all private equity groups in our sample as a cut-off, and explore whether

endowments continue to enjoy superior performance when they invest in the younger


11
  It is possible that existing relationships and prestige of an established limited partner
help somewhat in getting access to the hottest new funds, but typically new funds are not
in the position of turning away new investors.


                                              29
private equity groups. Panel A shows the results if we include all funds started after

1990. In this case we find that endowments and public pension funds do not outperform

the sample anymore. Moreover, the differences in performance between the different

LPs are less pronounced. But advisors and banks seem to perform most poorly when we

condition on the younger GPs. One might be concerned that including all funds started

after 1990 in the sample could create bias, if some classes of LPs such as endowments are

more likely to invest in recent years when returns have not been realized. We therefore

repeat the analysis restricting the sample to young funds that closed before 1999 (Panel

B). The picture changes significantly if we use this cut-off, since now endowments and

public pension funds tend to outperform the rest of the LPs, while banks and other LPs do

worst. The difference between the LP classes, however, is again less pronounced than in

Table 2.12



       Overall, these results suggest that some of the differences in the performance of

LPs (in particular, endowments and public pension funds) might be attributable to

preferential access of these LPs that have been in the industry for a long time. Over time,

they may have developed good relationships with established and successful funds in the

industry.    But endowments still outperform other LPs to some extent, even when

choosing among the younger GPs. Moreover, it might be optimal for established LPs to

invest in a number of younger funds even if the expected returns on these funds are low
12
  We also repeat a regression approach along similar lines as Table 3, including only
funds established after 1990 and before 1999. Parallel to the descriptive statistics we find
young funds in which banks invest do significantly worse. All LP dummies except for
endowments have a negative coefficient relative to the omitted category (public pension
funds) but none of these are significant. When we use excess IRR as the dependent
variable, endowments have significantly positive performance.


                                            30
initially. The goal of this strategy could be the need to generate information about new

classes of funds (e.g., Chinese venture capital) and to create a pipeline of a new

generation of GPs with whom they will have preferential relationships going forward.

This in turn could bias our results on the returns of young funds downwards and make the

differences between LP classes less pronounced than they might otherwise be.



   7. LP-Specific Differences

       Our analysis so far has focused on the differences between LP classes. But not all

endowment or pension fund investors are equal. Therefore, we now turn to analyzing the

importance of the underlying heterogeneity among individual LPs. The analysis that

follows will allow us to investigate whether differences in investment styles are

systematically related to differences in the performance of LPs.



       For that purpose, we estimate a model with LP-specific fixed effects.            We

augment the standard model we used in Table 3 by adding a full set of LP-specific fixed

effects instead of dummies for LP classes. This allows us to test whether individual LPs

differ in their intermediary investment styles, e.g., their propensity to invest in younger,

larger, or better performing funds. Table 8 reports the results from this exercise for a

number of different dependent variables. The first row of this table reports the R2 of a

regression of the raw fund IRR on controls for fund category and vintage year fixed

effects. The R2 in this regression is 28.9%. We now add the dummies for LP classes to

this specification. Row 2 shows that the R2 goes up to 29.7%. Moreover, the F-test for

the joint significance of the LP class dummies is significant at the 1% level. When we




                                            31
include the full set of individual LP fixed effects, the R2 of the regression increases to

35.2%. This increase is much more pronounced relative to the base model than when we

included the LP class dummies in row 2.            This finding suggests that LP-specific

heterogeneity explains a bigger fraction of the overall variation of LP performance than

differences between LP classes. We also find that an F-test on the joint significance of

the LP fixed effects is significant at the 1% level.



       We also repeat this analysis using excess IRR as the dependent variable.

Similarly to before, we find that R2 between the base model and the model with LP type

dummies increases from 11.7% to 12.7%, but when we include the individual LP fixed

effects the R2 goes up to 19.2%.        The same patterns hold for the other dependent

variables: GP founding year, GP size, and the change in size between two consecutive

funds. In each case, the increase in R2 is much larger when including the individual LP

fixed effects. Overall, these findings suggest that LP-specific differences in investment

styles are more important than differences between LP types in explaining the variation

in LP performance.



       7. 1. Differences within LP Classes

       A natural question is whether some classes of LPs are more heterogeneous than

others. To look at the heterogeneity in LP styles by class of LP, we collect the estimated

LP fixed effects and calculate the mean, median, and standard deviations of these fixed

effects by LP type. If the distribution of the estimated fixed effects is very tight around

the sample mean, it would suggest that LPs do not vary greatly within LP classes, and




                                              32
vice versa if the distribution is very wide.      Moreover, we can analyze if there are

differences in the distribution across different LP class.



       The results in Table 9 suggest that the standard deviations of IRR fixed effects for

endowments are somewhat larger than the other LPs. Panels A and B show that the

standard deviation of the raw IRR and excess IRR fixed effects for endowments are 31

and 23 respectively, higher than for the other LP classes (except the “other” category).

However, this could be driven by the positive skewness of fund returns for endowments.

Indeed, when we condition on the lower 75% of funds across all LPs, the difference in

spreads across the different LP classes is much less apparent (Panels C and D, and

Figure 1). The standard deviations are relatively similar across the different LP classes

for the other dimensions of LP investment styles, which suggest that there is no striking

asymmetry in the amount of heterogeneity across LP classes.



       7. 2. Correlation between the Dimensions of LP Investment Styles

       Finally, we analyze how the different dimensions of an LP’s investment style

correlate with one another and with performance. For that purpose, we accumulate the

estimated LP fixed effects in one matrix, where each row contains all the estimated fixed

effects from the regressions with different dependent variables for a given LP. So an LP

who has high performance across its different funds and invests with smaller GPs on

average will have a high fixed effect in the performance regression and a lower fixed

effect in the GP size regression. We can now correlate these different fixed effects to

understand how these different investment dimensions are related to one another.




                                             33
        Table 10 shows the correlation structure within our sample of LPs. Each cell in

this table represents the correlation between one set of fixed effects, described in the top

row of the table, and another set of fixed effects described on the left hand side of the

table. The first cell shows that, not surprisingly, the correlation between the raw IRR

fixed effects and the excess IRR fixed effects is high (point estimate of 0.62) and strongly

significant.   When we look at the correlation of raw IRR fixed effects and other

dimensions of LP investment style, we find that LPs who have higher fixed effects on the

change in fund size and GP size are correlated with higher performance fixed effects.

The interpretation of these results is that LPs who invest in larger and faster growing

funds on average tend to have higher average IRRs. And finally, we document a negative

correlation between the IRR fixed effect of an LP and the fixed effects on average GP

founding year and the fraction of GPs in the same region as the LP.



        Looking at the other dimensions of LP investment style, we find that LPs that

have higher fixed effects on the change in fund size (that is, those investing in funds that

increase their fund size more from one fund to the next) have lower GP founding year

fixed effects, a lower fraction of GPs in the same area, higher GP size fixed effects, and

higher reinvestment fixed effects.        Moreover, we find positive and significant

relationships between the fixed effect for GP size, reinvestment by the LP, and the

fraction of GPs in the same region. And finally we find a positive correlation between




                                            34
the reinvestment decision and the number of funds per GP, as well as the fraction of GPs

in the same region.13



       Overall, this supports the hypothesis that LPs vary in their overall investment

styles along a number of dimensions. These include the average size, growth rate, and

founding year of GPs they invest in, the tendency to reinvest in funds, and the proclivity

to invest in GPs that are geographically close to the LP. Most interestingly, these

different investment styles are systematically related to differences in the performance of

LPs.



     8. Endowments

       In this section, we try to understand in more detail what explains the superior

performance of endowments. For that purpose, we perform a simple cross-sectional

analysis relating the variation in performance among endowments to their observable

characteristics. Of the 73 endowments in our sample, 55 are universities for which

ranking data was available in the 1995 survey of U.S. colleges and universities conducted

by U.S. News and World Report magazine (47 private and 8 public universities).

U.S. News compiles data from various sources and aggregates them into one overall score

for each university.



13
  We also use a similar approach to take another look at the risk and return question
alluded to in the introduction. We compute for each LP a rough measure of the total (not,
as we would prefer, the systematic) risk of its portfolio: the standard deviation of the
logarithm of raw and excess IRRs of the funds in its portfolio. (We use logarithms to
reduce the impact of the skewness of the distribution.) We find a positive correlation—
which in some specifications is statistically significant and in others is not—between this
proxy for risk and the LP-specific fixed effects from the IRR and excess IRR regressions.

                                            35
       Table 11 shows descriptive statistics for the universities in our sample. The

overall score of all rated universities in our sample ranged from 71.6 (the lowest score

assigned to a rated university by U.S. News) to 100 (the highest). We also collected data

on the individual measures of academic quality used by U.S. News to determine the

rankings. Universities in our sample had academic reputation rankings ranging from 1

(the highest) to 129. The high school class standing of entering freshmen, measured as

the share of freshmen in the top 10 percent of their high school classes, ranged from a

low of 14% to the highest possible 100%. Acceptance rates among applicants ranged

from 14% for the highly selective schools to 88%. Yield rates, or the percentage of those

accepted who actually enrolled, were between 21% and 75%. Student to faculty ratios

varied from 6 to 20. The strength of a school’s resources was determined by its total

expenditures on instruction, administration, student services and academic support

divided by total full-time equivalent enrollment, with expenditure per student ranging

from $8,270 to $63,575. Freshmen retention rates—representing the average percentage

of freshmen entering in 1990 to 1993 who returned the following year—ranged from

71% to 99%. Graduation rates were based on the average percentage of students in the

1985 to 1988 freshman classes who graduated within six years, and ranged from 47% to

97%. Finally, alumni giving rates were based on the average percentage of living alumni

who gave to fund drives in the preceding two years, and ranged from 10% to 58%.



       To assess whether these characteristics and ranking factors are associated with

investment performance, we employed two approaches.          First, we simply compare




                                           36
average performance for the different subsets of endowments. We find that, overall,

university endowments outperform other endowments by 9%. Among the university

endowments, we see that private universities have an average IRR of 22% while the

public ones only achieve an IRR of 17%. Finally when we sort universities into the top

50% versus the bottom 50% according to the U.S. News ranking, we find that

endowments in the upper half outperform the lower-ranked half by 11%. We confirm

that these univariate results hold even when using a regression framework as in Table 3

where we include controls for fund vintage years and fund categories (not reported).



       We also use an alternative approach similar to the one in section 7.2, where we

collect the estimated LP fixed effects in regression models that incorporate LP-specific

fixed effects. We then correlate these estimated fixed effects with the academic ranking

variables. Table 12 shows the correlations obtained for the universities in our sample.

The first column of figures shows the correlations between LP fixed effects in regressions

using raw IRR as dependent variable on LP dummies, LP vintage, dummies for the

region of the LP and for the co-location of the LP and GP, fund vintage years, and fund

categories. The next two columns show the correlations when weighted IRR and excess

IRR are used as dependent variables in the LP-specific regressions. We find that there is

a strong positive correlation between LP fixed effects and overall ranking scores

(particularly for the weighted IRR regressions, which has a correlation coefficient of

0.71, significant at the 1% confidence level). In other words, endowments that received

higher scores in the U.S. News rankings tend to perform better. Acceptance rate and

alumni giving rate also show consistently significant correlations across all




                                           37
specifications: the more selective universities and those that have loyal and generous

alumni tend to perform better in their private equity investments. These effects are still

present but slightly weaker when we restrict the analysis to exclude funds closed in 1999

and after.



       Overall, these results suggest that private endowments and those with higher

academic rankings are associated with better investment performance in private equity.

The fact that the proxies for the selectivity of the student body and alumni loyalty are

particularly significant explanatory variables suggests that the advantage of top-

performing schools may lie in the information generated by close ties to accomplished

alumni, rather than simply in the wealth of the university.



   9. Conclusion

       The differences between institutional and individual investors have attracted

growing attention by financial economists. The diversity of strategies across the various

classes of institutional investors, however, has been much less scrutinized. This paper

seeks to address this gap, examining the experience of various institutional investors in

private equity funds.



       Using data on investment choices and performance that have not been hitherto

explored by economists, we document a puzzling pattern: dramatic differences in the

performance of investments by different institutions. Endowments have an annual return

some 14% better than other institutions, while funds selected by investment advisors and




                                            38
banks perform particularly poorly. These differences remain present when we employ a

variety of controls and specifications. We explore the importance of funds’ reinvestment

strategies in explaining the differences in LP performance. We find that endowments and

corporate pension funds are much less likely to reinvest in a given partnership.

Moreover, those LPs are better at forecasting the performance of follow-on funds. Funds

in which endowments decided to reinvest show much higher performance than those

where endowments decided not to reinvest. This suggest that endowments proactively

use the information they gain from being an inside investor, while other LPs seem less

willing or able to use information they obtained as an existing fund investor.



       We also explore the possibility that the superior performance of endowments or

public pension funds results from historical accident: i.e., that these LPs through their

early experience as limited partners may have greater access to established, high-

performing funds. To test this hypothesis, we examine investments in young private

equity funds (those raised after 1990) across all classes of LPs. If the performance

difference is mainly driven by the superior access that older LPs have in established

funds, conditioning on younger funds should erase the difference in performance between

the different classes of LPs. When we repeat our analysis conditioning on young funds,

we still find a performance premium for endowments and public pension funds, though

the difference is much smaller than in the funds formed before 1990. While this finding

does not support the idea that the superior performance of these LPs is merely driven by

historical accident, we cannot rule out that some of the performance difference is due to

their early access to superior funds.




                                            39
       Finally, we examine the LPs’ “intermediary style”: the systematic patterns they

display when selecting private equity funds. We show that LP-specific differences in

investment styles are significantly correlated with the performance differences between

LPs. LPs that have higher IRR fixed effects also tend to invest in older funds and have a

smaller fraction of GPs in the same geographic area as the LP. In addition, a cross-

sectional examination of the variation in performance among endowments reveals that

private endowments and universities with higher quality and more loyal students enjoy

superior returns from their private equity investments.



       This paper poses a number of follow-on questions that would reward further

research:

   •   First, better understanding the sources of the performance puzzle is an important

       challenge. What specific agency problems, for instance, have led to the poor

       selection of funds by investment advisors and banks? While we can speculate on

       some of the causes—for instance, the weak incentive compensation offered many

       advisors and the desire on the part of many banks to attract lending and advisory

       business by investing in new funds—clearly more work is needed to understand

       these issues.

   •   Second, we noted in the introduction that the differing experience levels of the

       LPs might exacerbate cycles in the private equity market. To fully investigate this

       question, it would be necessary to link the records of LP investments that we have




                                            40
    investigated here with the characteristics of the individual companies backed by

    private equity funds.

•   Finally, it would be interesting to explore the generality of these results. Are the

    same patterns seen, for instance, in the returns from hedge fund and public equity

    managers? If so, it may be interesting to explore the broader consequences of the

    changing mixture of institutional investors.




                                        41
                                     References


Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2003, “All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention
and News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Unpublished
working paper, University of California at Berkeley and Davis.

Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, “Style Investing,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 68, 161-199.

Froot, Kenneth, and Melvyn A. Teo, 2004, “Equity Style Returns and Institutional
Investor Flows,” Working paper no. 10355, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1996, “The Use of Covenants: An Analysis of Venture
Partnership Agreements,” Journal of Law and Economics, 39, 463-498.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1998, “What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising?,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 49-192.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1999, “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S.
Venture Capital Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 3-44.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2000, “Money Chasing Deals? The Impact of Fund
Inflows on Private Equity Valuations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 55, 281-325.

Gompers, Paul, and Andrew Metrick, 2001, “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 229-260.

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, “Momentum Investment
Strategies, Portfolio Performance and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior,”
American Economic Review, 85, 1088-1105.

Gromb, Denis, and Dmitiri Vayanos, 2002, “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with
Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361-407.

Hellmann, Thomas, Laura Lindsey, and Manju Puri, 2004, "Building Relationships Early:
Banks in Venture Capital," Unpublished working paper, University of British Columbia,
Arizona State University, and Duke University.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2004, “Private Equity Performance: Returns,
Persistence and Capital Flows,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, “The Structure and
Performance of the Money Management Industry,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics, 339-379.




                                          42
Lerner, Josh, G. Felda Hardymon, and Ann Leamon, 2004, Venture Capital and Private
Equity: A Casebook, New York, John Wiley, 3rd edition.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar 2004, “The Illiquidity Puzzle: Theory and Evidence
from Private Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 3-40.

Mayer, Colin, Koen Schoors, and Yishay Yafeh, 2003, “Sources of Funds and Investment
Activities of Venture Capital Funds: Evidence from Germany, Israel, Japan, and the
U.K.,” Working paper no. 9645, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Poterba, James, 1989, “Venture Capital and Capital Gains Taxation,” in Lawrence
Summers, editor, Tax Policy and the Economy, Cambridge, MIT Press, volume 3, 47-68.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of
Finance, 52, 35–55.




                                         43
                                            Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

Panel A: Descriptive statistics - Funds
                                                        Overall                           Early-stage VC funds
                                              N    Mean Std dev      Min     Max     N    Mean Std dev      Min    Max
Total closing (MM$)                        1,398    406      664      4.5   6,100   395    208     242      5.2   1,600
Overall fund sequence number               1,393     3.7     3.6       1      32    393    3.7      2.7      1      14
Closing year                               1,398   1997      2.7    1991    2001    395   1998      2.6   1991    2001
Internal rate of return (%)                 576      6.7    51.0    -94.2    513    159   13.8     79.3   -66.8    513
    Pre-1999 funds only                     341     23.9    59.1    -94.2    513    71    60.5     99.6   -66.8    513
             a
Excess IRR (%)                              564      6.5    43.6    -90.5    493    156   17.2     67.8   -62.5    493
 Pre-1999 funds only                        332     11.0    54.9    -90.5   493.4   69    40.2     96.1   -62.5   493.4

Carried interest (%)                        199     20.7     2.2      20      30    58    21.8      3.3     20      30
Management fee (%)                          115      2.1     0.5       1       4    38     2.4      0.5      1       4
Total number of LPs investing in fund      1,397     5.4     5.7       1      46    394    4.9      4.5      1      31
Geographical location of US-based funds:
 West                                      1,117    0.31               0       1    331   0.56               0       1
 Northeast                                 1,117    0.47               0       1    331   0.27               0       1
 South                                     1,117    0.12               0       1    331   0.12               0       1
 Midwest                                   1,117    0.11               0       1    331   0.06               0       1



                                                   Later-stage VC funds                       Buyout funds
                                              N    Mean Std dev       Min    Max     N    Mean Std dev     Min     Max
Total closing (MM$)                         530     328      466      4.5   4,600   473    660     953      10    6,100
Overall fund sequence number                527      4.2     4.2       1      32    473    3.0      3.3      1      29
Closing year                                530    1997      2.8    1991    2001    473   1997      2.6   1991    2001
Internal rate of return (%)                 224      7.6    42.4    -49.9   268.4   193    -0.4    21.2   -94.2    57.9
    Pre-1999 funds only                     134     25.6    45.2    -38.8   268.4   136    3.1     21.8   -94.2    57.9

Excess IRRa (%)                             217      5.6    34.5    -78.4    249    191    -1.3    19.0   -90.5     46
 Pre-1999 funds only                        129      9.0    42.8    -78.4   248.8   134    -2.1    19.8   -90.5    45.5

Carried interest (%)                         54     20.5     1.8      20      30    87    20.2      1.2     20      30
Management fee (%)                           32      2.1     0.4       1       3    45     1.8      0.3      1       3
Total number of LPs investing in fund       530      5.2     5.4       1      33    473    6.2      6.8      1      46
Geographical location of US-based funds:
 West                                       442     0.27               0       1    344   0.11               0       1
 Northeast                                  442     0.50               0       1    344   0.62               0       1
 South                                      442     0.11               0       1    344   0.12               0       1
 Midwest                                    442     0.12               0       1    344   0.15               0       1


a
 Excess IRR is internal rate of return minus the median IRR of the portfolio formed for each fund
category every year.
                                        Table 1 (continued). Descriptive Statistics

Panel B: Descriptive statistics – Mean characteristics of limited partners, by class of LP
                                                                        Total funds               Total              Percentage          Percentage      Number of
                                                Year of establishment
                                                                           under              private equity        committed to        committed to        funds
                                        N          of private equity
                                                                        management            commitments             VC funds          buyout funds      in which
                                                 investment program
                                                                          (MM$)                  (MM$)                  (%)                 (%)          LP invested
Public pension funds                    74               1987            24,753                    2,212                 33%                37%             31.3
Corporate pension funds                 72               1986            10,728                      635                 44                 31              10.5
Endowments                          100                  1985             1,565                      200                 41                 24              14.3
 Private endowments                  63                  1985             1,378                      178                 44                 23              15.1
 Public endowments                   10                  1986             2,207                      200                 41                 21              21.4
 Foundations                         27                  1986             1,783                      239                 37                 26               9.9

Advisors                                66               1988             4,811                    3,654                 43                 35              25.3
Insurance companies                     32               1983            36,631                    1,171                 31                 32              18.6
Banks and finance companies             30               1983            85,435                      671                 27                 57              19.1
Other investors                         43               1989              933                       108                 57                 31              5.7
Overall                             417                  1986            18,036                    1,173                 39%                33%             18.2




Panel C: Fund observations by vintage year and type
                            1991        1992      1993          1994    1995        1996       1997        1998          1999      2000          2001 All years
Early-stage VC funds          8          15         11           24      19           21         45            41          69       102           40        395
Later-stage VC funds          22         20         31           36      49           43         66            69          76          78         40        530
Buyouts funds                 8          19         28           41      35           41         72            75          52          68         34        473
Overall                       38         54         70          101     103           105       183        185           197        248          114       1,398



Panel D: Availability of fund performance data
                                                         Funds with performance data                                               All funds

                                                            Early-stage Later-stage Buyout                                    Early-stage Later-stage Buyout
                                               All funds                                                       All funds
                                                             VC funds VC funds       funds                                     VC funds    VC funds    funds

Total closing (MM$)                              584             292           431           1,002               406             208              328         660
                                                (836)           (294)         (574)         (1,168)             (664)           (242)            (466)       (953)

Sequence number                                   4.1            4.7           4.3            3.3                 3.7            3.7              4.2         3.0
                                                 (3.2)          (2.9)         (3.4)          (3.1)               (3.6)          (2.7)            (4.2)       (3.3)

Vintage year                                     1997           1998          1997           1997                1997           1998             1997        1997
                                                 (2.8)          (2.8)         (2.9)          (2.6)               (2.7)          (2.6)            (2.8)       (2.6)

Total number of LPs investing in fund             8.0            7.3           7.6            9.0                 5.4            4.9              5.2         6.2
                                                 (6.5)          (5.4)         (6.4)          (7.3)               (5.7)          (4.5)            (5.4)       (6.8)

Fraction first funds                             20%            14%           17%            27%                 30%            27%              25%         37%

Fraction second funds                            19%            13%           17%            26%                 19%            17%              16%         23%

Fraction third funds                             15%            12%           16%            16%                 15%            13%              16%         15%

Number of observations                           576             159          224            193                1,398            395             530          473
 % of all funds                                  41%            40%           42%            41%
                            Table 1 (continued). Descriptive Statistics

The sample of funds consists of 1,398 distinct funds listed by Asset Alternatives.

Panel A summarizes fund characteristics according to the type of fund (early-stage VC, later-stage
VC, and buyout funds). Excess IRR is internal rate of return minus the median IRR of the portfolio
formed for each fund category every year. Geographical location by region follows the U.S. Census
classification of states: West includes California; Northeast includes Massachusetts, New York,
Pennsylvania; South includes Texas; Midwest includes Illinois, Ohio.

Panel B summarizes overall investment characteristics of 417 limited partners (LPs) who invested
in those 1,398 funds, presented according to class of LP (public pension fund, corporate pension
fund, endowment, etc). Percentage committed to VC funds includes both early-stage and later-stage
VC investments. Percentages committed to VC funds and to buyout funds do not add up to 100%
because LPs also invest in other types of specialized private equity funds, such as oil, gas and
energy, real estate, or venture leasing funds, which are not covered by our analyses.

Panel C shows the distribution of the funds by vintage year.

Panel D shows mean characteristics of funds for which performance data was available, relative to
the entire sample. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
              Table 2. Mean Fund Characteristics by Class of LP and by Fund Type

                                                  Overall                                 Early-stage VC funds
                                                  Fund      Fund   Weighted                       Fund     Fund    Weighted
                                      Fund size                                       Fund size
                               N                sequence    IRR    fund IRR    N                sequence   IRR     fund IRR
                                       (MM$)                                           (MM$)
                                                 number      (%)      (%)                        number     (%)       (%)
Public pension funds          2,317     984       4.8       7.6      2.6      365       320       4.8      12.1      1.1
Corporate pension funds       759       826       4.6       5.1      3.1      141       228       4.4      9.4       3.1
Endowments                    1,433     588       4.7       20.5    16.9      542       309       4.8      34.6     28.9
 Private endowments           953       613       4.8       20.8    19.1      379       324       4.8      33.4     30.7
 Public endowments            214       701       4.9       16.2     3.2      61        344       5.4      30.6      7.6
 Foundations                  266       404       4.1       23.9    23.3      102       233       4.1      44.3     43.4

Advisors                      1,667     782       4.6       -1.8     -3.0     551       343       4.5      -0.5      -0.6
Insurance companies           594       542       4.0       5.5      2.1      148       238       4.3      2.6       -5.3
Banks and finance companies   573       721       3.5       -3.2     -4.1      89       252       3.4      -13.9    -13.2
Other investors               244       429       3.7       4.8      5.9       98       148       2.9      -6.8      -6.5
Overall                       7,587     777       4.5       6.9      3.8      1,934     299       4.5      12.8      7.7



                                          Later-stage VC funds                                 Buyout funds
                                                  Fund      Fund   Weighted                       Fund     Fund    Weighted
                                      Fund size                                       Fund size
                               N                sequence    IRR    fund IRR    N                sequence   IRR     fund IRR
                                       (MM$)                                           (MM$)
                                                 number      (%)      (%)                        number     (%)       (%)
Public pension funds          910       593       5.6       10.8     4.7      1042     1,557      4.0      3.2       1.5
Corporate pension funds       260       376       5.5       10.9     8.1      358      1,389      3.9      0.3       0.3
Endowments                    493       465       5.4       19.3    15.3      398      1,118      3.8      0.1       0.5
 Private endowments           307       482       5.6       19.2    17.4      267      1,174      3.9      2.1       2.4
 Public endowments            91        517       5.5       17.1     4.8      62       1,324      3.5      -5.0      -5.4
 Foundations                  95        361       4.6       22.2    20.6      69        717       3.4      -2.1      -0.3

Advisors                      601       680       5.5       -1.0     -3.8     515      1,370      3.7      -4.3      -4.5
Insurance companies           218       443       4.6       12.3     7.9      228       835       3.2      -0.6      0.7
Banks and finance companies   177       444       3.8       1.0      -0.4     307      1,017      3.3      -2.2      -3.3
Other investors                86       480       5.4       17.8    20.2       60       815       2.6      -2.3      -2.3
Overall                       2,745     544       5.3       9.4      5.2      2,908 1,314         3.7      0.4       -0.3


The table shows groupings of 7,587 investments by 417 LPs in 1,398 funds, and mean values of
selected characteristics of those funds. Fund size refers to the total dollar value raised from all
investors in the fund, fund sequence number is by reference to the private equity firm’s funds
portfolio, fund IRR is the internal rate of return of the fund obtained from Private Equity
Performance Monitor, and weighted fund IRR is internal rate of return weighted by commitment
to a fund as a fraction of each LP’s total commitments to private equity funds.
                                         Table 3. Fund Performance Regressions

Dependent variable: Fund IRR
                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
Dummy for LP class:
(comparison category is public pension funds)
  Corporate pension funds                               -6.59   **     -7.83   **    -10.99   ***     -9.93   ***     -7.40
                                                       (2.83)         (3.70)         (4.16)          (3.75)          (6.01)
 Endowments                                             11.58   ***     9.07   **      9.34   **       9.81   **      25.01   ***

                                                       (4.37)         (4.25)         (4.32)          (4.39)          (8.15)
 Advisors                                                2.92           2.94           3.65            1.85           26.52   **

                                                       (2.85)         (5.11)         (5.72)          (5.41)         (10.64)
 Insurance companies                                    -5.65          -3.44          -3.95           -4.95            7.41
                                                       (3.89)         (4.33)         (4.64)          (4.59)          (8.59)
 Banks                                                  -9.05   ***    -4.92          -1.09           -5.81          -11.23
                                                       (2.96)         (4.49)         (6.20)          (4.49)          (9.29)
 Other LPs                                              -7.90         -31.33   ***   -28.07   ***    -27.62   **     -40.77   **

                                                       (5.03)         (9.98)         (7.01)         (10.97)         (15.63)

LP and GP in same region                                               -7.35   ***    -7.13   ***    -6.81    ***    -6.31    ***

                                                                      (2.38)         (2.38)         (2.33)          (2.30)
LP vintage                                                              0.35           0.85   **      0.30            0.71
                                                                      (0.22)         (0.43)         (0.24)          (0.43)
LP size (log of total commitments to private equity)                   -0.80          -0.42          -0.84           -0.39
                                                                      (0.70)         (0.73)         (0.78)          (0.79)
Total private equity fund inflow                                                                    -31.55    ***   -23.05    ***

                                                                                                    (6.69)          (6.43)
Interaction effects:
  Corporate pension funds * LP vintage                                                -1.60   **                      -0.99
                                                                                     (0.72)                          (0.65)
 Endowments * LP vintage                                                              -0.71                           -0.46
                                                                                     (0.61)                          (0.61)
 Advisors * LP vintage                                                                -0.23                           -0.07
                                                                                     (0.83)                          (0.83)
 Insurance companies * LP vintage                                                     -0.68                           -0.86
                                                                                     (0.82)                          (0.86)
 Banks * LP vintage                                                                    0.84                           -0.69
                                                                                     (1.55)                          (1.29)
 Other LPs * LP vintage                                                               -1.27                           -2.26
                                                                                     (1.39)                          (1.53)

 Corporate pension funds * inflow                                                                                     -8.05
                                                                                                                    (10.60)
 Endowments * inflow                                                                                                 -30.50   **

                                                                                                                    (12.45)
 Advisors * inflow                                                                                                   -48.23   ***

                                                                                                                    (15.57)
 Insurance companies * inflow                                                                                        -28.28   **

                                                                                                                    (13.93)
 Banks * inflow                                                                                                        9.63
                                                                                                                    (13.16)
 Other LPs * inflow                                                                                                   38.49
                                                                                                                    (24.64)

Year fixed effects                                        Yes            Yes            Yes             No              No
Fund category fixed effects                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
LP region dummies                                          No            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
R-squared                                              26.9%          23.5%          23.8%          20.9%           22.0%
Number of observations                                  2,755          1,582          1,582          1,531           1,531
                            Table 3 (continued). Fund Performance Regressions

The sample consists of investments by 417 LPs in 1,398 funds as compiled by Asset Alternatives, and
excludes funds closed in 1999 and after. Several versions of the following pooled regression are run
and coefficient estimates and standard errors are reported by columns in the table:

                  FundIRR ij = β 0 +        β 0 j DummyLPj +       β1 j DummyLP j × FundInflow i
                                        j                      j

                              +       β 2 k DummyLPk × LPvintage j + β3D_sameregion ij + controls
                                  k


FundIRRij is the internal rate of return of fund i in %. Six dummy variables identify the class of LP for
each LP-fund pair, with DummyLPk = 1 for each observation consisting of an investment in fund i by
LP j belonging to LP class k and = 0 otherwise. “Public pension funds” is the ‘base LP class’, with
zero values for all LP dummy variables. FundInflowi is the year-on-year change in the amount of
funds inflow into venture capital in the country and in the year of closing of fund i, and is a proxy for
market conditions. LPvintagej is the year of establishment of the private equity program at LP j
relative to that of the median LP in the sample, which began its private equity program in 1987.
D_sameregionij is a dummy variable and = 1 if both LP j and private equity firm managing fund i are
headquartered in the same region in the U.S. (Midwest (includes Illinois and Ohio), Northeast
(includes Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania), South (includes Texas), and West (includes
California)), and = 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors allowing for data clustering by funds in all the
regressions are shown in brackets below the coefficient estimate. Intercepts are not reported.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                              Table 4. Fund Performance Regressions
                                              (using individual funds as observations)

Dependent variable:                                                   Fund IRR        Fund IRR      Fund IRR        Excess IRR     Excess IRR       Excess IRR
                                                                         (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)

Number of public pension funds investing in fund                         0.32           -0.10         -0.25            -0.90          -0.86            -1.24
                                                                       (1.31)          (1.28)        (1.26)           (1.24)         (1.21)           (1.23)
Number of corporate pension funds                                       -5.51   *       -5.68 **      -5.61   **       -3.37          -3.35            -4.40
                                                                       (2.85)          (2.76)        (2.82)           (2.84)         (2.73)           (2.81)
Number of endowments                                                     3.88   ***      4.02 ***      4.15   ***       5.36 ***       5.40   ***       5.10 ***
                                                                       (1.28)          (1.24)        (1.26)           (1.22)         (1.18)           (1.19)
Number of advisors                                                       1.00            2.10          1.00             2.05           2.32             3.22 *
                                                                       (2.13)          (2.10)        (1.98)           (1.90)         (1.84)           (1.93)
Number of insurance companies                                           -4.13           -2.51         -1.79            -3.53          -2.20            -1.97
                                                                       (3.69)          (3.60)        (3.63)           (3.69)         (3.57)           (3.56)
Number of banks                                                         -6.74   *       -5.81         -6.87   *        -7.60 **       -6.70   *        -6.68 *
                                                                       (3.83)          (3.80)        (3.81)           (3.76)         (3.70)           (3.69)
Number of other classes of investors                                    -5.14           -8.90         -8.85            -9.05         -12.70   *       -11.92
                                                                       (7.45)          (7.28)        (7.36)           (7.60)         (7.42)           (7.41)
Log(size of fund)                                                        4.51            7.68 *        8.19   *        -0.04           3.04             4.85
                                                                       (4.12)          (4.28)        (4.29)           (3.39)         (3.61)           (3.78)
Average vintage of LPs that invest in fund                                               1.47          1.26                            1.03             0.99
                                                                                       (0.90)        (0.90)                          (0.88)           (0.88)
Average total private equity commitments of LPs that invest in fund                     -0.21 **      -0.19   *                       -0.19   *        -0.19 *
                                                                                       (0.11)        (0.11)                          (0.10)           (0.10)
Total inflows into private equity                                                                    -32.79   ***                                     -16.78
                                                                                                    (10.73)                                          (10.72)


Year fixed effects                                                       Yes             Yes            No               No             No               No
Fund category effects                                                    Yes             Yes           Yes               No             No               No
Adjusted R-squared                                                     20.0%           21.2%         18.5%             6.6%           7.9%             8.3%
Number of observations                                                   324             309           309              316            301              301


The sample consists of 324 funds that were closed prior to 1999 and for which data is available to run
the following ordinary least squares regressions:

                         FundPerformancei = β 0 +                     β1k NumLPik +β 2 log(FundSizei ) + controls
                                                                  k


Fund performance is measured in two ways: (1) internal rates of return for individual funds, obtained
from Private Equity Performance Monitor, (2) excess IRR, calculated by subtracting from each fund’s
IRR the median IRR of the portfolio formed that year and in that category. NumLPik is the number of
LPs of class k that invested in fund i. FundSizei is the total closing amount for fund i in MM$.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                      Table 5. Reinvestment Decisions by LPs

Panel A: Reinvestments by fund category and by class of LP
                                                     Overall                                                   Early-stage VC funds
                                      Reinvested   Next fund   Change in size,     Next               Reinvested     Next fund    Change in size,      Next
                               N       (Yes=1;       size      current to next   fund IRR       N      (Yes=1;         size       current to next    fund IRR
                                        No=0)       (MM$)         fund (%)          (%)                 No=0)         (MM$)          fund (%)           (%)
Public pension funds           976      0.61         1,330          100            2.5         202      0.54               378        106.4             7.6
Corporate pension funds        346      0.38         1,181           96            0.6         88       0.36               344        100.8            11.8
Endowments                     777      0.48          808            95           18.7         346      0.54               405        102.5            35.8
Advisors                       671      0.48         1,041          103           -8.7         250      0.51               460        117.5            -7.3
Insurance companies            227      0.58          781           100           -1.3          86      0.66               323        101.4            -6.1
Banks and finance companies    197      0.40         1,053          108           -9.2          25      0.48               362        120.9           -17.7
Other investors                90       0.34          654           144           -5.8          37      0.35               220        188.4           -26.4
Overall                       3,284     0.51         1,059          101            2.6        1,034     0.52               393        110.2            10.8


                                               Later-stage VC funds                                                 Buyout funds
                                      Reinvested   Next fund   Change in size,     Next               Reinvested     Next fund    Change in size,      Next
                               N       (Yes=1;       size      current to next   fund IRR       N      (Yes=1;         size       current to next    fund IRR
                                        No=0)       (MM$)         fund (%)          (%)                 No=0)         (MM$)          fund (%)           (%)
Public pension funds           315      0.65          765          96.4            4.4         459      0.60              2,137       100.2            -1.2
Corporate pension funds        93       0.39          649          113.9           0.0         165      0.39              1,927        84.0            -4.5
Endowments                     264      0.48          613          82.1           11.9         167      0.35              1,953       101.4            -2.5
Advisors                       258      0.54          924          106.7          -12.8        163      0.34              2,117        75.0            -3.2
Insurance companies            75       0.61          663          91.9            2.6          66      0.42              1,512       106.0            -0.3
Banks and finance companies    60       0.40          588          96.5           -15.0        112      0.38              1,457       111.1            -4.6
Other investors                33       0.48          520          125.9           8.3          20      0.10              1,676        92.4            -3.9
Overall                       1,098     0.54          732          97.5            0.7        1,152     0.46              1,968        95.8            -2.4




Panel B: Consequences of reinvestment decisions
                                                                                          LPs re-     LPs did not                    Test
                                                                                         invested       re-invest                 p-value

Current fund IRR (%)                                             Mean                       24.8                16.9               0.002       ***

                                                                 Median                     11.2                 3.4              <0.001       ***



Current fund excess IRR (%)                                      Mean                       16.0                12.1               0.088       *

                                                                 Median                      3.5                 1.6              <0.001       ***



Next fund IRR (%)                                                Mean                         6.9               -2.2              <0.001       ***

                                                                 Median                      -7.0              -12.2               0.001       ***



Next fund excess IRR (%)                                         Mean                       13.6                    7.7             0.003      ***

                                                                 Median                      1.6                   -0.3             0.001      ***



Size of current fund (MM$)                                       Mean                        565                   676            <0.001       ***

                                                                 Median                      275                   311             0.007       ***



Percent change, current to next fund size                        Mean                     +106%                +95%                0.005       ***

                                                                 Median                    +90%                +84%               <0.001       ***
                              Table 5 (continued). Reinvestment Decisions by LPs

Panel C: Consequences of reinvestment decisions by class of LP
                                                                                 Mean                      Mean size            Mean change
                                                    Mean            Mean                     Mean next
                                                                              next fund                    of current         in size, current
                                                 fund IRR      excess IRR                   excess IRR
                                                                                    IRR                         fund             to next fund
                                                     (%)             (%)          (%)             (%)       (MM$)                        (%)

Public pension funds          Reinvested         +22.9%          +13.1%        +5.6%          +10.7%            764                  +112%
                              Did not reinvest   +15.8%           +7.4%        -2.4%           +5.5%            812                   +82%
                              t-test               0.076 *         0.105        0.021 **        0.065 *       0.444                  <0.001      ***



Corporate pension funds       Reinvested            17.3              8.3         -0.6             5.4          681                      105
                              Did not reinvest        9.1             0.7          1.4             6.8          796                       91
                              t-test               0.117           0.071 *      0.692           0.734         0.281                    0.153

Endowments                    Reinvested            39.3            25.8         30.5            31.4           336                       94
                              Did not reinvest      36.6            30.6           7.1           16.7           528                       96
                              t-test               0.709           0.438        0.001 ***       0.017 **     <0.001     ***            0.736

Advisors                      Reinvested            20.6            17.6          -7.8            7.1           527                      111
                              Did not reinvest        6.0            9.8          -9.7            5.3           743                       96
                              t-test               0.013 **        0.110        0.675           0.644        <0.001     ***            0.150

Insurance companies           Reinvested            21.7            13.3           1.7           10.4           366                      104
                              Did not reinvest      14.1              6.1         -6.8             3.3          444                       93
                              t-test               0.437           0.386        0.288           0.261         0.299                    0.269

Banks and finance companies   Reinvested              4.2             0.4         -6.9             0.1          568                      112
                              Did not reinvest        2.3            -1.6       -10.6             -0.6          639                      105
                              t-test               0.698           0.644        0.294           0.817         0.564                    0.644

Other investors               Reinvested            39.3            24.7           6.8           16.1           239                       94
                              Did not reinvest       2.2            -0.4         -14.7            1.1           414                      171
                              t-test               0.001 ***       0.046 **      0.044 **       0.076 *       0.171                    0.189



The sample consists of 3,284 reinvestment opportunities identified by reference to the sequence
number of funds within the same fund family. Each reinvestment opportunity is coded 1 if the LP
reinvested and 0 if investment in the follow-on fund was “discontinued.”

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                         Table 6. Reinvestment Regressions

Linear probability models – Dependent variable: Reinvested (Yes = 1, No = 0)
                                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)

IRR of previous fund in same family                              0.0004     *     0.0005   *      0.0004   *       0.0004   *

                                                               (0.0002)         (0.0002)        (0.0002)         (0.0002)
Total market inflow in reinvestment decision year                                  0.074   **      0.082   ***      0.079   **

                                                                                 (0.031)         (0.031)          (0.031)
LP vintage                                                                         0.021           0.025           -0.008
                                                                                 (0.030)         (0.030)          (0.010)
LP and GP in same region                                                           0.005   **      0.004   *        0.023
                                                                                 (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.030)
Dummy for LP class (comparison category is public pension funds):
 Corporate pension funds                                                                          -0.216   ***     -0.174   **

                                                                                                 (0.063)          (0.068)
 Endowments                                                                                       -0.132   **      -0.141   **

                                                                                                 (0.058)          (0.063)
 Advisors                                                                                         -0.091           -0.084
                                                                                                 (0.068)          (0.073)
 Insurance companies                                                                               0.010            0.005
                                                                                                 (0.098)          (0.102)
 Banks                                                                                            -0.098            0.014
                                                                                                 (0.113)          (0.135)
 Other LPs                                                                                        -0.404   ***     -0.442   ***

                                                                                                 (0.115)          (0.085)
Interaction effects:
  Corporate pension funds * LP vintage                                                                              0.025   **

                                                                                                                  (0.011)
 Endowments * LP vintage                                                                                            0.008
                                                                                                                  (0.011)
 Advisors * LP vintage                                                                                              0.012
                                                                                                                  (0.010)
 Insurance companies * LP vintage                                                                                   0.010
                                                                                                                  (0.017)
 Banks * LP vintage                                                                                                 0.021   *

                                                                                                                  (0.011)
 Other LPs * LP vintage                                                                                             0.031   **

                                                                                                                  (0.016)

Fund category effects                                                 Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes
R-squared                                                           1.3%          2.4%            5.2%             6.2%
Number of observations                                              2,198         1,860           1,860            1,860
                                Table 6 (continued). Reinvestment Regressions

The sample consists of 2,198 reinvestment opportunities identified by reference to the sequence
number of funds within the same fund family, for which data was available to run the following
ordinary least squares regressions:

             Pr(Reinvested ij ) = β 0 +       β 0 k DummyLPk +       β1k DummyLPk × CurrentIRR i
                                          k                      k

                                +       β 2 k DummyLPk × FundInflow i +         β3k DummyLPk × LPvintage j
                                    k                                       k

                                + β 4 D_sameregion ij + controls

Reinvestedij is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if LP j reinvested in the next fund in the same
family as fund i. Six dummy variables identify the class of LP for each LP-fund pair, with DummyLPk
= 1 for each observation consisting of an investment in fund i by LP j belonging to LP class k and = 0
otherwise. “Public pension funds” is the ‘base LP class,’ with zero values for all LP dummy variables.
CurrentIRRi is the internal rate of return of fund i in %. FundInflowi is the year-on-year change in the
amount of funds inflow into either total private equity or venture capital in the country and in the year
of closing of fund i, and is a proxy for market conditions. LPvintagej is the year of establishment of
the private equity program at LP j relative to that of the median LP in the sample, which began its
private equity program in 1987. D_sameregionij is a dummy variable and = 1 if both LP j and private
equity firm managing fund i are headquartered in the same region in the U.S. (Midwest (includes
Illinois and Ohio), Northeast (includes Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania), South (includes
Texas), and West (includes California)), and = 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors allowing for
clustering by LP in all the regressions are in brackets.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                          Table 7. Recent Investments in Young Private Equity Groups

Panel A: All funds
                                      Overall            Early-stage VC funds     Later-stage VC funds           Buyout funds
                                       Fund Weighted            Fund Weighted              Fund Weighted            Fund Weighted
                                 N      IRR     IRR       N       IRR      IRR      N       IRR      IRR       N     IRR      IRR
                                         (%)     (%)              (%)       (%)             (%)       (%)            (%)      (%)
Public pension funds            506     -1.9    -3.7     65     -11.3     -14.1   183        1.9     -1.0    258     -2.3     -3.0
Corporate pension funds         139     -1.6    -2.9     20       -6.1    -17.3    41      10.3      11.0     78     -6.8     -6.5
Endowments                      267     -3.5    -4.2     81     -21.9     -22.1    91      12.0      10.1     95     -2.7     -2.7
Advisors                        417    -11.1   -11.7    122     -22.6     -22.0   163       -5.2     -8.8    132     -7.6     -5.7
Insurance companies             103     -5.7    -5.7     23     -19.5     -17.8    37        3.9       3.0    43     -6.6     -6.8
Banks and finance companies     121     -7.7    -7.3     18     -22.4     -18.3    39       -4.5     -4.0     64     -5.6     -6.2
Other investors                  33     -6.1    -6.1     11       -8.4     -8.4    11       -3.0     -3.0     11     -7.0     -7.0
Overall                       1,586     -5.4    -6.3    340     -18.6     -19.3   565        1.7     -0.6    681     -4.6     -4.5




Panel B: Pre-1999 funds only
                                      Overall           Early-stage VC funds      Later-stage VC funds           Buyout funds
                                       Fund Weighted           Fund Weighted               Fund Weighted            Fund Weighted
                                 N      IRR     IRR      N       IRR      IRR       N       IRR      IRR       N     IRR      IRR
                                        (%)      (%)             (%)       (%)              (%)       (%)            (%)      (%)
Public pension funds           281       8.2      4.4   18      22.5        5.5    83      23.6      16.4    180     -0.3     -1.3
Corporate pension funds         98       6.8      6.7    7      28.2      27.6     27      27.2      26.5     64     -4.2     -3.9
Endowments                     134     14.6     13.1    14        2.6     -1.2     50      38.6      34.5     70     -0.1      0.6
Advisors                       145       7.3      5.2   10      20.3      19.3     59      20.4      13.8     76     -4.6     -3.4
Insurance companies             58       4.0      2.7    6        3.9       6.4    18      21.3      18.0     34     -5.2     -6.1
Banks and finance companies     72      -0.2    -0.4     3        7.1       7.1    21        5.5       5.3    48     -3.1     -3.3
Other investors                 17      -1.3    -1.3     1       -3.8     -3.8      7        6.8       6.8     9     -7.4     -7.3
Overall                        805       7.7      5.6   59      15.0        8.9   265      24.0      19.3    481     -2.2     -2.4


Panel A shows groupings of 1,586 investments for which fund performance data was available by 366
LPs in 686 funds managed by 442 “young” private equity groups (i.e. established after 1990) as
compiled by Asset Alternatives. Fund IRR is the internal rate of return of each fund obtained from
Private Equity Performance Monitor, and weighted fund IRR is fund IRR weighted by proportional
commitment to the fund in each LP’s private equity portfolio.

Panel B excludes all funds established in 1999 and after.
                       Table 8. LP Class and Individual LP Effects in Regressions of
                         Fund Performance and Other Portfolio Characteristics

                                                       F-tests on fixed effects for:                   Adjusted
                                                    LP class              Individual LPs        N      R-squared

Fund IRR                           Row 1                                                       4,618    28.9%
                                   Row 2        3.64 (.002, 6) ***                             4,618    29.7%
                                   Row 3                               274 (<.001, 297) ***    4,618    35.2%

Excess IRR                         Row 1                                                       4,514    11.7%
                                   Row 2        3.28 (.004, 6) ***                             4,514    12.7%
                                   Row 3                               482 (<.001, 295) ***    4,514    19.2%

GP founding year                   Row 1                                                       7,080     3.1%
                                   Row 2       5.96 (<.001, 6) ***                             7,080     4.0%
                                   Row 3                               453 (<.001, 361) ***    7,080    15.8%

GP size                            Row 1                                                       7,115    13.8%
                                   Row 2       28.11 (<.001, 6) ***                            7,115    17.5%
                                   Row 3                              1,686 (<.001, 361) ***   7,115    32.9%

Percentage change in fund size     Row 1                                                       3,284     1.9%
between consecutive investments    Row 2          1.05 (.392, 6)                               3,284     2.6%
with same GP                       Row 3                              1,633 (<.001, 265) ***   3,284    25.4%



The sample consists of investments by 417 LPs in 1,398 funds as compiled by Asset Alternatives.
Reported in the table are the results from fixed effects panel regressions, where standard errors are
clustered at the fund level. For each dependent variable (as reported in column 1), the fixed effects
included are:

Row 1: fund category and vintage year fixed effects;

Row 2: fund category, vintage year, and LP class fixed effects;

Row 3: fund category, vintage year, and individual LP fixed effects.

Reported are the F-tests for the joint significance of the LP class fixed effects (column 2), and
individual LP fixed effects (column 3). For each F-test, we report the value of the F-statistic, the
p-value and the number of constraints. Column 5 reports the number of observations and column 6 the
adjusted R2 for each regression.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                       Table 9. Dispersion of Estimated Fixed Effects
                     from LP Fixed Effects Regressions, by Class of LP

                                   Panel A:                      Panel B:
                                              Fund IRR                  Excess IRR
                                    Mean       Median Std dev     Mean Median Std dev
Public pension funds                  7.0        12.3    24.1      13.9     11.6   14.8
Corporate pension funds              -1.7         3.2    27.2      14.5     13.7    9.5
Endowments                           21.4        23.6    31.4      29.9     26.3   22.9
Advisors                             10.0        20.0    27.6      18.3     21.3   12.1
Insurance companies                   7.9         5.7    22.0      13.8     10.9   13.3
Banks and finance companies          -5.7        -0.1    29.4      12.5     12.8    7.7
Other investors                       0.7         7.7    38.3      15.3      6.5   23.0
Overall                               8.4        12.0    29.1      18.6     16.1   17.7

                                   Panel C:                      Panel D:
                                    Fund IRR, using lower 75%     Excess IRR, using lower 75%
                                      of funds across all LPs        of funds across all LPs
                                    Mean      Median   Std dev    Mean      Median    Std dev
Public pension funds                 0.10      -4.58     14.31     4.63       6.34      10.04
Corporate pension funds             -0.53      -3.97     14.93     6.02       6.19       8.17
Endowments                          -1.58      -5.95     14.10     9.24       8.59       7.89
Advisors                            -7.77      -8.42     15.33     7.84       9.40      12.34
Insurance companies                  0.48      -2.10     14.27     4.59       5.55       7.45
Banks and finance companies         -1.90      -5.45     14.38     6.42       5.23       6.23
Other investors                     -7.75      -8.05     12.97     0.76      -0.23       5.76
Overall                             -2.00      -5.92     14.54     6.35       6.85       9.18

                                   Panel E:                      Panel F:
                                       Change in fund size            GP founding year
                                    Mean Median Std dev           Mean Median Std dev
Public pension funds                 0.24      0.29       0.70     2.81      3.34      9.74
Corporate pension funds              0.22      0.30       0.72     1.04      2.10     11.67
Endowments                           0.32      0.57       0.74    -2.01     -0.91     11.63
Advisors                             0.50      0.74       0.71     0.39      2.81     12.94
Insurance companies                  0.46      0.70       0.75    -1.88     -5.49     10.25
Banks and finance companies          0.22      0.56       0.85    -1.53     -3.39     10.09
Other investors                      0.80      0.38       1.29     0.87      0.54     11.16
Overall                              0.35      0.47       0.79     0.22      0.72     11.21
                 Table 9 (continued). Dispersion of Estimated Fixed Effects
                    from LP Fixed Effects Regressions, by Class of LP

                                    Panel G:                         Panel H:
                                            GP size (log of              Reinvested in next fund
                                        total capital managed)             (Yes = 1, No = 0)
                                      Mean     Median     Std dev      Mean     Median     Std dev
Public pension funds                   0.42      0.70        1.39     -0.021     -0.033       0.59
Corporate pension funds                0.56      0.88        1.28     -0.070      0.024       0.64
Endowments                             0.62      0.96        1.19      0.054      0.244       0.56
Advisors                               0.63      0.98        1.27      0.175      0.254       0.50
Insurance companies                   -0.19     -0.21        1.08     -0.060      0.050       0.66
Banks and finance companies           -0.27      0.16        1.53      0.011      0.144       0.56
Other investors                       -0.35     -0.30        1.70     -0.071      0.003       0.50
Overall                                0.35      0.70        1.36      0.004      0.059       0.58

                                    Panel I:                         Panel J:
                                           Fraction of GPs              Average number of funds
                                        located in same region             managed per GP
                                      Mean     Median     Std dev     Mean      Median     Std dev
Public pension funds                  -0.48     -0.58        0.38      0.51       0.38        0.48
Corporate pension funds               -0.40     -0.51        0.44      0.30       0.25        0.27
Endowments                            -0.38     -0.47        0.41      0.43       0.32        0.45
Advisors                              -0.53     -0.58        0.37      0.22       0.17        0.21
Insurance companies                   -0.49     -0.49        0.29      0.39       0.20        0.75
Banks and finance companies           -0.19     -0.38        0.53      0.25       0.12        0.35
Other investors                       -0.38     -0.51        0.55      0.15       0.00        0.31
Overall                               -0.42     -0.50        0.42      0.36       0.25        0.44

The table shows the mean, median, and standard deviation of the LP fixed effects, grouped by
LP class, from separate regressions of fund IRR, excess IRR, change in size between successive
funds, GP founding year, GP size, reinvestment decisions, fraction of GPs located in same region
as the LP, and average number of funds managed per GP in each LP’s portfolio on LP dummies,
LP vintage, dummies for the region of the LP and for the co-location of the LP and GP, fund
vintage years, and fund categories.
                      Table 10. Correlations among Estimated LP Fixed Effects

                                                                            GP                     Reinvested    Average
                                                            Change in
                                  Fund IRR     Exess IRR                 founding     GP size     in follow-on number of
                                                            fund size
                                                                           year                       fund     funds per GP


Excess IRR                          0.62 ***

Change in fund size                 0.47 ***     0.13 *

GP founding year                   -0.54 ***    -0.37 ***    -0.43 ***

GP size                             0.16 **      0.33 ***     0.34 ***    -0.27 ***

Reinvested in follow-on fund        0.02         0.19 ***     0.34 ***    -0.34 ***    0.62 ***

Average number of funds per GP      0.10         0.11        -0.06        -0.08        0.04          0.23 ***

Fraction of GPs in same region     -0.52 ***    -0.01        -0.20 ***     0.14 **     0.22 ***      0.45 ***     -0.09



The table shows pairwise correlations of estimated LP fixed effects when each of the listed
variables is used as dependent variable in a regression on LP dummies, LP vintage, dummies for
the region of the LP and for the co-location of the LP and GP, fund vintage years, and fund
categories.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                Table 11. University Characteristics

                                                 N        Mean         Min     Median      Max
Overall ranking score                            42       90.3         71.6     93.9       100
Academic reputation                              55       29.6          1        18        129
Freshmen in top 10 % of class                    55       62.1         14        63        100
Acceptance rate                                  55       51.8         14        51         88
Yield                                            55       38.4         21        38         75
Student to faculty ratio                         55       12.3          6        11         20
Education expenditure per student ($'
                                    000)         55       22.7         8.3      18.8       63.6
Freshman retention rate                          55       91.5         71        93         99
Graduation rate                                  55       81.6         47        87         97
Alumni giving rate                               55       33.9         10        38         58

The above table shows descriptive statistics for university rankings that were obtained from the
1995 U.S. News and World Report survey of colleges and universities in the U.S..

Overall ranking score is a weighted measure calculated by U.S. News based on several
individual measures, which included the following:

Academic reputation is an ordinal rank compiled from responses by college presidents, deans
and admissions directors who participated in U.S. News’ survey. Freshmen in top 10 % of class
refers to the share of freshmen in the top 10 percent of their high school classes and is a measure
of the high school class standing of entering freshmen. Acceptance rate is the percentage of total
applicants who received offers of admission. Yield is the percentage of those accepted who
actually enrolled. Student to faculty ratio is the ratio of full-time-equivalent students to full-
time-equivalent faculty. Education expenditure per student is a measure of the strength of a
school’s resources and is equal to its total expenditures on instruction, administration, student
services and academic support divided by total full-time equivalent enrollment. Freshmen
retention rate represents the average percentage of freshmen entering in 1990 to 1993 who
returned the following year. Graduation rate is the average percentage of students in the 1985 to
1988 freshman classes who graduated within six years. Alumni giving rate is the average
percentage of living alumni who gave to fund drives in the preceding two years.
Table 12. Correlations among Estimated LP Fixed Effects and University Characteristics

                                                      Fund IRR      Weighted IRR    Excess IRR


             Overall ranking score                      0.39   *       0.71   ***     0.47   **


             Academic reputation (rank)                -0.12          -0.07          -0.35   *


             Freshmen in top 10 % of class              0.24           0.43   **      0.50   ***


             Acceptance rate                           -0.33   *      -0.60   ***    -0.62   ***


             Yield                                      0.04           0.21           0.36   **


             Student / faculty ratio                   -0.37   **     -0.31   *      -0.27

             Education expenditure per student          0.27           0.38   **      0.31   *


             Freshman retention rate                    0.15           0.23           0.37   **


             Graduation rate                            0.27           0.34   *       0.47   ***


             Alumni giving rate                         0.40   **      0.34   *       0.51   ***




The table shows pairwise correlations between each of the variables listed in the first column and
estimated LP fixed effects when the variables listed at the top of each subsequent column is used
as dependent variable in a regression on LP dummies, LP vintage, dummies for the region of the
LP and for the co-location of the LP and GP, fund vintage years, and fund categories.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
         Figure 1. Box Plot of Excess IRR Fixed Effects by Class of LP,
              Conditioned on Lower 75% of Funds across all LPs



          1 Public pension fund


      2 Corporate pension fund


                 3 Endowment


                      4 Advisor


          5 Insurance company


     6 Bank or finance company


                       7 Other


                                    -40        -30          -20      -10   0   10
                                                             Excess IRR
                                  excludes outside values




The graph shows the relative distribution of excess IRR fixed effects when
conditioned on the lower 75% of funds across all LPs, grouped by LP class, from
regressions of excess IRR on LP dummies, LP vintage, dummies for the region of
the LP and for the co-location of the LP and GP. The line in the middle of the
shaded box indicates the median, the left and right edges of the box are the 25th and
75th percentiles respectively, and the ends of the line indicate adjacent values of the
distribution of LP-specific excess IRR fixed effects for each class of LP. Outside
values (extreme outliers) are not shown in the plot.
                                                       APPENDIX

  Table 3A. Fund Performance Regressions Using Excess IRR as Dependent Variable

Dependent variable: Excess IRR
                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
Dummy for investor type:
(comparison category is public pension funds)
  Corporate pension funds                                -4.77   *      -8.62   **    -11.45   ***   -10.25   ***     -9.63
                                                        (2.61)         (3.65)         (4.22)         (3.70)          (6.24)
 Endowments                                              21.70   ***    15.72   ***    15.47   ***    16.63   ***     26.69   ***

                                                        (6.83)         (4.56)         (4.49)         (4.71)          (8.38)
 Advisors                                                 7.63   **     11.35   **     11.14   **     11.51   **      27.90   ***

                                                        (3.40)         (4.92)         (5.52)         (4.86)         (10.14)
 Insurance companies                                     -0.57           2.09           1.10           0.85           12.68
                                                        (3.73)         (4.37)         (4.67)         (4.50)          (9.24)
 Banks                                                   -9.11   ***    -3.55          -2.08          -4.17          -10.19
                                                        (2.88)         (3.84)         (6.29)         (3.83)          (7.78)
 Other LPs                                               -2.51         -39.36   ***   -39.26   ***   -37.02   ***    -53.89   ***

                                                        (5.20)         (8.93)         (8.22)         (9.78)          (9.32)
LP vintage                                                               0.26          -8.64   ***     0.34            0.87   *

                                                                       (0.23)         (2.55)         (0.24)          (0.46)
LP and GP in same region                                                -8.90   ***     0.89   *      -8.75   ***     -8.34   ***

                                                                       (2.57)         (0.45)         (2.57)          (2.52)
Total private equity fund inflow                                                       -1.10         -13.56   **      -7.28
                                                                                      (0.75)         (6.04)          (5.67)
LP size (log of total commitments to private equity)                    -1.42   *                     -1.13           -0.86
                                                                       (0.78)                        (0.78)          (0.75)
Interaction effects:
  Corporate pension funds * LP vintage                                                 -1.55   **                     -1.01
                                                                                      (0.72)                         (0.69)
 Endowments * LP vintage                                                               -0.98                          -0.83
                                                                                      (0.65)                         (0.66)
 Advisors * LP vintage                                                                 -0.67                          -0.57
                                                                                      (0.88)                         (0.87)
 Insurance companies * LP vintage                                                      -1.00                          -0.70
                                                                                      (0.69)                         (0.79)
 Banks * LP vintage                                                                    -0.03                          -0.62
                                                                                      (1.46)                         (1.16)
 Other LPs * LP vintage                                                                -0.60                          -1.23   *

                                                                                      (0.76)                         (0.69)
 Corporate pension funds * inflow                                                                                     -4.00
                                                                                                                     (9.35)
 Endowments * inflow                                                                                                 -21.66   *

                                                                                                                    (12.57)
 Advisors * inflow                                                                                                   -33.75   **

                                                                                                                    (14.52)
 Insurance companies * inflow                                                                                        -27.00   **

                                                                                                                    (13.65)
 Banks * inflow                                                                                                       11.67
                                                                                                                    (10.37)
 Other LPs * inflow                                                                                                   36.91   ***

                                                                                                                     (8.71)
Year fixed effects                                          No            No             No             No              No
Fund category fixed effects                                 No            No             No             No              No
LP region dummies                                           No           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
R-squared                                                3.9%          5.2%           5.6%           5.9%            6.8%
Number of observations                                   2,684         1,541          1,541          1,491           1,491
                        Table 3A (continued). Fund Performance Regressions
                              Using Excess IRR as Dependent Variable

The sample consists of investments by 417 LPs in 1,398 funds as compiled by Asset Alternatives,
and excludes funds closed in 1999 and after. Several versions of the following pooled regression
are run and coefficient estimates and standard errors are reported by columns in the table:

              ExcessIRR ij = β 0 +        β 0 j DummyLPj +       β1 j DummyLP j × FundInflow i
                                      j                      j

                            +       β 2 k DummyLPk × LPvintage j + β3D_sameregion ij + controls
                                k


ExcessIRRij is the internal rate of return of fund i in % minus the median IRR of the portfolio
formed for each fund category every year. Six dummy variables identify the class of LP for each
LP-fund pair, with DummyLPk = 1 for each observation consisting of an investment in fund i by
LP j belonging to LP class k and = 0 otherwise. “Public pension funds” is the ‘base LP class’,
with zero values for all LP dummy variables. FundInflowi is the year-on-year change in the
amount of funds inflow into venture capital in the country and in the year of closing of fund i,
and is a proxy for market conditions. LPvintagej is the year of establishment of the private
equity program at LP j relative to that of the median LP in the sample, which began its private
equity program in 1987. D_sameregionij is a dummy variable and = 1 if both LP j and private
equity firm managing fund i are headquartered in the same region in the U.S. (Midwest (includes
Illinois and Ohio), Northeast (includes Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania), South
(includes Texas), and West (includes California)), and = 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors
allowing for data clustering by funds in all the regressions are shown in brackets below the
coefficient estimate. Intercepts are not reported.

***, **, *   indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
