NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSTRAINING MANAGERS WITHOUT OWNERS:
GOVERNANCE OF THE NOT-FOR-PROFIT ENTERPRISE
Mihir A. Desai
Robert J. Yetman
Working Paper 11140
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11140
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005

We thank Marion Fremont-Smith, Allan Grossman, Doug Guthrie, Karen Horn, Andrew Metrick, Rosalie
Wolf and participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s conference on the Governance of Not-forProfit Organizations for helpful discussions and comments. Desai thanks the Division of Research at Harvard
Business School for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Mihir A. Desai and Robert J. Yetman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Constraining Managers without Owners: Governance of the Not-for-Profit Enterprise
Mihir A. Desai and Robert J. Yetman
NBER Working Paper No. 11140
February 2005
JEL No. L30, G30, H40, K20
ABSTRACT
In the absence of owners, how effective are the constraints imposed by the state in promoting
effective firm governance? This paper develops state-level indices of the legal and reporting rules
facing not-for-profits and examines the effects of these rules on not-for-profit behavior. Stronger
non-distribution constraints are associated with greater charitable expenditures and foundation
payouts while more stringent reporting requirements are associated with lower insider compensation.
The paper also examines how governance influences an alternative metric of not-for-profit
performance

the provision of social insurance. Stronger governance measures are associated with

intertemporal smoothing of resources and greater activity in response to negative economic shocks.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
Robert J. Yetman
Graduate School of Management
University of California, Davis
AOB iV
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
rjyetman@ucdavis.edu

1.

Introduction
In the absence of owners, how effective are the constraints imposed by the state on

insiders in providing for effective governance of firms? Ownership patterns may well substitute
for legal protections complicating direct inferences on the efficacy of legal and reporting
requirements. The not-for-profit sector is characterized by the absence of owners but the
presence of legal and reporting rules. Indeed, the differentiating characteristic of not-for-profits
is the legal constraint on the non-distribution of earnings to insiders. Additionally, reporting of
various kinds – mandated by the government rather than the owners – is also required. The
strength of these legal and reporting rules vary by state within the U.S. creating the opportunity
to analyze the efficacy of legal and reporting rules in a setting without owners and without the
complicating features of cross-country studies.
This paper analyzes the influence of state-varying legal and reporting rules on the
behavior of public charities and private foundations from 1987 to 2000. If these entities are
motivated purely by altruistic motives or if the rules themselves are ineffective, these governance
constraints may have no effect on not-for-profit outcomes. Alternatively, some aspects of these
governance constraints might constrain not-for-profit managers from exploiting the latitude
afforded by the absence of owners and thereby improve firm performance. In order to consider
these alternatives, we calculate a state-level index of the legal and reporting constraints facing
not-for-profits. For legal constraints, we create an index of legal rules facing not-for-profits that
is further subdivided into indices measuring explicit rules that strengthen the non-distribution
constraint and more general, alternative enforcement mechanisms. For reporting rules, we create
an index of reporting requirements allowing us to consider the role of both legal rules and
reporting requirements in influencing not-for-profit behavior.
In order to assess the relevance of the governance environment to not-for-profit firms,
these indices are related to measures of operating performance and insider compensation for
public charities. The paper also analyzes the degree to which payouts by nonoperating
foundations also vary with these governance metrics. Finally, the paper provides an alternative
test of not-for-profit performance – the degree to which not-for-profits provide social insurance
by building stocks of reserves and responding to local negative income shocks – and examines
the effect of governance on firm performance through this test. Much as the efficiency of private

2

firms is measured by their responsiveness to investment opportunities, this test capitalizes on the
idea that not-for-profits should expand activity at times when their activity is most warranted –
that is, do they help when helping helps the most.
We find that the governance environment of not-for-profits is associated with differential
performance by public charities and private foundations on several different margins. For public
charities, the analysis demonstrates that stronger non-distribution constraints and reporting rules
are associated with a greater fraction of expenditures devoted to charitable activities and a lower
probability of undertaking inefficient fundraising activity. In addition to these effects on public
charity behavior, stronger legal and reporting rules are also associated with lower insider
compensation. With respect to private foundations, stronger non-distribution constraints and
reporting rules are associated with larger payouts and a lower probability of delaying required
payouts. As with public charities, stronger legal and reporting rules are associated with lower
officer compensation relative to total expenses as well as to the pay of other employees for
private foundations.
Finally, not-for-profits in states with stronger legal and reporting rules also
intertemporally smooth resources more by attenuating the link between the raising of resources
and charitable expenditures. This intertemporal smoothing appears to fulfill a social insurance
objective as not-for-profits in states with stronger legal and reporting rules also respond to
negative income shocks with greater activity. These results suggest that not-for-profits in states
with stricter governance environments fulfill a social insurance objective more effectively.
In general, governance laws related to the non-distribution constraint and state level
reporting requirements have the most influence on not-for-profit behaviors while more
ambiguous legal rules associated with enforcement appear to have little effect. More
specifically, disclosure and reporting rules are most effective in deterring excessive insider
compensation while the non-distribution constraint is most effective in focusing activities toward
charitable purposes. As hypothesized in the literature, these results suggest that the strength of
the non-distribution constraint specifically is a critical factor in regulating the behavior of notfor-profit organizations and that disclosure requirements can also deter opportunistic insiders. In
sum, stronger non-distribution constraints and reporting rules increase the fraction of overall

3

expenditures dedicated to charitable causes, mitigate large expenditures on officer compensation,
and help ensure the efficient provision and timing of not-for-profit activity.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature and
motivates our empirical methodology. Section 3 discusses the data employed with particular
emphasis on the indices of governance employed in the paper. Section 4 provides the results.
Section 5 concludes.
2.

Related literature and empirical methodology
This analysis of the governance of not-for-profits is related to the growing literature on

the economic functioning of not-for-profits and the extensive literature on social insurance
mechanisms.
2.1.

The Economics of Not-For-Profits
Analyses of not-for-profit firms typically consider why particular economic activities are

undertaken by not-for-profit firms. This literature emphasizes that not-for-profit firms are
distinctive primarily because of the non-distribution constraint and that this constraint can lead to
efficient provision by these entities in some sectors. The intuition of Hansmann (1980), as
expressed in models of asymmetric information (Easley and O’Hara (1982)) or ex-post
expropriation (Glaeser and Shleifer (2004)), suggests that sectors characterized by the inability to
contract fully over quality will feature not-for-profit firms. The available evidence on the sectors
where not-for-profits are most active is consistent with this interpretation.
These analyses are helpful in considering what types of activities are undertaken by notfor-profits but provide limited guidance on analyzing the dynamics of not-for-profit activities. Of
course, understanding the dynamics of not-for-profit firms is critical to any assessment of the
performance of not-for-profits, particularly as it relates to the role of governance. One exception
to this is the view that, without owners and a traditional for-profit governance framework, notfor-profit organizations evolve into worker cooperatives where worker preferences, particularly
elite worker preferences, determine activities. This view is framed within the context of not-forprofit hospitals in Pauly and Redisch (1973) and extended to other settings in Glaeser (2003).1
1

The public finance literature has emphasized the responsiveness of contributions to taxes rather than the nature of
the entity-level treatment of not-for-profits. See Bittker and Rahdert (1976) for a history of the exemption of notfor-profit and Hines (1998) for a discussion of the tax treatment of taxable income earned by not-for-profits.
4

In parallel with this economics literature, a growing literature in the accounting field has
examined the reporting behavior of not-for-profits.2
In addition to the relevant literature on not-for-profit firms, our analysis also frames notfor-profit firms within the larger literature on social insurance mechanisms. This large literature
typically emphasizes programs that are explicitly designed to provides insurance, such as
unemployment insurance (as in Hamermesh (1982) or Gruber (1997)), and their effects in
allowing recipients to smooth consumption. The intuition of social insurance has been extended
to the mechanisms that are operative between and within families (as in Hayashi, Altonji, and
Kotlikoff (1995)) or through the progressivity of the tax code (as in Auerbach and Feenberg
(2000) and Kniesner and Ziliak (2004)). While Cochrane (1991) alludes to the role of not-forprofits in smoothing consumption, we are unaware of any empirical efforts that conceptualize
not-for-profits in this way. This is surprising given the large literature, summarized in RoseAckerman (1996), on the altruistic motives behind the donations that fund most not-for-profits.
As described below, one of the tests we employ to assess the quality of not-for-profit
performance is their level of intertemporal resource smoothing and their responses to negative
local income shocks.
Finally, this examination of the governance environment of not-for-profits parallels the
growing literature on the impact of legal and reporting rules on for-profit firm performance. As
in La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and subsequent work in the law and finance literature, these
efforts can emphasize cross-country differences in legal rules or, as in Bushman, Piotroski and
Smith (2004), differences in accounting procedures. As Shleifer and Vishny (1996) note,
ownership patterns themselves can embody responses to weak legal rules; in this sense,
examining not-for-profits where owners are absent allows us to examine how legal and reporting
rules alone influence firm performance. In emphasizing within-country differences, this paper
may be closest in spirit to Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) who create firm-specific measures
of governance and link these governance measures to subsequent firm performance. This effort
can be considered an effort to import the emphasis on quantifiable measures of governance to the
2

For example, Baber, Daniel, and Roberts (2002) find that not-for-profit managerial compensation is at least
partially explained by variations in the relative performance of the not-for-profit suggesting that the pay-forperformance relationship documented in the for-profit sector is also present in the not-for-profit sector. Krishnan,
Yetman, and Yetman (2004) find that not-for-profit managers opportunistically report their accounting results so as
to attract higher levels of donations and to appear more “charitable” to regulators.
5

fields of not-for-profit enterprises. The most closely related paper on not-for-profits is Fisman
and Hubbard (2003) that links several attorney general powers as measured in 1977 to the
endowment characteristics of not-for-profits.
2.2.

Empirical Methodology
The nearly $1 trillion in assets in the not-for-profit sector are deployed by two types of

firms – private foundations and public charities – that, in aggregate, are equally sized. While
both types of entities are §501(c)(3) organizations providing them with a differentiating tax
status, they are distinguished by the number of funders and some legal requirements.
Specifically, private foundations are typically funded by a relatively small number of individuals,
are required to pay out at least five percent of their assets regularly, are subject to a tax on net
investment income, and typically make disbursements to public charities. Public charities are
either those entities whose financial support is provided by the general public or the broad
classes of educational, medical, and associated supporting organizations that are specifically
accorded public charity status through the Internal Revenue Code. In part, the minimal payout
requirement for private foundations is designed to prevent the creation of foundations for purely
tax-minimizing purposes.3
In order to assess the efficacy of these governance rules, we separately consider the
effects of our measures of state-level governance (described in detail below) on public charities
and private foundations. For public charities, the sample consists of approximately 52,000 firmyear observations from 1987 to 2000. Our tests emphasize three margins on which poor
performance within not-for-profit performance may be measured– the focus on charitable
activities, the efficiency of fundraising, and the level of insider compensation.4 In order to
consider the degree to which public charities are focused on charitable purposes (rather than
administrative or fundraising expenses), we analyze the relationship between legal and reporting
rules and the ratio of charitable expenses to total expenses and the ratio of charitable expenses to
total revenues. Fundraising activities, rather than serving to effectively raise funds, can serve the
interests of insiders through extensions of social networks and the consumption of perquisites.

3

See Marsh (2002) for a discussion of the historic rationale for the distinction between private foundations and
public charities.
4
Of course, these measures of performance are largely efficiency metrics. The social insurance mechanism we
outline below provides a more nuanced notion of performance.
6

Accordingly, we also analyze an indicator variable intended to measure inefficient fundraising
activities. An indicator variable is set equal to one if the ratio of fundraising expenses to
donations is equal to 1.0 or greater, and zero otherwise. An average ratio in excess of 1.0 is
suggestive of excessive or inefficient expenditures on fundraising. Insider compensation is the
other margin of not-for-profit behavior emphasized in this analysis. In order to measure
compensation of insiders controlling the public charity, the ratios of officer compensation to total
expenses and of officer compensation to other employee compensation are employed.5 Neither
of these measures are perfect measures of poor performance or excessive compensation but do
serve to measure the degree to which elite workers within public charities are benefiting from
firm resources through either direct compensation, inefficient fundraising or non-charitable
expenditures.
Turning to private foundations, the sample consists of approximately 38,000 firm-year
observations from 1994 to 2000. We examine the relationships between governance and
foundation payouts and foundation managerial compensation. The rationale for examining the
compensation of foundation managers parallels that for public charity managers. Foundation
payout policies are of particular interest as they capture the degree to which foundations
distribute what is minimally required by rules. As the tax deduction for a contribution to a
private foundation occurs when the foundation receives the funds rather than when it is
eventually distributed to a public charity, rules requires minimal distribution amounts to ensure
that foundations are not advancing purely tax avoidance through transfers of assets to
foundations (Steuerle 1977). Prevailing rules require that foundations meet a minimum
distribution requirement by spending at least five percent of their assets on charitable grants or
charitable administrative expenditures in the current or following year (§4942). The minimum
distribution requirement has been the subject of considerable controversy, with public charity
advocacy groups calling for increases in the percentage of assets that must be annually paid out
while foundation groups defend the current rules.6

5

Officers compensation includes any amounts (wages, benefits, bonuses, etc.) paid to employees who have decision
control over a not-for-profit’s operations or finances.
6
See Cambridge Associates (2000) and Mehrling (1999). Brody (1997) examines the broader questions of whether
the non-profit sector should even have an endowment, whether this endowment should be controlled by private
foundations instead of public charities, and whether private foundations should be allowed to exist in perpetuity.
Hansmann (1990) criticizes the accumulation of wealth by universities on grounds of inter-generational equity.
7

Our first measure of foundation payout is the ratio of current year payouts to the required
amount (i.e., five percent of assets). The current payout amount is line 8 of Part V of the IRS
990, and the minimum required amount is line 7 of Part XI of the prior year’s IRS 990-PF. We
base the payout requirement on the prior year’s amount as foundations can meet their payout
obligations in the current year or in the following year (with any excess distributions carried
forward to the subsequent year). Although many foundations distribute the legal minimum of
five percent, some distribute more than is required. Our second measure of charitable payout is
an indicator variable equal to one if the foundation delays its payout as long as possible (i.e.,
until the following year) and zero otherwise. This variable is the ratio of the current year payout
(line 8 of Part V of the IRS 990) to the amount of remaining undistributed amounts left over
from the prior year that must be distributed by the end of the current year (line 2a Column C Part
XIII of the IRS 990-PF). By systematically delaying its payout, a foundation can retain its assets
longer.
Finally, the conceptualization of not-for-profits firms as providing social insurance is
tested using methods drawn from the financial economics literature. Typically, tests of the
efficiency of investment, as in the setting of conglomerates, employ proxies for investment
opportunities, typically industry q, to assess whether firm investment is responding to relevant
opportunities. In the not-for-profit setting, the intuition of social insurance suggests that activity
should increase in response to negative economic shocks when the marginal productivity of notfor-profit activities becomes greatest.7 Said another way, not-for-profits fulfilling their mission
should disproportionately respond during distressed times as this is when their investment
opportunities are the greatest. Accordingly, we test if not-for-profits respond differentially to
local economic shocks depending on their governance environment.
This test of the efficiency of not-for-profit activity has several advantages. First, it
provides a measure of performance that is not entirely cost-driven in a setting where output is
hard to measure. Second, the intuition of investment opportunities corresponds to the espoused
goals of a variety of not-for-profits. Of course, such a test is a reduced form of a fuller model.
Such a model conceives of not-for-profit firms intertemporally smoothing activity in response to
7

Alternatively, the concavity of utility functions provides the same intuition. That is, not-for-profits that best
internalize the utility functions of their customers will expand activity during periods when marginal utility is
highest.
8

investment opportunities and this responsiveness is muted by the principal-agent problem that
exists between funders and managers. Such a model, while beyond the scope of this paper,
seems promising and would result in the reduced form which is tested here.
We operationalize this notion of insurance using two empirical tests. First, for insurance
to be provided, there has to be some element of intertemporal smoothing where funds are
gathered during some periods (typically economically robust ones) and saved for later periods
when they are most effective. In order to identify the presence of intertemporal smoothing, we
examine how governance influences the relationship between changes in total revenue sources
(including donations, the sales of products and services, and other income) and changes in
charitable expenditures. If well-governed firms are intertemporally smoothing, the governance
variable should attenuate the relationship between the sources of funds and the disbursement of
those funds.
Such intertemporal smoothing need not be for purposes associated with the needs of notfor-profit beneficiaries. In order to examine if this intertemporal smoothing has an insurance
component, we examine if measures of governance influence the relationship between changes
in local economic conditions (such as disposable income, gross state product, and unemployment
levels) and changes in charitable expenditures. Local positive income shocks may well increase
resource flows to not-for-profits permitting them to increase their charitable outputs. However,
an insurance objective would be fulfilled if a positive relationship between local economic
conditions and charitable output would be mitigated in well-governed firms. Said another way,
the intertemporal smoothing identified in the first test could be characterized as insurance if this
second test demonstrates that negative shocks are associated with increased activity for wellgoverned firms.
3.

Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1

Governance Measures8
As is emphasized in the literature on not-for-profits, the governance of not-for-profits is

split between federal and state authorities. At the federal level, the Internal Revenue Service is
charged with overseeing not-for-profit organizations. Although the IRS has the ability to revoke
8

Our analysis of governance emphasizes legal and reporting rules. Of course, board structure and selection can also
be a meaningful aspect of not-for-profit governance.
9

a not-for-profits tax-exempt status in response to misbehavior, it rarely does so. As a practical
matter, the majority of not-for-profit oversight is provided by various state-level agencies.
Because there is substantial variation in state-level not-for-profit legal regulation, we employ this
variation in our empirical analysis. 9 We use seven measures of a state’s legal power to regulate
not-for-profits, which naturally subdivide – one rooted in preventing expropriation of charitable
assets by managers and the other rooted in the mechanisms through which the enforcement of
these powers take place. The expropriation rules are directly related to the non-distribution
constraint. As noted by Hansmann (1980), the non-distribution constraint is designed to prevent
asset expropriation and it is this constraint that distinguishes the not-for-profit form of business.
Table 1a describes the construction of the indices and the precise powers that are characterized in
these indices.
In the absence of oversight by either stockholders or the capital market, not-for-profit
managers can divert charitable assets toward themselves in many ways including non-armslength sales of assets, consuming perquisites, or retaining charitable assets upon dissolution. To
prevent expropriation, states have instituted several laws and we use the most common four as
outlined in Fremont-Smith (2004). First, a state can legally distinguish not for profits from forprofit firms. By applying a unique set of statutory law to not-for-profits, a state can more easily
act to prevent the distribution of charitable assets (i.e., residual claims) to officers, directors, or
other specific individuals other than recipients specifically included in the organization by-laws.
Second, states can require that liquidating distributions be made by not-for-profits only to other
not-for-profits. By requiring that only another not-for-profit can receive the liquidating
distributions of another not-for-profit a state effectively limits the payment of liquidating
distributions to insiders. Third, states can enact laws that require that the State Attorney General
be notified of not-for-profit asset sales. Again, this law prevents not-for-profits from
systematically disposing of their assets, particularly through below-market sales to officers or
9

We are aware of only one other paper, Fisman and Hubbard (2003), that attempts to identify and measure statelevel measures of not-for-profit governance. Our measure of legal and reporting governance differs from their
measure in several respects. First, we emphasize the non-distribution constraint given the literature’s emphasis on
this aspect of not-for-profits. Second, our measure is based on a recent re-evaluation of state level governance
(Fremont-Smith 2004) that updates the 1974 laws, also characterized by Fremont-Smith, used by Fisman and
Hubbard. Third, our measure includes several new state-varying governance measures included in the recent source
that were not included in the prior version. Finally, we also construct a state-level measure of reporting
requirements. We thank Marion Fremont-Smith for providing us with an advance copy of her publication, FremontSmith (2004).
10

employees through so-called “slow liquidations.” The fourth and final component of our nondistribution metric is whether state law limits not-for-profits from re-incorporating as for-profit
corporations. This law acts to prevent charities from paying out their assets as distributions to
new “shareholders” that could be officers, directors or non-charitable corporations.
The mechanisms a particular state can employ to enforce its provisions over not-forprofits also vary across states. Some states make their enforcement authority explicit by
instituting specific laws. We use the most common monitoring and enforcement laws as
contained in Fremont-Smith (2004). First, a state can require that the Attorney General must be
notified of any legal suits involving charities. In this way the Attorney General is able to
determine if there is any enforceable action that should simultaneously be undertaken. Second, a
state can empower parties other than the Attorney General (such as officers, directors, or other
employees) the standing to bring legal action against a not-for-profit. This law has the effect of
exposing the charity to multiple sources of legal challenge. Third, states may allow for Cy pres,
or the authority of the courts to modify the incorporated purpose of the organization if that
organization’s purpose became obsolete, wasteful, or otherwise impracticable.
In addition to variation in legal rules, states are also characterized by distinctive reporting
requirements. These reporting requirements are applicable to organizations that solicit donations
within the state. Each state has from zero to nine distinct financial reporting requirements
imposed by a registration authority. The registration authority varies across the states,
sometimes being the Attorney General but often is a board of charities. Our reporting
governance metric is a linear combination of these nine different financial reporting requirements
that are outlined in summary in Table 1b.10 Because it is possible that some larger organizations
solicit donations in multiple states, our measure (which is based on the state of incorporation)
will contain some measurement error. To determine if this effect influences our results we
replicated our tests eliminating organizations that filed combined IRS 990s (combined 990s
result when a parent organization reports the aggregated financial results of the various affiliated
state organizations) with no change in the substance of our results.

10

We collected these measures of various state not-for-profit reporting requirements from the Charitable
Organization Multi-State Filing Project at www.multistatefiling.org.
11

Our nine measures of reporting requirements fall into three general categories. The first
category includes the two general reporting requirements of whether or not a state requires
registration and if registration needs to be renewed annually. The second category includes five
types of documents that a state could require to be included in the registration. These documents
are the not-for-profits’ financial statements, by laws, articles of incorporation, IRS tax-exempt
determination letter (i.e., the IRS 1023), and any additional forms the state may require. The
final category contains two miscellaneous items. Some states require that a not-for-profit
disclose the name of any paid professional fundraising organizations used. Professional
fundraisers frequently retain a portion of donations as a fee and remit remaining funds to
charities. By using professional fundraisers and reporting only net donations a charity can
appear to be raising fewer donations in a state, perhaps drawing less regulatory attention.
Finally, some states require that organizations that solicit donations in their jurisdiction undergo
a financial statement audit by Certified Public Accountants.
Tables 2a, 2b and 3 provide these legal and reporting indices, respectively, and their
components by state. The minimum value for the total legal index is 3 while the highest is 7
indicating substantial variation across states. The reporting index provides even more variation
with some states requiring nothing and other states requiring all nine components of our
reporting index. Our governance sub-indices are correlated with each other as the correlation
coefficient between the non-distribution sub-index and the enforcement sub-index is 0.37.
Similarly, the correlation coefficient between the combined legal index and the reporting index is
0.32. In addition to including these three measures separately in our regression models, we also
include various combinations of them including grouping the two legal governance metrics into a
single legal governance measure as well as grouping all three measures into a single governance
metric.
3.2.

Not-for-profit Organization Data
All public charities and foundations with revenues over $25,000 must file an IRS Form

990 (or in the case of a foundation, a 990-PF) annually. To ensure the wide dissemination of
Form 990 information the IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) division sponsors the Urban Institute to

12

collect the data and make it freely available on the Internet at www.guidestar.org.11 The public
charity dataset includes the years from 1987 to 2000. The most recent year of our sample (2000)
contains 15,669 observations, while the oldest (1987) contains 8,357. Each of the annual public
charity datasets includes all charities with assets over $10 million plus a stratified random sample
of charities with assets less than $10 million. This database contains 160,140 observations of
which 65,195 are not educational (i.e., private high schools or universities) or medical (i.e.,
hospitals and medical research institutes) not-for-profits.
We restrict our analysis to the sample of 65,195 charitable not-for-profits (and exclude all
educational or medical not-for-profits) for two reasons. First, these types of organizations are
subject to several additional sources of state-level governance that are not related to the measures
of governance we use for our analysis. For example, in addition to being subject to the typical
powers of a state Attorney General, medical not-for-profits are subject to oversight by state
licensing and medical boards. In contrast, charitable not-for-profits are regulated by a single
state agency and their powers correspond to our governance metric. Second, many states exempt
educational and medical not-for-profits from the reporting requirements that we employ. These
exemptions are granted because medical and educational not-for-profits generally must file
particular regulatory forms with the state agencies that oversee them. Unfortunately, we are not
aware of any reliable source that would permit us to construct a legal or a reporting governance
metric for educational or medical not-for-profits. We further reduce our sample of 65,795
charitable not-for-profits to 51,917 by requiring that they receive donations of a least $10,000.
Charities that receive few donations are frequently not subject to state reporting requirements
and are less likely to be subject to enforcement efforts by state oversight agencies.
The foundation dataset spans the years 1994 through 2000. The 1994 database includes
the entire population of 50,914 foundations, while the 1995 to 2000 samples include
approximately 8,000 observations for each year. The sample observations for 1995 to 2000 were
compiled by the IRS and include all foundations with total year-end assets of $10 million or
more as well as a stratified random sample of smaller foundations. We exclude 6,909 private
operating foundation observations, which operate charitable programs rather than make grants

11

Computer readable data is available from the National Center for Charitable Statistics directly at
www.nccs.urban.org.
13

and face a different set of tax rules. We also exclude 2,654 foundation-year observations with
zero assets.12
Descriptive statistics for the variables employed in the paper are presented in Table 4.13
Although the organization-specific characteristics we examine vary from year to year, our
governance metrics do not. We did attempt to gain some understanding of the extent to which
these various governance mechanisms have been stable over time, particularly during our sample
periods. Discussions with various individuals at various state not-for-profit regulating agencies
suggest that in general the existing rules have been in place for at least the past several years.
Because the governance variables do not vary across time, all standard errors are clustered at the
entity level. Additionally, because the charitable sector is diverse we also include industry
indicator variables in our regression analyses. The IRS has created a National Taxonomy of
Exempt Entities (NTEE) which include 18 major categories (and numerous sub-categories) of
charitable not-for-profits.
4.

Results

4.1.

Public Charities
As previously discussed the empirical analysis is directed towards addressing two broad

issues. First, does stronger governance induce not-for-profits to focus more on charitable
activities? Second, does stronger governance attenuate payments (in the form of salaries) to
insiders? Table 5 initiates our analysis with an examination of how our governance metrics
influence the charitable payout and fundraising activities of public charities. Industry, size (total
assets) and revenue controls are included in all regressions. All t-statistics are based on standard
errors clustered at the firm level. Several variations of each model are presented in order to
examine the independent and joint effects of the governance variables.
The measure of charitable payout in columns 1 through 6 is the ratio of charitable
expenses to total expenses. This measures captures the relative proportion of total expenditures
12

Zero asset foundations frequently act as little more than annual conduits where a donor provides funds to the
foundation, which disburses those funds to a charity before the end of the year.
13
Because the foundation sector is diverse and our sample contains observations with extreme minimum and
maximum values of many of our variables of interest we attempt to mitigate the influence of extreme values on our
analyses in several ways. First, we winsorize all of our data at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Second, we conduct
extensive outlier testing in each regression model including examining residual plots and screening our data based
on Cook’s D statistics, leverage statistics, and standardized residual statistics.
14

that are devoted to charitable causes rather than consumed as administrative expenses or spent on
fundraising activities.14 The results in column 1 of Table 5 indicate that the combined
governance variable is associated with a larger share of not-for-profit expenses being dedicated
to charitable purposes. When we partition the combined governance variable into its three subindices (non-distribution, enforcement, and reporting) in columns 2-6 of Table 5, results suggest
that the enforcement sub-index has no independent effect on public charity behavior. In contrast
the non-distribution and reporting governance variables each has a statistically significant effect
on public charity behavior. Columns 7 through 12 of Table 5 repeat this analysis using the share
of total revenue as a scaling factor in order to capture the relative amount of total current
resources that are devoted to charitable purposes. Scaling by revenues is a useful check on these
results as a not-for-profit can spend its current inflows on charitable, administrative, or
fundraising activities but it may alternatively choose to save a portion of those inflows. Results
for this alternative measure of charitable payout are similar to those obtained when scaling by
total expenses suggesting that intertemporal dynamics or the stage of not-for-profit growth does
not account for the observed results. In terms of economic magnitude the results suggest that
increasing non-distribution governance from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile (a change of
1.0) induces an approximately one percent increase in expenses dedicated toward charitable
purposes. A similar magnitude applies to the results on reporting governance.
Columns 13 through 18 of Table 5 employ a dependent variable that measures the
efficiency of fundraising. As noted by Steinberg (1986), a not-for-profit will benefit financially
by increasing its fundraising activities until the marginal cost of fundraising is equal to marginal
donation revenues.15 The fundraising metric we employ is an indicator variable equal to one if
the ratio of fundraising expenses to total donations is equal to or greater than 1.0 and zero
otherwise. This average measure, although not identical to the underlying marginal metric,

14

We define charitable expenses as those reported as “program expenses” in Part II of Page 2 of the IRS 990. On
page 2 a charity must partition all of its expenses into one of three mutually exclusive categories; programs,
administrative, and fundraising.
15
Rose-Ackerman (1982) provides a formal analysis of the issue of “excessive” fundraising and finds that donors
(who favor a particular type of public good) gain from fundraising to the extent it attracts other donors to their
charity and lose to the extent that donations are diverted away from their favored charity towards alternative
competing charities. This substitution effect can cause waste to the extent it merely increases overall fundraising
expenditures without increasing the amount of overall donations in the market.
15

captures the notion of “excessive” fundraising. These specifications employ a logit model.16
These results indicate that the combined governance variable is associated with a lower
probability of incurring “excessive” fundraising expenses. When we partition the combined
governance variable into its three sub-indices (non-distribution, enforcement, and reporting)
results show that the enforcement sub-index has no independent effect but that the nondistribution and reporting governance variables each has a statistically significant effect on
fundraising, consistent with the results found for charitable expenditures above. In terms of
magnitudes, the results suggest that increasing non-distribution (reporting) governance from the
25th percentile to the 75th percentile induces an approximately 14 (12) percent decrease in
probability that a public charity will engage in excessive fundraising.
The importance of the non-distribution laws and reporting laws relative to general
enforcement variables is something that persists in our analysis. Given that the non-distribution
constraint is, as noted by Hansmann (1980), the differentiating characteristic of not-for-profits,
these results are reassuring. These laws act to prohibit specific activities such as self-dealing or
indirect distributions. Similarly, the state level reporting laws are designed to lay bare the
financial transactions of the not-for-profit. In contrast, state level laws regarding the
enforcement powers of the state Attorney General do not correspond to specifically prohibited
transactions or actual requirement but simply lay out what general powers the Attorney General
has. These more general laws appear to have no effect on the behavior of not-for-profits.
Table 6 presents the results of tests intended to measure the effects of governance on
insider compensation.17 Columns 1 through 6 show the effects of the governance metrics on the
ratio of officers’ compensation to total expenses. This ratio captures the relative amount of total
expenditures that are paid to officers. Results show that the combined governance variable is not
associated with the ratio of officers’ compensation to total expenses. The results in subsequent
columns (2 to 6) suggest that higher levels of reporting governance attenuate the ratio of officers’
compensation to total expenses, but that neither of the legal subindices has any independent
effect.

16

As the descriptive statistics in Table 4 indicate, only six percent of the sample has this indicator variable set equal
to one. Alternative specifications that employ a cutoff of 0.8 instead of 1 reach similar conclusions.
17
This figure is drawn from line 25 of Part II of the IRS 990 (line item description is “compensation of officers,
directors, etc.”.
16

One problem with using the ratio of compensation to total expense is that many not-forprofit employees, including officers, donate their services. To the extent that the donation of
services is correlated with governance this test is not necessarily isolating the effects of
governance on compensation per se. To overcome this potential weakness we use a second
compensation metric defined as the ratio of officer’s compensation to other employee (i.e., nonofficer) compensation. This ratio captures the relative amount of compensation that not-forprofits officers receive relative to the other employees. Columns 7 through 12 in Table 6 report
results using this metric and show that higher combined governance is associated with lower
amounts of officer’s compensation relative to other employee compensation. When we partition
the combined governance variable into its three sub-indices (non-distribution, enforcement, and
reporting) results show that the enforcement sub-index has no independent effect but that the
non-distribution and reporting governance variables each has a statistically significant and
independent effects. In terms of magnitude the results suggest that increasing reporting
governance from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile (a change of 2.0) induces an
approximately 0.1 percent decrease in the ratio of officer’s compensation to total compensation.
As with charitable payout and fundraising behavior, the results suggest that laws
regulating inappropriate distributions to insiders and reporting requirements have the strongest
effect on officer’s compensation. These results correspond to the intuition that excess
compensation is deterred in the presence of laws that prohibit the distribution of assets to insiders
and in the presence of reporting requirements the force not-for-profit managers to report their
financials in detail.
4.2.

Private Foundations
The analysis of private foundations parallels that conducted on public charities. Similar

to public charities, foundations also make charitable payouts. An important distinction between
foundations and charities is that foundations have a minimum payout requirement while charities
do not. Again we seek to address two basic issues; does stronger governance cause foundations
to pay out more than the minimally required amount, and does stronger governance attenuate
payments (in the form of salaries) to insiders? Columns 1 through 6 of Table 7 examine the
effects of governance on the amount of foundation payouts relative to legally required minimum

17

amount of five percent of assets.18 The results in column 1 of Table 7 show that the combined
governance variable is associated with larger foundation payouts relative to the required amount.
When we partition the combined governance variable into its three sub-indices (non-distribution,
enforcement, and reporting) as in columns 2-6 of Table 7, results suggest that the nondistribution and reporting governance variables each has a statistically significant effect on
foundation payouts while the enforcement sub-index has no independent effect on foundation
payouts. These results suggest that an increase in non-distribution governance from the 25th
percentile to the 75th percentile induces an approximately seven percent increase in foundation
payouts relative to the required amount. A somewhat smaller magnitude (four percent) applies
to reporting governance.
As discussed above, a foundation has two choices when making its payout decisions.
The first choice is determining how much to payout (as examined in the columns 1 through 6 of
Table 7) and the second choice is determining when to payout. Because foundations are
permitted to delay their payouts one year they can retain their assets one additional year by
deferring their payouts. The second six columns of Table 7 presents results using an indicator
variable equal to one if the foundation delays the majority (i.e., 99 percent) of its payouts until
the following year and zero otherwise. Results suggest that higher combined governance is
associated with a lower probability of delay in foundation payouts. As with other results, the
enforcement sub-index has no independent effect but the non-distribution and reporting
governance variables each has a statistically significant and independent effects on foundation
payout delay. In terms of magnitude the results suggest that increasing reporting governance
from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile induces an approximately 5 percent decrease in
probability that a private foundation will delay its payouts as long as possible.
With respect to foundation officers’ compensation19, results in the first column of Table 8
shows that higher levels of combined governance are associated with lower ratios of officers’
compensation to total compensation suggesting that stronger governance attenuates foundation
officer’s compensation. The partitioned results in columns 2 through 6 indicate that this effect
stems from the non-distribution sub-index and that neither the enforcement subindex nor the
18

The payout amount is line 8 of Part V of the IRS 990, and the minimum required amount is line 7 of Part XI of the
prior year’s IRS 990-PF.
19
This figures is taken from line 13a of the IRS 990-PF.
18

reporting governance measure are associated with the ratio of foundation officer’s compensation
to total expenses. Scaling by other employee compensation provide similar results, as indicated
in columns 7 through 12 of Table 8. In terms of magnitude the results suggest that increasing
non-distribution governance from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile induces an
approximately 3 percent decrease in the ratio of officers compensation to total expenses. A
similar change in non-distribution (reporting) governance induces a decrease in the ratio of
officer compensation to other employee compensation of 37 (70) percent.
The results for foundation payouts are similar to those for public charity payouts and
suggest that similar forms of governance laws have similar effects on not-for-profit behavior.
This is somewhat surprising given that private foundations are more likely to have a significant
donor who can exert significant control. Nonetheless, in both cases non-distribution laws and
reporting requirements appear to be associated with higher charitable payouts in both types of
not-for-profits. In part, this may be explained by the fact that the oversight of many foundations
are provided by the families of donors and, more specifically, later generations of donors with
less incentive to fulfill the charitable mission of the foundation. We leave this link between the
presence of an actual donor and foundation behavior for future work.
4.3.

Not-for-Profits and Social Insurance
The preceding analysis is useful in establishing empirical regularities between insider

compensation, a focus on charitable purposes and the governance environment of the not-forprofit firms. This analysis, however, is subject to several criticisms. First, it does not employ the
panel nature of the underlying data. Indeed, the results are subject to the same criticisms leveled
at cross-country studies that relate firm performance or capital market conditions to governance.
Second, it only emphasizes the cost-structure of not-for-profits without attempting to assess the
degree to which not-for-profits are fulfilling their mission. In order to investigate further the
importance of the governance environment on not-for-profits and to respond to these concerns,
we turn to an analysis of whether not-for-profit firms fulfill a social insurance objective. While
no ready summary statistic is available to assess the performance of not-for-profits, we employ
the panel nature of the data to assess the degree to which not-for-profits are intertemporally
smoothing resources and if they are, indeed, helping when helps the most. These tests, while
novel in the setting of not-for-profits, employ the differential response to shocks to see if the

19

relationship between resources and activities and between local economic conditions and not-forprofit activities is mediated by the governance environment.20
A social insurance object would be fulfilled if not-for-profits both intertemporally smooth
resources and if they expend more resources when local economies are hardest hit. The intuition
for intertemporal smoothing arises from the fact that a well governed not-for-profit would opt to
limit the expansion of its charitable expenditures in flush times in order to build a reserve that
can be employed in future bad times. In order to consider this possibility, Table 9 examines the
relationship between not-for profit activities and the resources available to a not-for-profit,
including donations, program revenues (from the sales of products and services) and revenues
from the sales of assets. We partition the revenue sources into these three categories because
they are very different. Donations are received from donors while program revenues are earned
income. Asset sales are neither donated nor earned, but result from the organization disposing of
a portion of its investment or plant assets. These three revenue categories comprise the vast
majority (over 95 percent) of total organization revenues. To conduct this analysis we express
all our variables as percentage changes and include year and industry effects.
The first two columns of Table 9 examine the link between these resources and not-forprofit expenses for charitable purposes and shows that, as available resources from donations and
programs increases, the amount of charitable expenditures also increases. This finding is
consistent with the intuition that increased resources are associated with increased expenditures.
Results in the third column of Table 9 show that revenues from asset sales are not associated
with increases in charitable expenditures. One likely cause for this result is that revenues derived
from asset sales tend to be lumpy and are therefore less likely to have an impact on charitable
expenditures. Of more interest than these main effects is the coefficient on the interaction of the
governance variable and these resource variables. Results in Columns 1 and 2 suggest that the
presence of stronger governance attenuates the increase in charitable outputs as resources from
donations and programs rise. This finding is consistent with a social insurance effect in that
charities in well governed states increase their charitable spending less as resources increase,
saving some resources for poorer economic conditions. In columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table 9 we
20

Because foundations are less subject to the effects of economy wide fluctuations (as they are predominantly
funded by a single person) and typically pursue longer-term objectives, we exclude private foundations from this
analysis.
20

combine the measures of economic resources into single equations. Column 4 presents the
combined results excluding the main effect of governance while the results in Column 5 include
the governance main effect. The results in Column 6 also exclude the governance main effect
but report clustered t-statistics. In all cases, the results show an insurance effect (as noted by a
statistically negative sign on the interaction coefficient) for program revenues.
While these results indicate intertemporal smoothing of resources, particularly program
revenues, it does not suggest that not-for-profits are increasing resources during economically
difficult times. In order to consider this relationship, we consider the relationship between
several measures of local economic conditions and charitable expenses. As no single measure
best captures local needs, we employ changes in disposable income, disposable income per
capita, gross state product, and state-level unemployment rates. The results in columns 1, 3, 5
and 7 in Table 10 indicate that as the overall economic situation of a state improves (as measured
by higher state disposable income, higher state disposable income per capita, higher gross state
product, and lower state unemployment rates) the amount of charitable expenditures by public
charities likewise increases. These results suggest that not-for-profits are expanding and
contracting in tandem with local economic cycles. When these economic variables are interacted
with governance, the results in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 indicate that the increases in charitable
expenditures in response to economic activity are attenuated in higher governance states. In
other words, not-for-profits in states providing a stricter governance environment are more likely
to attenuate the relationship between local economic conditions and charitable expenditures,
enabling them to provide more resources during more difficult economic times.
These results can be viewed as supporting the view that good governance rules help notfor-profit entities fulfill a social insurance function. While the coefficients on the interaction
terms are supportive of this intuition, the coefficients on the local economic variables are not
consistent with not-for-profits, on average, providing an insurance function as conceptualized in
this paper. While the direct test of the effect of governance on not-for-profit is on the sign of the
interaction term, the coefficients on the economic variables alone indicate the degree to which
not-for-profits remain tied to local economic conditions. Further analysis might usefully
examine the other factors that allow not-for-profit firms to fulfill a social insurance function.
5.

Conclusion

21

The not-for-profit sector, consisting of public charities and private foundations, is a
significant part of the U.S. economy. Public charities face several important operating choices
including how much financial resources to devote to charitable rather than administrative
activities, how much to spend on fundraising, and how to compensate their officers. Private
foundations likewise face important choices including how much of their assets to give away to
charities annually, when to pay those gifts, and how much to compensate their officers. These
choices are central and fundamental to the overall operating effectiveness of the charitable sector
and are remarkably unconstrained by the usual mechanisms that constrain for-profit managers.
In the absence of the governance normally provided by owners, not-for-profits are subject to
oversight and monitoring by various state-level agencies. Although this situation is well known,
what is not known is how effective these legal and reporting rules are in controlling the behavior
of not-for-profit managers.
The governance environment facing not-for-profit firms appears to shape their emphasis
on charitable activities, their compensation patterns, their willingness to engage in inefficient
fundraising, and their willingness to smooth and time their activities most effectively. These
findings are consistent with the notion that state-level laws and regulations constitute an effective
governance environment in the absence of owners. The results further suggest that the more
general enforcement provisions that outline the legal authority of state attorney generals have
little or no effect on not-for-profit firm behavior while specific rules that strengthen the nondistribution constraint or mandate fuller reporting provide the largest effects on not-for-profit
behavior. Finally, our analysis finds that strong governance rules also appear to enhance the
willingness of not-for-profits to intertemporally smooth their activities and expand activities
when local economic conditions worsen. This finding is suggestive of a social insurance
function for not-for-profits as well-governed entities moderate their spending in good economic
periods in order to expand their charitable activities in less robust economic periods.
This analysis also suggests several lines of further inquiry. First, the diffusion of funders
of not-for-profits might usefully be analogized to the concentration of ownership to examine how
not-for-profit firms respond to the presence of large funders. One possible avenue for this would
be to consider the role of government grants, or large block grants received from feeder
organizations such as the United Way. Second, the effects of large liquid endowments on
charitable behavior, analogous to the free cash flow problem encountered in for-profit
22

corporations, is a relatively unexplored area. Third, the extent to which legacy effects alter
private foundation payouts has not been examined. The payout philosophy of a foundation could
be a function of whether or not the originating founder is still alive or a function of the influence
of the founder’s heirs on foundation payouts. Each of these questions could be analyzed within
the framework of the governance environment articulated in this paper. We leave these
questions for future research.

23

References
Auerbach, A.J., Feenberg, D., 2000. The Significance of Federal Taxes as Automatic
Stabilizers. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 14:37-56.
Baber, W., Daniel P. and Roberts, A., 2002. Compensation to managers of charitable
organizations, An empirical study of the role of accounting measures of program
activities. Accounting Review 77: 679-694.
Bittker, B.I., Radhert, G.K., 1976. The Exemption of Nonprofit Organizations From Federal
Income Taxation. The Yale Law Journal. 85 (3): 299-358.
Brody, E., 1997. Charitable Endowments and the Democratization of Dynasty. Arizona Law
Review 39 (Fall): 873-948.
Bushman, R., Piotroski, J., Smith, A., 2004. What Determines Corporate Transparency?
Journal of Accounting Research. 42:207-252
Cambridge Associates, 2000. Sustainable Payout for Foundations. Cambridge Associates, Inc.:
Cambridge, MA.
Cochrane, J.H., 1991. A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance. The Journal of Political
Economy. 99: 957-976.
Fisman, R., Hubbard, G., 2003. Endowments, Governance, and the Nonprofit Form. The
Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations. The University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, E. L., Shleifer, A., 2001. Not-for-profit entrepreneurs. Journal of Public Economics.
81: 99-115.
Glaeser, E., 2003. Introduction. The Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations. The
University of Chicago Press.
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., and Metrick, A., 2003 "Corporate Governance and Equity Prices."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 107-155.
Gruber, J., 1997. The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance. The
American Economic Review. 87: 192-205.
Hamermesh, D.S., 1982. Social Insurance and Consumption: An Empirical Inquiry. The
American Economic Review. 72: 101-113.
Hansmann, H., 1980. The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise. The Yale Law Journal. 89: 835-902.
Hansmann, H., 1990. Why do Universities have Endowments? Journal of Legal Studies19
(January): 3-42

24

Hayashi, F., Altonji, J., Kotlikoff, L., 1996. Risk-Sharing between and within Families.
Econometrica. 64: 261-294.
Hines, J., 1999. “Nonprofit Business Activity and the Unrelated Business Income Tax.” In
James Poterba’s ed., Tax Policy and the Economy. 13: 57-84.
Kingma, B.R., 1989. An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-out Effect, Income Effect, and
Price Effect for Charitable Contributions. The Journal of Political Economy. 97: 11971207.
Kniesner, T.J., Ziliak, J.P., 2004. Tax Reform and Automatic Stabilization. The American
Economic Review. 92: 590-612.
Krishnan, R., Yetman, M., and Yetman, R., 2004. Cost Shifting in Nonprofit Organizations:
An Agency Based Analysis. Working paper, the University of California at Davis.
La Porta, R., Lopes de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., 1997, “Legal determinants of
external finance,” Journal of Finance 52: 1131
La Porta, R., Lopes de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., 1998, “Law and finance,”
Journal of Political Economy 106: 1113-1155.
Marsh, T., 2002. A Dubious Distinction: Rethinking Tax Treatment of Private Foundations and
Public Charities. Virginia Tax Review. 22. pp.
Mehrling, P., 1999. Spending Policies for Foundations: The Case for Increased Grants Payout.
National Network of Grantmakers: San Diego, CA.
Pauly, M., Redishch, M., 1973. The Not-For-Profit Hospital as a Physicians’
Cooperative. The American Economic Review. 63: 87-99.
Rose-Ackerman, S., 1987., Charitable Giving and “Excessive” Fundraising. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 97: 195-212.
Rose-Ackerman, S., 1996., Altruism, Nonprofits, and Economic Theory. Journal of Economic
Literature. 34: 701-728.
Shleifer, A.and Vishny, R.,1996. A Survey of Corporate Governance, Journal of Finance, 52:
737-783.
Steinberg, R., 1986. Should Donors Care About Fundraising? In The Economics of Nonprofit
Institutions, Edited by Susan Rose-Ackerman. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Senate of the United States, 2003. Charity Aid, Recovery, and Empowerment Act of 2003. S
272.

25

Steuerle, G., 1977. Pay-out Requirements for Foundations. U.S. Department of the Treasury:
Washington, D.C.
United States House of Representatives, 2003. The Charitable Giving Act of 2003. HR 7.

26

Table 1a
Description of Legal Governance Measures
Non-distribution Sub-Index Measures
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
Variable

Description

Not-for-profits legally
distinguished
from for-profit firms

Some states have a unique set of statutory laws that apply specifically to not-for-profits.
One common element of these separate laws is that they typically act to prevent the
distribution of charitable assets (i.e., residual claims) to officers, directors, or other
specific individuals other than recipients specifically included in the organizations’ bylaws.

Liquidating distributions
restricted to other not-forprofits

Some states require that charitable liquidating distributions be paid to other registered
charities only. This prevents charities from paying assets to corporate officers or
directors or other non-charitable organizations.

Attorney General must be
notified of asset sales

Some states require charities to notify the Attorney General if it sells substantially all of
its assets. This permits the Attorney General to enforce non-distribution rules on
charitable liquidations.

Limitations on reincorporating as a forprofit corporation

Some states prohibit or otherwise limit the extent to which charities can re-organize as
for-profit corporations. This prevents charities from paying out their assets to new
“shareholders” which could be officers or directors or non-charitable corporations.

_______________________________________________________________________________________________
Enforcement Rights Sub-Index Measures
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
Variable
Attorney General must be
notified of any suits
involving charities

Description
Some states require the courts to notify the Attorney General of any legal action brought
against a charity. One purpose of this requirement is that it permits the Attorney General
to determine if there is any enforceable action it should undertake as well.

Parties other than Attorney Some states give parties other than the Attorney General (such as officers or directors) the
General have standing to right to bring legal suit against a charity. This exposes the charity to additional sources of
bring legal actions
legal enforcement.
Cy pres authority

Cy pres laws give the courts the power to modify the incorporated purpose of the

organization if that organization’s purpose became obsolete, wasteful, or otherwise
impracticable
Source: Fremont-Smith (2004).

27

Table 1b
Description of Reporting Governance Measures

Variable

Description

Registration required

Most states exempt organizations that raise small amounts of donations (typically around
$10,000). Virtually all states exempt not-for-profit educational and medical
organizations from registration as these types of organizations typically have their own
state and frequently federal registration requirements.

Annual renewal of
registration

For states that require registration the renewal period is generally either annual or never
(once the charity is registered it need never again register).

Fundraising organizations
used

Some charities use professional fundraising firms which raise donations and remit those
donations, less a fee, to the charity.

Financial statement audit

Some states require the charity to undergo a financial statement audit by Certified Public
Accountants

Financial statements
included

In addition to the IRS 990 (which is required to be included in all state registrations)
some states also require that financial statements be included.

Bylaws included

Are bylaws included as part of required reporting?

Articles of incorporation
included
Tax exempt determination
letter included

Are articles of incorporation included as part of required reporting?

Other state specific
information included

Some states have additional state-specific forms that must be included in the registration.

The tax-exempt determination letter (the IRS 1023) is the formal document that exempts
a charity from federal income taxation.

Source: Based on filing requirements as reported by the Charitable Organization Multi-State Filing Project. Further detail is available at
www.multistatefiling.org.

28

Table 2a
Legal Non-distribution Governance Sub-Index
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________

State
Alaska
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
DC
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Mississippi
Montana
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin
West Virginia
Wyoming

Legally
distinguished

Limitations
on
distributions

0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

AG
notice of
asset
sales
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1

Reincorp.
limits

Total Nondistribution
Sub-Index

1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0

2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
1
2
3
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
1
2
2
2
3
2
1
4
2
2
4
2
3
2
1
2
3
3
2
1
3

29

Table 2b
Legal Enforcement Governance Sub-Index
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________

State
Alaska
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
DC
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Mississippi
Montana
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin
West Virginia
Wyoming

AG
notice of
suits
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1

Other
party
standing
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1

Cy
pres
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Total
Enforcement
Sub-Index
0
2
1
1
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
2
2
1
2
3
2
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
2
2
3
2
3
1
3

Total
Legal
Index
2
4
3
3
7
4
5
4
4
4
6
3
4
5
5
4
4
3
4
6
4
4
5
6
6
4
6
6
6
6
2
5
3
5
6
5
4
7
5
4
6
4
6
5
3
4
6
5
5
2
6

30

Table 3
Reporting Governance Index
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

State
Alaska
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
DC
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Mississippi
Montana
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon

Obs.
159
474
176
472
5,121
812
1,060
1,464
218
2,007
843
271
529
61
2,244
1,045
457
529
383
1,691
987
275
1,267
1,079
911
202
122
1,340
104
324
274
1,227
150
93
5,482
2,474
435
449

Register

Annual

Fundraiser

Audit

Financials

By-laws

Articles

1023

Addl.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1

1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0

1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0

1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0

1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1

0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1

0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1

0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total
Reporting
Index
5
5
6
3
6
3
3
7
0
4
6
0
0
0
7
0
6
2
4
6
8
5
8
6
6
9
0
8
8
0
7
8
6
0
6
6
4
5

31

Table 3
Reporting Governance Index (continued)
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

State
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin
West Virginia
Wyoming

Obs.
2,850
308
411
193
719
2,055
102
1,363
160
696
933
179
89

Register

Annual

Fundraiser

Audit

Financials

By-laws

Articles

1023

Addl.

1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0

1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0

0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0

1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0

1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0

0
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0

Total
Reporting
Index
7
6
4
0
10
0
8
8
0
6
7
5
0

32

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics for Public Charities and Private Foundations
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
Variable:

Mean

Median

25%

75%

Std.Dev

Governance Variables:
Non-distribution governance

2.51

2.00

2.00

3.00

0.76

Enforcement governance

3.44

4.00

3.00

4.00

0.83

Reporting governance

5.62

6.00

5.00

7.00

2.46

Charitable expenses / total expenses

0.785

0.839

0.73

0.90

0.20

Charitable expenses / total revenues

0.676

0.734

0.49

0.86

0.29

Fundraising indicator

0.060

0.000

0.00

0.00

0.23

Officer compensation / total expenses
Officer compensation / other
employee compensation
Total revenues (in $millions)

0.059

0.032

0.01

0.06

0.08

0.346

0.217

0.00

0.70

0.37

13.26

4.18

1.11

11.43

47.79

Total assets (in $millions)

29.09

11.29

2.48

25.77

86.46

6.61

1.02

0.21

4.08

27.72

Percentage change in total donations

-0.61

0.04

-0.28

0.307

3.57

Percentage change in program revenues

-0.20

0.06

-0.05

0.17

1.33

Percentage change in asset sales

-0.09

0.62

-0.21

1.00

14.36

Percentage change in state disposable income
Percentage change in state disposable income per
capita
Percentage change in gross state product

-0.02

0.04

0.03

0.06

0.27

-0.01

0.03

0.02

0.05

0.20

-0.02

0.05

0.03

0.06

0.28

Percentage change in state unemployment

-0.01

-0.05

-0.13

0.10

0.19

Percentage changes in charitable expenditures

-0.19

0.05

-0.04

0.15

1.16

3.16

1.13

0.97

1.65

9.58

0.27

0

0

1

0.44

0.50

0.53

0.23

0.77

0.29

4.87

1.68

0.67

4.07

10.90

Charitable Not-for-profits:

Total donation (in $millions)

Private Foundations:
Qualifying distributions / required
distributions
Delayed distributions indicator
Officer compensation / total expenses
Officer compensation / other
employee compensation
Total revenues (in $millions)

23.98
1.76
0.28
11.68
232.87
Total assets (in $millions)
3.16
1.13
0.97
1.65
9.58
______________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: The governance variables are described in Tables 1a and 1b. Charitable expenses are expenses directed towards accomplishing the charitable
mission rather than for fundraising or administrative activities. The fundraising indicator is equal to one if the ratio of fundraising expenses to
donations received is one or greater, and zero otherwise. Officers compensation for charitable purposes is the amount of officers compensation that is
allocated to activities that accomplish the charitable mission rather than those allocated to fundraising or administrative activities. Program revenues
are from the sales of products and services. Qualifying distributions are amounts paid by a foundation that qualify towards meeting the five percent
payout minimum. Required distributions are five percent of total assets. The delayed distribution indictor variable is equal to one of the foundation
times its payouts such they are as late as possible (i.e., in the following year) and zero otherwise.

33

Table 5
Effects of Governance on Charitable Organization Operating Efficiency
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Dependent Variable:

Constant

Ratio of Charitable Expense to Total Expense
(1)

(2)

0.657

0.657

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.671

0.653

0.657

0.654

(66.14) (60.40) (88.19) (58.68) (59.90) (58.59)

Combined
Governance

0.003

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.539

0.544

0.556

0.538

0.545

0.540

(46.15) (40.50) (63.69) (39.43) (40.29) (39.43)

0.005

0.003

(3.17)

(2.26)

(2.74)

(1.64)

Y
Y
Y

(13)

(14)

(15)

-2.634 -2.755 -2.863
(-10.61) (-10.3) (-13.86)

(16)

(17)

(18)

-2.687 -2.774 -2.713
(-10.08) (-10.16) (-9.92)

(-2.55)

(3.93)

Reporting Governance

Fundraising Indicator Variable

-0.054

0.004

Enforcement
Sub-index

Y
Y
Y

(8)

0.005

Distribution
Sub-index

Industry Effects?
Size Controls?
Revenue Controls?

(7)

0.003

(3.61)

Legal Governance

Ratio of Charitable Expense to Total Revenue

-0.074
(-1.80)

-0.045
(-0.95)

0.005

0.005

0.008

0.008

-0.145 -0.143

(1.85)

(1.89)

(2.07)

(2.12)

(-2.05) (-2.04)

0.004

0.002

0.004

-.001

(1.66)

(0.65)

(1.04) (-0.21)

0.003

0.002

0.002

0.004

0.003

0.004

(3.01)

(2.23)

(2.29)

(3.58)

(2.90)

(3.14)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.014

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.064
(-2.41)

-0.050
(-2.09)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

0.061

(-0.11) (0.91)
-0.062
(-2.51)
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Observations
51,756 51,756 51,756 51,756 51,756 51,756
51,917 51,917 51,917 51,917 51,917 51,917
24,050 24,050 24,050 24,050
24,050 24,050
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: The specifications in columns 1 through 12 are OLS regressions. The specifications in columns 13 through 18 are logit regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 6 is the ratio of
charitable expenses to total expenses. The dependent variable in columns 7 through 12 is the ratio of charitable expenses to total revenue. The dependent variable in columns 13 through 18 is a dummy
variable set equal to one if the entity is engaged in “excessive fundraising” as defined in the text. All regression employ industry effects, size controls (total assets) and revenue controls (total revenues). All
t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the entity level. Governance variables are described in Tables 1a and 1b.

34

Table 6
Effects of Governance on Charitable Organization Officers’ Compensation
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Dependent Variable:

Ratio of Officer’s Compensation to Total Expense
(1)

Constant
Combined
Governance
Legal Governance

(2)

0.078
0.071
(16.69) (13.49)

(3)

(4)

0.078
0.073
0.071
(22.29) (13.48) (13.42)

(6)

(7)

0.073
(13.45)

0.311
(13.16)

-.001

-.005

(-1.39)

(-2.83)
0.000
(0.45)

0.001
(1.13)

Distribution
Sub-index
Enforcement
Sub-index
Reporting
Governance

(5)

Ratio of Officer’s Comp. to Other Employee
Compensation
(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

0.304 0.284 0.315
0.305
(11.90) (16.95) (11.72) (11.84)

-.008
(-2.23)

(12)
0.316
(11.77)

-.006
(-1.55)

0.001

0.001

-.007

-.007

(0.68)

(0.60)

(-.97)

(-1.08)

0.000

0.001

-.010

-.005

(-.10)

(0.73)

(-1.58)

(-0.77)

-.001

-.001

-.001

(-2.03)

(-2.32)

(-2.29)

-.005

-.005

-.005

(-2.47) (-2.02)

(-2.03)

Industry Effects?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Size Controls?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Revenue Controls?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
No. of Observations 26,971 26,971 26,971 26,971 26,971 26,971
25,831 25,831 25,831 25,831 25,831 25,831
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: All specifications are OLS regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 6 is the ratio of officer’s compensation to total expenses. The
dependent variable in columns 7 through 12 is the ratio of officer’s compensation to total employee compensation. All regression employ industry effects,
size controls (total assets) and revenue controls (total revenues). All t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the entity level.
Governance variables are described in Tables 1a and 1b.

35

Table 7
Effects of Governance on Foundation Payouts
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Dependent Variable:

Constant
Combined Governance

Ratio of Current Year Payout to Prior Year Distributable
Amount
(1)

(2)

1.355

1.340

(28.30)

(20.27)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

1.467

1.316

1.370

1.352

-0.874

-1.025

-0.920

-1.002

-1.024

-1.011

(47.52)

(19.93)

(20.17)

(19.90)

(-10.85)

(-9.55)

(-18.09)

(-9.34)

(-9.43)

(-9.30)

0.020

-0.015

(4.84)

(-2.16)

Legal Governance

0.041

0.030

-0.003

0.016

(3.77)

(2.59)

(-0.16)

(0.87)

Non-Distribution Subindex
Enforcement Subindex
Reporting Governance

Industry Effects?
Size Controls?
Revenue Controls?

Delayed Payout Indicator

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

0.074

0.071

-0.001

0.006

(3.86)

(3.74)

(-0.03)

(0.17)

0.009

-0.013

-0.005

0.028

(0.49)

(-0.69)

(-0.15)

(0.85)

0.021

0.017

0.019

-0.023

-0.025

-0.026

(4.11)

(3.08)

(3.47)

(-2.62)

(-2.74)

(-2.76)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Observations
38,411
38,411
38,411
38,411 38,411 38,411
28,956
28,956 28,956 28,956 28,956 28,956
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: All specifications are OLS regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 6 is the ratio current year payouts to the prior year’s distributable amount. The dependent variable in columns 7
through 12 is a dummy variable set equal to one if the entity has delayed its payout, as defined in the text. All regression employ industry effects, size controls (total assets) and revenue controls (total
revenues). All t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the entity level. Governance variables are described in Tables 1a and 1b.

36

Table 8
Effects of Governance on Foundation Officers’ Compensation
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Dependent Variable:

Constant
Combined Governance

(1)

(2)

0.570
(50.45)
-0.002
(-2.41)

0.632
(41.10)

Legal Governance

(3)
0.545
(75.70)

-0.015
(-5.78)

(4)
0.629
(40.91)

(5)
0.620
(40.12)

Enforcement Sub-index
0.000
(-0.12)
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

0.619
(40.07)

(7)
6.765
(37.09)
-0.203
(-13.87)

Y
Y
Y

0.003
(2.13)
Y
Y
Y

(8)

(9)

(10)

6.715
(29.93)

5.591
(51.55)

7.143
(30.68)

-0.384
(-10.51)
-0.031
(-6.57)
0.000
(-0.05)

Reporting Governance

(6)

-0.017
(-6.05)

Non- Distribution Subindex

Industry Effects?
Size Controls?
Revenue Controls?

Ratio of Officer’s Compensation to Other Employee
Compensation

Ratio of Officer’s Compensation to Total Expense

Y
Y
Y

-0.031
(-6.61)
-0.003
(-0.51)
0.002
(1.23)
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

(11)

(12)

6.361
(29.58)

6.837
(30.97)

-0.772
(-12.36)
-0.011
(-0.19)

-0.706
(-11.36)
0.103
(1.67)
-0.187
(-9.71)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.281
(-7.79)

-0.216
(-13.10)

-0.185
(-11.05)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Observations
33,516
33,516
33,516
33,516
33,516
33,516
1,516
1,516
1,516
1,516
1,516
1,516
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: All specifications are OLS regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 6 is the ratio of officer’s compensation to total expenses. The dependent variable in columns 7 through 12 is the
ratio of officer’s compensation to total employee compensation. All regression employ industry effects, size controls (total assets) and revenue controls (total revenues). All t-statistics (in parentheses) are
based on standard errors clustered at the entity level. Governance variables are described in Tables 1a and 1b.

37

Table 9
Effects of Governance on the Sensitivity of Charitable Expenses to Charity-Specific Resources
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

Intercept

(1)
-1.501
(-133.0)

(2)
-1.164
(-109.2)

(3)
-1.680
(-119.6)

(4)
-0.998
(-73.8)

Legal governance indicator
variable
Change in donations
Change in donations * governance
indicator
Change in program revenue
Change in program revenue *
governance indicator

-0.002
0.044
(38.7)

0.020
(14.11)

(-0.64)
0.020
(14.08)

-0.007

0.001

0.001

(-4.02)
0.310
(112.2)

(0.58)
0.200
(47.40)

(0.47)
0.200
(47.31)

-0.058

-0.054

-0.053

0.000
(0.56)

(-9.22)
0.000
(-0.28)

(-8.96)
0.000
(-0.28)

0.000

0.000

0.000

(-0.31)

(0.33)

(0.31)

(-13.82)
Change in asset sales revenue
Change in asset sales revenue *
governance indicator

(5)
-0.997
(-73.03)

Year Effects?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Industry Effects?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
No. of Observations
41,045
30,363
21,360
15,679
15,680
R-Squared
0.40
0.62
0.44
0.47
0.47
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: All specifications are OLS regressions. The dependent variable is the annual percentage change in charitable expenses. The
governance indicator variable is equal to 1 if the legal governance variable (the combination of non-distribution and enforcement
governances) is greater than 6 (its median value) and zero otherwise. Donations are the total donations received by an organization. Program
revenues are those from the sales of products and services. Asset sales revenues are from the sales of assets including investments and
equipment. All regressions employ industry effects and yearly indicator variables. T-statistics based on robust standard errors are underneath the
parameter estimates.

38

Table 10
Effects of Governance on the Sensitivity of Charitable Expenses to Local Economic Shocks
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

Constant
Change in disposable income
Change in disposable income *
governance indicator

(1)
0.287
(15.90)
2.019
(136.0)

(2)
0.281
(15.58)
2.035
(127.3)

(3)
0.698
(36.31)

(4)
0.688
(35.76)

3.067

3.096

(147.2)

(140.0)

(5)
0.266
(15.03)

(6)
0.263
(14.87)

1.910
(138.25)

1.928
(128.2)

(7)
-1.419
(-117.4)

(8)
-1.414
(-117.1)

-0.709

-0.756

(-51.35)

(-48.42)

-0.054
(-3.18)

Change in per-capita disposable
income
Change in per-capita disposable
income * governance indicator

-0.074
(-3.30)

Change in gross state product
Change in gross state product *
governance indicator

-0.049
(-3.00)

Change in state unemployment
level
Change in state unemployment
level * governance indicator

0.147
(6.430)

Year Effects?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Industry Effects?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
No. of Observations
40,987
40,989
40,986
40,974
40,986
40,983
41,194
11,008
R-Squared
0.54
0.54
0.56
0.56
0.54
0.55
0.41
0.41
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes: All specifications are OLS regressions. The dependent variable is the annual percentage change in charitable expenses for public
charities. The governance indicator variable is equal to 1 if the legal governance variable (the combination of non-distribution and
enforcement governances) is greater than 6 (its median value) and zero otherwise. All regressions employ industry effects and yearly indicator
variables. T-statistics based on robust standard errors are underneath the parameter estimates.

39

