                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MONETARY INSTRUMENTS AND POLICY RULES
             IN A RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS ENVIRONMENT



                         Michael Dotsey

                         Robert G. King




                     Working Paper No. ill




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                            May 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1114
                                                        May 1983




                       Monetary Instruments and Policy Rules
                       in a Rational Expectations Environment




                                     ABSTRACT

       This paper explores the implications of rational expectations and the aggregate
supply theory advanced by Lucas (1973) for analysis of optimal monetary policy
under uncertainty along the lines of Poole (1970), returning to a topic initially
treated by Sargent and Wallace (1975). Not surprisingly, these two "classical"
concepts alter both the menu of feasible policy choice and the desirability of
certain policy actions. In our setup, unlike that of Sargent and Wallace (1975),
the systematic component of monetary policy is a relevant determinant of the magnitude
of "business fluctuations" that arise from shocks to the system. Central bank be-
havior--both the selection of monetary instruments and the framing of overall policy
respJnse to economic conditions--can work to diminish or increase the magnitude of
busir.ss fluctuations. However, the "activist" policies stressed by the present
discussion bear little (if any) relationship to the policy options rationalized
by' the conventional analysis of monetary policy under uncertainty. In particular,
in contrast to Poole's analysis, money supply responses to the nominal interest
rate are not important determinants of real economic activity. Rather, the central
bank should focus on policies that make movements in the general price level readily
identifiable by economic agents.




 Michael Dotsey                                         Robert G. King
 Research Department                                    Department of Economics
 Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond                       University of Rochester
 Richmond, VA 23261                                     Rochester, NY 14627
 (804)   643-1250 (ext. 3201)                           (716) 275-3895
I. Introduction1

        How should the central bank design its monetary policies, so as to minimize

the magnitude of business fluctuations? The modern answer to this question builds

on Poole's (1970) analysis of the implications of three alternative instrument

selections for output variability, within a simple stochastic Keynesian model:

(i) an interest rate peg at a predetermined level, in which the monetary authority

allows the money supply to adjust so as to accommodate thequantityof money demanded;

(ii) a simple money supply rule, in which money follows a predetermined path; and

(iii) a "combination policy," which permits the money supply to respond to interest

rate departures from a predetermined "target" level. Within this setup, the con-

temporaneous information about economic activity contained in the nominal interest

rate can best be exploited by a combination policy, with the optimal magnitude of

money supply response to nominal interest rates depending on the relative variability

of   real ("IS") and nominal ("LM") shocks.2
        The present discussion augments Poole's model by introducing an aggregate corn—

modity supply schedule that depends on relative prices as perceived by agents at a

specific point in time. If expectations about the current and future price level

are adaptive, then Poole's results obtain. This is no longer the case, for two

basic reasons, if expectations are rational and are based on contemporaneous

information such as prices and the nominal interest rate.

        First, agents optimally exploit the information contained in the nominal

interest rate. Second, changes in the money supply have real effects only to the

extent that the resulting price level movements are perceived as changes in real

opportunities. consequently, all combination policies imply the same distribution

of real activity as a simple money stock rule, since agents can identify the money

supply response to interest rate movements. Further, since private agents find the
                                     -2-




 interest rate to be a useful indicator of
                                             aggregate conditions, a policy of pegging

 the interest rate is undesirable. That is, if the interest rate is removed as a

 source of information, the extent of economic fluctuations is increased (although

 aggregate output is insulated from money demand disturbauces)

      Under the rational expectations assumption, we also examine two types of

monetary policies that may improve on a simple monetary rule. First, the nominal

 interest rate may be made into a better indicator of movements in the general

price level--aiding suppliers in their efforts to sort out relative and general

price movements--by an announced policy of regularly responding to changes in

economic conditions, along the lines described previously by King (1982) and

Weiss (1980). Second, structural reforms of the money supply process may alter

the covariance between money and the aggregate shocks that give rise to business

fluctuations. Some analogous considerations have been discussed by McCallum and

Whitaker (1979), in their analysis of "automatic stabilizers" in a rational

expectations environment.

     The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows: The macro-

economic model and alternate monetary policy rules are described in Section II,

with Poole's results replicated for an adaptive expectations version of the model

in Section III. After outlining the rational expectations solution of the model

(Section IV), the implications of alternative policy rules are discussed in

Section V.   In Section VI, we review related literature and provide some

concluding comments.



II. The Macroeconomic Model

     This section describes the economy that will be extensively analyzed

under alternative expectational schemes in Sections III and V below.
                                            -3-



 The Private Economy

        Two basic components of the linear macroeconomic model are a conventional

 aggregate demand or "IS" function (1) and a conventional money demand function (2)

                d    d
        (1)    y = k     -
                             ar   + Ut

        (2)       =      +   dy - cR     + Vt

 Equation (1) indicates that the logarithm of aggregate demand depends negatively

 on the real interest rate (rn) and positively on a shock u, which is independently

normally distributed with mean zero and variance a2. Equation (2) states that the

 logarithm of nominal money demand is positively related to the log of the price

level         the log of output            and a stochastic shock as well as being nega-

tively related to the nominal interest rate (R). The money demand shock is also

independently normally distributed with mean zero and variance a. With a fixed

price level and the corresponding Keynesian assumption that production is demand-

determined as well as the requirement of monetary equilibrium (M =
                                                                           M),   equations

(1) and (2) are Poole's model.

     Lucas's formulation (1973, pp. 327-328)       of   the aggregate supply schedule

derives from initially considering one of a large number of localities or

industries, which are indexed by z = 1, 2, ... Z.         In that location, supply

depends positively on the perceived relative price of the product, written as

the difference between the log of the local price P(z) and the supplier's

estimate of the log of the general price level,

     (3a)      y(z) = k5 ÷ b(P(z) -         EP)
The economy-wide average or aggregate3 supply (y Zy(z)) depends on the

difference between the (log of the) price level         (P Z'P(z)) and the economy-
wide average expectation about this variable (EP
                                                     zt     Z1EE P )
                                                               zzt
                                                 -4-




          (3b)     y    = kS +
                                     b(P
                                           -   EP)
A key aspect of this supply schedule is that movements in the general level of

prices alter output only to the extent that a representative supplier does not

perceive them, i.e., if EPt does not adjust one to one with Pt.

         Taken together with a definition of the real rate of interest as r              = Pt   +


Rt
     -
         EPi     and equilibrium conditions that specify M =
                                                                 M and y
                                                                               =
                                                                                   y,    equations

(1), (2) and (3b) represent a fairly standard macroeconomic model, closely related

to that analyzed by Sargent-Wallace (1975). The model can be solved for
                                                                                         P, Y
and Rt as functions of the money stock, the shocks         u and       and the expectational

terms EzPt and EzPt+l with comparative statics results that are wholly conventional.

         However, to study the model's behavior under rational expectations, it is

necessary to specify further elements of the "micro structure" of the model.

Specifically, demand in a particular location z differs from the economy-wide

average or aggregate value (see footnote 3) by a random shock,

                  d         d
         (4)
                 y(1)   =
                            y    +


where t(z) is an independent normal variate with mean zero and variance a that

is the same forall locations.5 Finally, the number of markets is large enough so

that average value of the c(z) shocks is zero in each period.


Monetary Policy

         In our analysis of monetary policy under uncertainty, we consider five alter-

native specifications (see Table 1 below). A common feature of these specifications

is a fixed long-run money growth path (M with          -
                                                           'i_   =   n),   so that the policies

differ solely in the conditions under which temporary movements in the money

stock occur. The policies are as follows:

         Th Sple Money Stock Rule specifies that no responses to economic
conditions occur. However, departures of the money supply (M)              from    the
                                      —5—




long-run path may arise as a result of control errors, which also arise under

other specifications considered below. Such money shocks (xt) are assumed inde-
                                                             2
pendently normally distributed with mean zero and variance a --since all money
                                                            x
stock variables are in logarithms, these errors correspond to percentage deviations.

        The Interest Rate Peg implies that the money stock is demand-determined during

the period. With this specification, we seek to depict a policy regime in which the

nominal interest rate is an "instrument" for control of an intermediate target such

as the money stock or a target such as output. That is, the central bank controls

the interest rate over a short period (a single unit of our discrete time setup)

but, in principle, the level of the "peg" might be adjusted from period to period.6

       The Combination Policy is the third policy option considered by Poole

(1970). This policy involves money supply response to departures from an

interest rate target, i.e., the interest rate is an information variable which
                                                                                          7
alerts the monetary authority to changes in the conditions of the private economy.

        A Feedback Policy involves reaction to past real or nominal aggregates or,

more basically, to the shocks that underly these aggregates, The simple form

considered here involves response to only date t-l shocks.

         Structural Reforms of monetary institutions could alter the pattern of the

money stock's response to the underlying shocks to the system.    Due   to   the aggre-

 gate character of our model, we do not discuss the nature of the institutional

 changes involved but simply specify that a component of money (hr) responds to
                     8
 aggregate shocks.

        The monetary authority's criterion is based on the gap between actual and

                                            where full information output (y(z)) is
 full information output (y(z) -   y(z)),
 the level of output that would occur if agents know all current price and the

 values of all contemporaneous shocks. Barro (1976) has argued persuasively that

 monetary policy should employ such a criterion, as opposed to an aggregate output

 gap   measure such as   - y*, so as to capture the impacts of aggregate policies
                                                   -6-




on resource allocation. The policy goal in our model is to minimize the

variance of local output about its full information value, denoted V(y(z) *

y(z)) .

                      Table I: Alternative Monetary Policy Rules
Money Stock Rule*                         MS =
                                           5         d =
                                                          +
                                                              x
Interest Rate Peg                         Mt = Mt             Pt + dyt -   peg +
                                                                                   Vt
Combination Policy**                      M =             +
                                                                       + xt
Feedback Policy                           M = M           +        + x;        =f    x     +f v
                                                                                             vt-i
                                                                                                    +f u
                                                                                                      ut-i
                                                                                    xt-l
Structural
                                                                                xt +hv
                                                                           ht =hx    Vt+hu
             Reform                       M =             +
                                                              h+x;                      ut
      *Mt is a long-run growth path of money
     **RT is a target interest rate, taken to be
                                                 tiRt below.



III. Optimal Policy Under Adaptive Expectations

      In this section, the optimal policy under uncertainty is analyzed given the

assumptions that (i) the monetary authority knows the structure of the model, but

not the values of current shocks, and (ii) the private sector forms its expectations

according to a simple adaptive mechanism. The analysis essentially replicates Poole's

conclusions about the implications of money supply control policies, pegs, and com-

bination policies. That is, for the money supply rule (5), which incorporates

feedback          and contemporaneous response to departures from an interest rate

target (g(R -     R')),   we find that an optimal policy typically involves a non-zero

value of ga--using the new. information in the interest rate--and adjustment of either

     or Rt to past information about the state of the economy.

      (5)      M =        +
                              t-l   +
                                        g(R    -
                                                    R')
                                                          +
                                                              x
For the remainder of this section, we consider only policy specification (5).
                                                                            -7-




        The specific form of the adaptive mechanism employed is EP =                                                                           +
                                                                                                                                       XPjz)
(lA)(P1         +   n).1°        This mechanism implies that agents are not fooled by sustained

inflation at the rate n, but do not fully recognize irregular movements in the

general price level as they are taking place. That is, EPt =                                                                       + (l_A)(P1      ÷ n)

                             =
so that Pt -
                    EP            (1-X)            -
                                                       I-1              -
                                                                            n)      .
                                                                                             Analogously, it is assumed that agents
believe that the future price level will be the current price level plus the normal

rate of inflation, i.e., E P    =                               E       P + n.
                          z t+l                                     z t
        The solution for the price level, nominal interest rate and real output--given

the specified adaptive mechanisms--is obtained by requiring that portfolio balance

and commodity market equilibrium occur and solving for the values of these endo-

genous variables. (Appendix A reports the results of this procedure.) In this

model, variations in aggregate and local output stem, respectively, from move-

ments in Pt -                 and P(z) -                                    so that the discussion focuses on these
                    EPt                                EPti
two terms. The price level solution implies that the gap between the price

level and its economy-wide average expected value has the following form:



        (6)         Pt -     EPt
                                        =    (1A)                   -
                                                                            P-           -   n)

                                        = (l-X)a
                                                            t-l                 -
                                                                                        g(R
                                                                                              T   -   r
                                                                                                      A       -
                                                                                                                  n)

                                                            +                   - d + c( + n)                      -
                                                                                                                       t-l   +   n)}
                                             +                              +
                                                                                c)u
                                                                                              -
                                                                                                  a(v
                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                  x)},
where     =   '(g   +   c)       (a +   b)       (1-A) +            a(l         +       db(l-A))          >       0 and 9 k5 and           (kd -   kS)/a.U
        This expression displays two basic aspects of policy choice in the adaptive

expectations version of the model. First, if last period's price level differed

from the value (Mt - n + dy +                          c(   +           n))         as a result of shocks, etc.,
                                               -8-




it is desirable to use temporary adjustments of money growth to eliminate this

source of output departures from .             In    this case, direct adjustment of money

via feedback            or adjustments to the interest rate target (R) are perfect

substitutes. Put alternatively, in a manner corresponding to Poole (1970), the

"instrument problem" is unimportant under conditions that are equivalent to

certainty. Second, the money supply response to interest rate departures from

R is an important determinant of output variability.

         Next, we analyze the movement in expected relative prices, Pt(z) -
                                                                                                      EPt,
under the conditions that tl is set to eliminate the effects of departures in
                                                                            T
last period's price level from its full information expected value and that Rt =

  + n.     It is found that

         (7)      P(z) -   EPt
                                 =   (l-X)    (P(z) —             — n)

                                 =
                                     - Et(z)   +                  + c)u          -
                                                                                     a(v
                                                                                           -
                                                                                               x)].
The supply schedule, y(z) = kS +                       -
                                             b(P(z)        EZPt), then provides local output.
The ttfull information" value of output is that which would prevail if agents know

the aggregate shocks affecting price level (P EPt), so that y(z) = kS                                   +


Therefore,     the variance of local output around its full information value may be

shown to be


         (8)     V(y(z) -   y(z))      =
                                           b2(l-X)2{          2
                                                                         2
                                                                             +       ()2(2     +


The value of       which minimizes this variance is
                       a(a÷b)(1-X)(2 + a2)
         (9)
                                   X    V
                                                    -c.
                           (b(l—A)d+l)a

Thus, the optimal pattern of contemporaneous policy response depends positively

on the variance of nominal disturbances (x, v), negatively on the variance of real

disturbances (u), and negatively on the interest rate responsiveness of the demand

for real cash balances.
                                             -9-




      In summary, Poole's general conclusions (1970, p. 208) are maintained in the

adaptive expectations version of the model. Typically, the monetary authority

should choose a strategy of allowing the money supply to respond to nominal

interest rate movements, exploiting the contemporaneous information provided by

the interest rate. To investigate how the policy choice problem is sensitive to

efficient private sector use of information (rational expectations), we next

solve the model of Section II under that alternative assumption.


IV. Rational Expectations Solution

      Our evaluation of alternative monetary policy rules under rational expecta-

tions is based on solutions of the macroeconomic model (see Appendix B), using the

"method of undetermined coefficients" previously employed by Lucas and Barro in

similar contexts. The basic economic requirements of the model derive from the

local condition(s) of commodity equilibrium and from aggregate portfolio balance.

Equilibrium in the local commodity market, (y(z) =
                                                                         y(z)),   yields


      (10)     Pt(z) =   EPt
                                +   (l/b)(kd         -   kS)   -
                                                                   (a/b)(P   +
                                                                                 Rt
                                                                                      -
                                                                                          EPt1)
                                +                +
                                    (l/b)u               (l/b)c(z).
This solution for Pt(z) is incomplete since it contains the endogenous variable

Rt as well as expectations about the current and future aggregate price level,

EP
 zt andEP
        zt+l
     Equating money supply and money demand provides a comparable equation

for the nominal interest rate.

      (lla)         + c)R   =
                                P    +   d   +
                                                       futi
                                                     db(Pt
                                                               -
                                                                   EP)   -       - gR      -



                              xt-1 -fv
                            -fx      Vt-huUt-hvVt-hx
                                                   xt+(v-x)
                                                        t                                         t
                                                       —10-




In formulating (ha), a money supply incorporating an interest rate target, one-

period feedback, and a structural reform was employed. In the case of an

interest rate peg, an analogous equation for money would be obtained.


         (lib)    Mt = Pt      +       d   +
                                               db(Pt
                                                       -
                                                           EPt)
                                                                       -       peg    +
                                                                                          Vt

Again,    (ha) and (llb) are not complete solutions since they involve the en.dogenous

price level and expectations of the current price level.

         Under the method of undetermined coefficients, we hypothesize a linear solu-

tion for local prices and the global interest rate (or money supply in the case of

a peg) that involves all the predetermined and stochastic variables of the model.


         (12)    P(z) =            +
                                       i1M
                                                +
                                                    r2(vt
                                                             -
                                                                 x)        +
                                                                               1r3u
                                                                                      +        (z)   +
                                                                                                         it5 (Vt 1
                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                         xi)   +
                                                                                                                                   1r6u1
         (13)        Rt =   o      +
                                       it       +
                                                    1P7(vt
                                                             -
                                                                 xt)
                                                                           +
                                                                               3u                    +p5(v1 _xi) +6ui
These hypothesized solutions employ a composite excess money demand shock (Vt -

as is appropriate so long as v and x exert symmetric effects on the system (which

requires that f =
                 x
                       -fv).
         Rational expectations implies that terms such as EPt are mathematical

expectations, conditional on the information available to agents. Throughout

the analysis, agents are assumed to have full information concerning all lagged

variables in the model, which is summarized by the information set Il In

addition, following Lucas (1973), we restrict agents to contemporaneous price

information, which in our model is the local price Pt(z) and the nominal interest

rate Rt. Specifically, the current shocks (x, v and so forth) are not observable

by either the monetary authority or the private sector. However, at some points

in the discussion below, we discuss the implications of permitting the money supply

to be observable.
                                              —11—




      In view of (12) and (13), the requirement that the price level expectations

EP and EPt1 are truly conditional expectations implies that these have the

form of the following "regressions," as a result of the linear normal nature of

the model.


      EP = EPI(I1,        P(z), R)
             =
                 EPtjIi + 1(P(z)        -
                                            EPII      +
                                                          2t     -
                                                                     ERtII1)
and


      EPt+i =        EP+i(I1,      Pt(z), R)

                               +              -                        -
                 =
                     EP+1IIi       yi(Pt(z)       EPtIIi)   +
                                                                y2(R       ERtI1)
The "regression coefficients"          and y are specified functions of the variance—

covariance matrix of the variable being predicted (e.g., Pt -
                                                                             EPtIi)     and the

information variables employed, (P(z) -
                                                   EPjI1)       and (Rt -
                                                                             ER!I1)).     Conse-

quently, as Lucas has stressed, the sensitivity of expectations to movements in

information variables depends on characteristics of the economic environment facing

individuals, including the form of the money supply rule. As an extreme example,

if the interest rate is pegged, individuals lose a source of information, so that

EPt is altered. Thus, evaluation of alternative monetary policies under rational

expectations must consider the effects that these policies have on the quality and

type of information transmitted to individuals. Below, we use l' y, etc. to

refer to the generic expectational parameter and denote the value under a particular

policy rule by a superscript, i.e., MS for the case of a money stock rule.
                                          -12-




      A rational expectations solution involves finding values of the unknown

coefficients ii, , and y that satisfy (10, 11), (12, 13) and the restrictions

that link      and y to elements of the variance-covariance matrices discussed

above (which are functions of the ir and ip parameters). In this class of models,

the ir and I   coefficients   can readily be expressed in terms of the behavioral

parameters (a, b, etc.) and regression coefficients (,       y).   Although it is not

possible to explicitly solve for the regression coefficients, the nonlinear

restrictions that implicitly determine solution values can be used to demonstrate

important general properties of the rational expectations model (see Appendix B

and the discussion below).

      Before proceeding to the implications of more general environments, it

is useful to consider the restricted model where there are no nominal shifts (x

and v. are absent) and no contemporaneous or feedback responses. (The monetary

policy specification is just M = Mt = M0 + nt). The general problem that a

supplier in location z faces is to isolate the relative price P(z) -   =
                                                                            Pt
Since the agent is assumed to observe P(z) but not ct(z), he will typically be
uncertain as to whether a particular movement in Pt(z) derives from aggregate

conditions        or relative conditions (i4(z)). However, if there is only one

aggregate shock, then movements in Rt actually convey movements in the aggregate

price level (that is, Rt is perfectly correlated with Pt). This characteristic

will carry over to the discussion below, where policies that' make the interest

rate a better indicator of the general price level are desirable.
                                                -13-




V. Monetary Policies Under Rational Expectations

       This section compares four types of activist monetary policies (interest

rate pegs and targets, feedback policies, and structural reforms) to a simple

money stock rule, under the assumption that agents form their expectations

rationally.

       The variance of output about its full information value has the simple

 form V(yt(z) -
                  y(z))   =
                              [l/(l1)]o2          under all policy structures. Thus, monetary

policies which induce individuals to put a smaller weight on local prices in forming

expectations of the price level lead to a lower value of this variance.



A Money Stock Policy

      Under a money stock policy, the model displays many of the standard features

associated with the equilibrium approach to business cycles. (For a recent survey,

see Barro (1981)). In particular, nominal disturbances have real consequences only

to the extent that suppliers cannot disentangle relative from absolute movements

in prices. Local prices take the form
                              A            A—          (                     c\
      (14)        P(z) = c(r÷n)       -     +
                                               Mt + 1r2v_x) + 1r3u + Tr4C.Z1.

The r coefficients are functions of the structural parameters and the expectational

coefficients, with the exact nature of this dependence spelled out in Appendix B.

For example, ri4 is equal to l/(b(l_)), which reflects the fact that suppliers

partially attribute a •shift in relative demand to movements in the general price

level. As a result, prices will be more responsive to such shocks than under full

current information,where         =       1/b (the asterisk denotes full current information).
Although the solution for is only implicitly determined, it can be shown that

o < < c5/(cY + 02) < 1. Therefore, a change in local prices causes a less than

one-to-one change in agents' expectations of the general price level.
                                                    -14-




       The behavior of local output is derived from the local supply schedule,

y(z) = kS +    b(Pt(z)
                         -
                             EPt).           This can be rewritten as



                                                                                 - 3)ut
                                             4t
               y(z) =                                            -
        (15)
                             +   b(ii2 -     12     -
                                                           (Vt    x) + b(ir3 -
                             +
                                 b(ir4
                                         -                       + 'mt - xt) + YuUt + yc(z).

It   is shown in   Appendix B that >'m          <   0. y > 0,    y   =   1.12   That is, the magnitude   of

response to the money excess demand shocks (which have a negative impact on out-

put) and aggregate demand shocks (which have a positive impact on output) is greater

than under full information.



An Interest Rate Peg

       In a rational expectations environment, there are two basic constraints on

a monetary authority which seeks to peg the interest rate. First, the level of

the peg must be consistent with the expected real interest rate and a level of

expected inflation implied by money growth. Second, it must also specify a long-

run path of money (Mt in this model), so as to insure that price level movements

are not arbitrarily accommodated. This latter condition avoids price level deter-

minacy problems discussed by Sargent and Wallace (1975) and McCallum (1981). Such

a "monetary anchor" might derive ultimately from the requirements of fixed exchange

rates or a legal requirement that forces the central bank to hit some monetary target.

In the context of this model, the condition imposed is that EMt+ijI =                               which
                                                                                             M+i,
pins down the conditional mean of the price level at date t+1. This condition

can be met in one of two ways. The monetary authority can make the peg temporary,

promising to return to some form of money stock rule next period1 or to "settle

up" at the end of each period so as to hit the monetary target Mt+1 on average.
                                        -15-




Another method for achieving determinacy, discussed by McCallum, is to set the

interest rate peg so as to hit a monetary target. Essentially all of these policies

provide some anchor for expectations and, therefore, allow the price level to be

determined.

      Under the peg, the local price is the only piece of contemporaneous information.

Consequently, agents place greater weight on this information in expectation formation.

(Appendix B formally demonstrates that

      The stochastic behavior of output and prices is qualitatively different

under the peg. The solution for local prices no longer involves money demand

disturbances, as these are absorbed by changes in the money supply.


      (16)          P(z) =   c(+n) d+Mt +   [l/(a+b(l))]ut    +
                                                                  [l/b(l-)Jct (z)
      Local output is also insulated from velocity shocks, although aggregate

demand shocks produce departures from full information output.
                              b(l-)
      (17) yt(z) = kS +
                                        +   c(z)
                              a+b(l_)
                                                                         peg
Importantly, even though output is insulated from monetary disturbanCe t

is inferior to a policy which allows interest rates to vary. The intuitive reason

for this is that the peg destroys the information concerning aggregate conditions
                                                         rate. Mathematically, this
that is normally conveyed by the nominal interest

translates into agents placing greater weight on local prices in forming expecta-
                                                     >       and a higher output variance
tions about the aggregate price level, making

under the    peg.
                                        -16-




      Our assumption that the money supply is not observable is central to this

result.     If agents could accurately observe Mt -   under the peg, then they could

gain the same information yielded by the interest rate under the money stock rule.

We conjecture, but have not shown, that if money stock figures were 'noisy' signals,

then the peg would also destroy information and raise output variability.



An Interest Rate Target

      In the adaptive expectations model of Section II, it was shown that a policy

which systematically responded to interest rates altered the distribution of output

and that such a "combination policy" dominated both a simple money stock rule and

an interest rate peg. However, under rational expectations, such a policy is neutral

with respect to real economic activity, relative prices, and the real rate of

interest.

      The reason for this neutrality is straightforward, as it results from two

basic characteristics of this type of model. First, perceived changes in the money

stock have an equal impact on local prices and the perceived general price level.

Since relative prices do not respond to perceived movements in money, suppliers

do not supply more output. Second, as both the nominal interest rate and the

form of the money supply rule are part of the individual's information set,

changes in the level of money resulting from responses to nominal interest rates

are fully perceived.
                                          —17-




      By contrast, the nominal interest rate will be sensitive to the magnitude

of the monetary authority's response to interest rate departures from target,

because this brings about changes in expected inflation. However, this alteration

of the stochastic behavior of the nominal interest rate does not alter information

that it conveys about current and future prices. Interest rate targeting has no

effect on real activity in our model. Consequently, we turn to discussion of

policies that may improve on simple money supply growth rules.

Fee&ack   Policies
      When agents are heterogeneously informed and have access to common opportunities

for exchange of goods and assets, King (1982) and Weiss (1980) have demonstrated

that feedback policies can alter the "information content of prices" and, hence,

the distribution of real activity. The present setup involves agents in each

location z knowing P(z) but not the complete vector of commodity prices prevailing

at a point in time, so that agents are heterogeneously informed. Further, all agents

trade in the economy-wide bond market. Consequently, in contrast to Sargent and

Wallace (1975), feedback policies are relevant.

     In our model, the nominal interest rate involves two elements:             (i) direct

influences of aggregate shocks (ut, v, and x); and (ii) influences of economy-

wide averages of expectations of the current and future price level (EPt and

EP   ).
 z t+l


      (18)   (Rt -   ERtjI1)   =   {(l+db u ÷ v - xt)     +   b(l-ad)(Ep   -
                                                                               EPtjIi)

                                   + a(l+db) (EZPt+i -                            a(l+db)
                                       a+b               EP÷1!I   1)}/[ + C +       a÷b
                                         -18-




If expectations were homogeneous, then the nominal interest rate would effectively

convey only the direct influences, as given by the first term in square brackets.

Feedback policy would be irrelevant to agent expectations about the general price

level, although it could influence the expected future price level and, hence,

the nominal interest rate.'3

      However, in the present setup, agents find it valuable to use local information,

Pt(z) EPI1. in the formation of expectations about the current and future

price level. Consequently, the nominal interest rate conveys the following
               14
information.


                l+ab                     b(l-ad)   + a(l+db)
      (19) b u ÷ (v -          x)]   +
                                           b+a l       b÷a
                                                                 -
                                                                     EPtIi)
Policy may affect the information content of the interest rate by altering the

weights that agents attach to local prices in forming EP and EPt÷,.

      It should be stressed that current feedback responses (fx, + fv1 +

are neutral as in Sargent and Wallace (1975) and in contrast to the adaptive expectations

model of Section III. Rather, it is prospective feedback actions that are important

for the information content of prices. That is, future policy responses to shocks

that are only imperfectly known by agents at the current point in time (fx +

     + fuUt) affect expectations of next period's price level and therefore affect

current prices. Ideally, feedback policy would make the nominal interest rate a

perfect "indicator" of the general price level, so that (as in the one-shock case

of Section IV above) agents might correctly identify relative opportunities.

However, the present setup does not permit the feedback rule to attain this ideal

position, unlike some earlier examples provided by Weiss (1980) and King (l98la).

Indeed, it has so far not been possible to analytically solve for an ideal feedback

structure, although it is possible to show that feedback policies exist which
                                         15
dominate the simple money stock rule.
                                     -19-




      In our model, as in other recent macroeconomic analyses, prospective feed-

back can alter the information content of prices in ways that are desirable.

However, as discussed by King (1982), much detailed knowledge about the workings

of the economy must be accumulated before it is possible to systematically evaluate

alternative monetary regimes and to determine those that have low output variance.



Structural Reforms

      A key aspect of the interest rate peg described above is that unobservable

fluctuations in the quantity of money work to offset shocks to velocity (both dis-

turbances are assumed not directly observable by private agents). However, this

correlation between money and other aggregate shocks comes about at a significant

cost, namely that the interest rate is no longer a signal about aggregate economic

conditions. If this correlation could be obtained without imposing such a cost,

it is reasonable to conjecture that output fluctuations could be reduced. Structural

reforms which link the quantity of money to aggregate shocks are a possibility in

this regard. Specifically, we consider a monetary policy of the form     =   ... +
              v + x , where h u + h x + hVt
        xt
h u ÷ h x + hvt
 Ut                t         Ut        xt V embody the structural reforms.

      The reason we view the above linear combination of current shocks as a
structural reform is that we wish to stick to the requirement that the central

bank has no greater information than the private sector. In particular, no

consideration is given to the possibility that the central bank knows the

contemporaneous value of the aggregate shocks, since it is presumably the case

that a policy of releasing the information dominates a direct response)6 Rather,

we are concerned with variations in central bank rules which alter individuals'

optimal responses to shocks. Previous authors who have considered this type of
                                             -20-




idea include Friedman (1957), who indicates how a commodity currency standard can

lessen the informational requirements of central bank policy, and McCallum and

Whitaker (1979), who discuss how specified tax schedules may stabilize income

over the course of a business cycle.

         To be concrete, suppose that the money stock obeyed the specification Mt =

Mt
     +
         "9- + x,'7     so that money responds positively to declines in output as in

Friedmants (1948) proposal for economic stability. The portfolio balance condition

now becomes


          (20)    (g+c)R =       + d9   +
                                            (d+)b(Pt_EP)
                                                           -
                                                                + (v_x).
That is, shifts in 4    are identical to changes in the income elasticity of money
demand. Furthermore, increases in           reduce the variance of output around its

full information value (see Appendix B) by lowering .          Therefore, a policy
which introduced a negative correlation between money and output fluctuations

would reduce the magnitude of these fluctuations.

         A fully efficient policy would have the money supply responses that eliminated

autonomous events (h =     -1)   and accomodated shifts in money demand (hv =   1),    so

that the interest rate would depend only on the aggregate real demand factor Ut.

As discussed above, this would yield the full information value of output in every

period.

         Our sense is that the interesting and realistic proposals along this line

involve restructuring the regulations of the banking sector, a decentralized

provider of money, so as to achieve a desired aggregate money response to shocks

that are not directly observable by the central bank. However, the example

again serves to indicate that a very different type of 'activist policy" is

desirable in the present rational expectations environment.
                                            —21—




VI. Related Literature

       A valuable reference point for our discussion is the analysis of Sargent

and Wallace (1975), which also emphasizes rational expectations and Lucas's

aggregate supply hypothesis (1975, p. 254), but that differs from our discussion

in two key respects. First, although S-W contrasted money supply rules with

and without feedback to past economic conditions, they did not investigate money

supply responses to contemporaneous observable indicators such as nominal interest

rates. Second, while appealing to Lucas's work as the foundation for their aggre-

gate supply specifications, S-W formulated the aggregate supply schedule as y =

kS   +(P -   EPtIi),     in the notation of the present paper.

       As McCallum (1980) and others have noted, the Lucas supply hypothesis leads

to the S-W supply schedule only if local prices are the sole contemporaneous source

of information. This is clearly indicated in our model by replacing EPt in the

aggregate supply schedule with its rational expectation, obtaining an expression

                                                                             If R were not
of the form y = kS   +
                         ib(P    -
                                         EPIIi)    +
                                                       2b(R
                                                              -
                                                                  ERtlI1).
observable, the last term would drop out, leaving an expression similar to that

of S-W. However, in our setup, the variables               and 2 are not arbitrary, but

rather are functions of the parameters of the economic environment including

those of the money supply rule.

      Fischer (1977) provides an alternative rationalization for an aggregate

supply function y = kS     +
                               a(P
                                     -
                                         EPI1),        stressing labor contracts. In

particular, contracts made by factor suppliers and demanders contain rational

expectations of the price level conditioned on the information available at the..

time the contract is signed. (A contract signed at the end of the previous

period would involve terms such as EPtI 1 and would exclude the use of period
                                         -22-




t information.) On the other hand, Barro (1977) has made a forceful argument

that suboptimal contracts of this form should not exist, demonstrating that this

type of contract is not optimal to either party. Efficient contracts would pre-

sumably not make employment/production contingent on the price level, but rather

on perceived relative prices.

      Woglom (1979) analyzes contemporaneous policy response to nominal interest

rates within a variant of the S-W model that incorporates a dependence of supply

on Pt -
          EPtI*   1,   without explaining its origins. In that analysis, the Poole-type

conclusions about the optimal magnitude of monetary response go through. Indeed,

the results of our analysis of the "adaptive expectations" model of Section III

and Woglom's setup are nearly identical.'8 From our perspective, this emphasizes

that Woglom's results basically derive from the fact that agents do not efficiently

utilize contemporaneous information.

      Canzoneri, Henderson and Rogoff (1981) provide a more complete development

along these lines. They stress that a role for active monetary response to interest

rates may arise if suppliers do not utilize interest rate information efficiently

(as in our adaptive expectations model of III above) or if there are preexisting

nominal contracts of the Fischer-Phelps-Taylor form. They contrast the real

effects of combination policies in such environments with the irrelevance that

occurs if all agents rationally employ the nominal interest rate in forming

expectations. Furthermore, these authors stress that although nominal contrasts

might similarly incorporate a dependence on nominal interest rates, an activist

policy can save the private sector the costs of such "indexation."

      Finally, Weiss (1981) provides an example of an environment in which a

policy of pegging the nominal interest rate (perversely) leads to an increase
                                     -23-




 in the information content of a vector of prices observed by private agents.

 In Weiss's setup, agents are heterogeneously informed about future aggregate

 shocks to money demand, which contaminate the current price and interest rate.

A policy of pegging the future nominal interest rate implies that such shocks

will have no impact on the future price level. Hence, such future nominal

disturbances are no longer relevant to the current price, which implies that

it serves as a better guide to current real opportunities. The loss of the

nominal interest rate as a signal about current circumstances in unimportant,

in Weiss's analysis, because the price level and nominal interest rate convey

identical information under the "flexible rate" scheme. It seems to us that

Weiss's result is principally a curiosity, although it does serve to warn that

information-based arguments against pegging nominal interest rates may not always

be as strong as in the model developed in Section V.

      In summary, the present paper and other recent analyses lend support to

the idea that activist monetary policies may be beneficial in a model that incor-

porates Lucas's supply hypothesis and rational expectations. However, in contrast

to Poole-type analyses, contemporaneous response to nominal interest rates is not

central. Rather, feedback policies and structural reforms which make price level

movements more discernible by private agents are rationalized by the present

analysis.
                                    Footnotes


     'The authors have benefited from discussions with John Boschen, Karl Brunner,
James Fackler, Marvin Goodfriend, Bennett McCalluin, Larry Radecki, and Betsy White.
King's participation in this research was supported by the National Science Foundation
under grant SES 80-07513 to the University of Rochester. Dotsey's participation
in this research was initiated at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The views
expressed in this paper are not necessarily those of NSF, the Federal Reserve Banks
of New York and Richmond or the Federal Reserve System and are solely the respon-
sibility of the authors.

          Friedman (1975) provides an overview of further developments along these
 lines, which generalize Poole's results without changing the basic message.


     3Throughout the discussion, the term "aggregate" is used to describe variables
which are (more precisely) economy-wide averages. This permits a ready movement
between a representative (or average) market and a specific market z, without
normalizing constants.

     4Our discussion abstracts from aggregate supply shocks, for the sake of
simplicity. We are confident that our central results would go through with a
modification to incorporate an aggregate supply shock in equation (3). However,
such a modification implies that full information output is stochastic and,
consequently, complicates the solution of the model.


     5it is difficult to tell a story consistent with optimal individual use
of information that produces this demand specification. However, we wish to
keep the model as close in spirit to the models in the standard literature,
e.g., Poole (1970). In any event, the major results of this paper can be
replicated in a model where local demand is sensitive to the locaiprice level.

      6Proceeding along the lines of McCallum (1981), it should be possible to
study an "adjustment peg" in a situation where the real rate of interest changes
over time. Our nondynamic analysis, by contrast, focuses on the informational
implications of an interest rate peg at a level that must be constant over time.
However, the main informational implications would appear to carry over to a model
(such as King, 1981b) that incorporates capital accumulation and dynamic behavior
of the real interest rate.

     7The particular formal structue employed emphasizes departures of the
interest rate from a target level R ,  i.e.,Ms =   + g(R _RT) + x . (As
   -   , the   combination policy appraches a pg an as      0,tthe cmbination
policy approaches a simple money stock rule.)

     8Santomero and Siegel (1981) provide a detailed discussion of bank regula-
tory policies' implications for the price level, within a model that involves
no effect of price level changes on output.
     9However, no result of this paper would be altered if the aggregate criterion
were employed (V(yt -
                                         y)).
                             This is because the local shocks ct(z) always have an
impact on local production that is equivalent to the full information impact, which
derives from the assumption that the local demand curve is vertical.

      10We realize that the mechanism chosen (primarily for its mathematical
 tractability) is not the usual way of expressing adaptive expectations. What
 is important is that agents make systematic mistakes and do not take advantage
 of all easily available information. The reader may wish to verify that a
 standard adaptive mechanism produces the same qualitative results.

          can be thought of as the "long run" value of aggregate output while
 A
 r is the "long run" value of real interest rate.

           12
       In some other papers relative shocks have a smaller impact on output under
incomplete information than under full information (see Lucas (1973) and Barro
(1976)). Hence, the vertical local demand curve leads to an identical effect.

      131n the case where all expectations are homogeneous (i.e., there is no
local information), aggregate output will be affected by Pt -          Writing                EPtIt.
Pt =       m+     'if1   Mt
                               +
                                 'r2 m + 3            u
                                              + Tr n1 + 6 ui and Rt = 11)0
                                                                                                 +           + 2      +

                               + 6 u1, one can solve for the undetermined coefficients in an
4)3 u ÷
                                                                               In this case P -                 =
analogous way to the method used in Appendix B.                                                        EPtilt
            - EmII)            + rr3(ut -
                                                     EuI),   where the conditional expectations in this
expression are derived from observing the linear combination 2 m + 11)3 u. embedded
in Rt. Therefore EmJI =
where 0
                    22 21 222
                 20m/(20m + 11)30). A
                                                      2    m + ij u) and Eu4j1÷ = LL
                                                        complete solution yields the result that
                                                                                                     m1 + i1), ut),



           EP            = -         m       +             which is independent of all feedback parameters.
                                                 a+b ut,
       -
 t              tjit           a+b       t
 It    can also be shown that this solution is equivalent to the solution which obtains
under heterogeneous expectations when                                   + .   [This   can be seen in Appendix B,

equation B-5a, where as                          o           - 0 and 2
                                                                                      2    + 3 3 0)/(l1) 0m +
       c). In that case EPt =                                       +          + ip Ut), which is the same as
11)3                                                   EPtII   1
the solution for EPtIt when expectations are homogenous.] This is intuitively
plausible since a value of                           2 =     implies    that Pt(z) is useless in conveying
 information about the aggregate price level. Also it is important to observe
 that when expectations are heterogeneous, the solution for y (and     in equation

 B-7c (and B-7d) involve the terms                                 and rr5 which contain the feedback parameters
       and f. It is through these regression coefficienis that                                 and        directly
 enter into the solution for output. If there were no money supply response next
 period to this periods shocks there would be no role for feedback, since EPi
 would be unaffected. Consequently, we describe the feedback effects as being
 "prospective" in nature.
     14This may be obtained by substituting the expectations rules into (18),
averaging over markets, and deleting the influences of interest rate surprises
on expectations.

     15Consequently, Appendix B provides a simple example of a feedback policy
that reduces the variance f outt about its full information value. Specifi-
cally, the variance is [ /(l_i )11a2 and it is shown that B <        so that
the variance under feedback is smalle. (This result can be generated by a
linear combination of f and f in a feedback specification of the form of
f (Vt   .
            -x   l + ut.) WeUdo not attach a great deal of importance to
tPie prticuar example chosen, as it was selected for analytical convenience.

     '6See Barro (1976) for an argument along these lines. For a counter
argument based on the private cost of information processing see Howitt (1981).

     17As an example of how this specification could be rationalized in the
Section II setup, consider an economy which had a local government office in
each location z. These offices would make a fixed level of real purchases, g,
in their respective locations and collect nominal taxes equal to T + y(z) +
Pt(z). These offices then either subtract from (or add to) the local stock of
money to the extent that P (z) + g < t + y(z) + P (z). Consequently, assume
Mt(z) = Mt + x. +     -        and that (corresponhngly) Mt    Mt + x +      -


     18Within our setup, this is easiest to see if expectations don!t adjust at
all to the current price (A = 0), so that the perceived relative price term
   -                                 where Pt is a predetermined expectation.
     EP   can be written as Pt -
This perceived relative price may be decomposed into two parts (P _EPtI*
+ (Ept(I*         where the former is a pure expectation error an the laEer
                                                                           l
represents the departure of the expectations scheme from rationality. In
our Section III analysis, it is assumed that the feedback component of monetary
policy is chosen to eliminate (EPtII* 1-• Hence, the supply of output
depends positively on P _EPtII =         + c)u -       -
                                                 a(v    x))}/1.    Since our
model and Woglom's modei are simIlar in other respects, we find that a simple
adaptive framework produces the nearly same results as his model with rational,
but predetermined expectations.
                                 References



Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-32.

___________ "Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,t Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 3, July 1977, 305-316.

___________ "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"
     Econometrica, 48, September 1980, 1393-1417.

___________ "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," Chapter 2 in Money
     Expectations and Business Cycles, NewYork, Academic Press, 1981.

Canzoneri, M., D. Henderson and K. Rogoff, "The Information Content of Interest
     Rates and the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy Rules," working paper,
     Federal Reserve International Finance Division, April 198l forthcoming
     Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Fischer, S., "Long-Term Contracting, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
     Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85, February 1977, 191-205.

Friedman, B., "Targets, Instruments and Indicators of Monetary Policy," Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 1, October 1975, 443-473.

Friedman, M., "A vbnetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability," American
     Economic Review, 38, June 1948, 245-264, reprinted as Chapter 5 in Essays
     in Positive Economics, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1953.

____________ "Commodity Reserve Currency," Journal of Political Economy, 59,
     June 1951, 203-232, reprinted as Chapter 7 in Essays in Positive Economics.

____________ "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, 58, March
     1968, 1—12.

Howitt, P., "Activist Monetary Policy Under Rational Expectations," Journal of
     Political Economy, 89, April 1981, 249-269.

King, R.G., (l981a) "Interest Rates, Aggregate Information and Monetary Policy,"
      unpublished working paper, February 1981, forthcoming Journal of Monetary
      Economics.

____________ (l98lb) "Investment, Imperfect Information and Equilibrium Business
      Cycle Theory," unpublished working paper, July 1980, revised September 1981.

____________ "Monetary Policy and the Information Content of Prices," Journal of
      Political Economy, 90, April 1982, 247-279.

Lucas, R.E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory,
      4, April 1972.
Lucas, R.E., "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
     American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326-334.

Lucas, R.E., and T.J. Sargent, "Rational Expectations and Econometric Practice,"
     introductory essay in a volume by the same title, University of Minnesota
     Press, 1981.

McCallum, B.T. and J.K. Whitaker, "The Effectiveness of Fiscal Feedback Rules
     and Automatic Stabilizers under Rational Expectations," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 5, April 1979, 171-186.

McCallun-i, B.T., "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic Stabilization Policy:
     An Overview," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, November 1980 (pt. 2),
     716-746.

              "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and
     Rational Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8, November 1981,
     319-331.

Phelps, E.S. and J.B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Power of Monetary Policy under Rational
     Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 85, February 1977, 163-190.

Poole, W.W., "Optimal Choice of Monetary Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro
     Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1970, 197-216.

___________ "The Making of Monetary Policy: Description and Analysis," Economic
     Inquiry, June 1975, 253-265.

Santomero, A.M. and J.J. Siegel, "Bank Regulation and Macroeconomic Stability,"
     American Economic Review, 71, March 1981, 39-53.

Sargent, T.J. and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Monetary Instrument,
     and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 83,
     April 1975, 241—254.

Weiss, L., "The i?ole of Active Monetary Policy in a Rational Expectations Model,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 88, April 1980, 221-233.

           "Interest Rate Policies and Informational Efficiency," Cowles Foundation
     Discussion Paper No. 589, Yale University, April 1981.

Woglom, G., "Rational Expectations and Monetary Policy in a Simple Macroeconomic
     Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1979, 91-105.
                                                  Appendix A


                                      Adaptive Expectations Solution

        The adaptive expectations version of the model specifies that EPt =

 AP(z)     +
               (l-A)(P1   +       n) and that EPt+i =                      +   n.
                                                                   EP                Solving the

aggregate system comprised of (1), (2), (3b), (5) and economy-wide average

expectations yields



                    =                   +
        (Al)                                           + TM_ g(R -r-n) -d + C(r+fl)_(P1+fl))

                   +((g+c)
                        R
                           u                 -a(v-x))
                                                 t t
                R = (r+n)              (+b)(1—x)
                                        a                                           T -
        (A2)                                                       + Mt —
                                                                               g(R       —r—n)—dy+c(r+n)—(P1-f-n))
                        (a+b)(1—A)           ((g+c)u -                           + 1/a
                                                               a(y_x))
        (A3)       =    + b(1A)a(f                 +      -
                                                               (R_r_n)_d+c(+n)_(P                    1

                          b(lA)_((g+c)u -
                                                          a(v_x))
where      =
               a(l+db(l-X))       +
                                      (g+c)(a÷b)(l_x)          >    0.     As discussed in the text, adjust-

ment of either            or R can make the second term in the output expression zero.

We assume that            has been so adjusted and that R' =                            +n.   Then y = kS   +

b(l-A) (a(x_v) +
                          (+c)u).
     Local output is given by y(z) =                       +                and y(z) =         + c(z)    so that



        (A4)      V(y(z) -        y(z))
                                             =
                                                 E[(a(x -v) +
                              =   b2(l-A)2                22           a
                                                                           22       2
                                         2       [(g+c)            +
                                                                           (a+a,)]
Differentiating this variance with respect to                               setting       the resulting derivative

to zero, and solving for a minimizing value of                                 leads to the expression reported

in the text (equation (9)).
                                                           -Bl-


                                                         Appendix B

                          Construction of Rational Expectations Solutions

     Throughout this appendix,* one of the two reduced form relationships is given

by text equation (11), the local commodity market clearing value of the product price,


        (B-i)         Pt(z) =            - (P         ÷ Rt -
                                                               EPi)   + EPt +
                                                                                        - (Ut   +


where       =   (kd     kS)/a. By contrast, the implications of the monetary equilibrium

condition must be developed under the alternative policy specifications.


1. The Flexible Rate Cases

     The solutions under the three basic flexible interest rate cases can be developed

by considering the composite money supply specification, M = Mt                                     + g(R -
                                                                                                              R)   + x.
+           which implies that the monetary equilibrium condition may be written as

                              +                  (l+db)Pt + dç -          -         +
        (B-2)
                                  c)Rt                             dbEP                 g(R) ÷ m - fmmt_1          -
                                                                                                                       fuuti,
where we have defined the excess money demand shock                           m =       v x.
                                                                                          -          Further, we assume

throughout this appendix that R' =
                                                       ERtIi.
     The undetermined coefficients representations of local prices and the economy-

wide nominal interest rate then take the following forms:


                                         +
     (B-3a)            P(z) =                1Mt + 2m +               + 4c(z) + 5m1 + 6u1

     (B—3b)            Rt =        +   l't + 2m + i3u + J5m1 +

(Note that since the average value of c(z) is zero across markets, it follows that

the price level is Pt =                      +        + 2m + 1T3u + 7r5m1 + 7r6u . Before solving

the model, the nature of the expectational terms EPt, etc. must be examined. Indi-

viduals in market z are receiving two signals at date t, the local price and nominal


        *
      For a inure detailed discussion, see the appendices to our Fedcral Reserve
Bank of e' Yor Working Paper (nu!'ther 8114).
                                                                B 2—




interest rate. Due to the linear multivariate normal nature of the model, the expec-

tactions E P and E P                       take the following forms:
                zt           zt+l

        (B-4a)           EPt =        tl1t    +
                                                      1(P(z)     -
                                                                                          + 2(Rt             -
                                                                                                                 EiR)

        (B-4b)           EPt1 =        tiPt+l          +
                                                           y1(Pt(z)
                                                                           -                          +
                                                                                                          y(R - tiRt),
where the notation tl is a short-hand for an expectation conditional on Il which

will be employed throughout this appendix. From (B-3a, b), it follows that                                                                                     =

   +            + x5m        +       iru     and that t1Rt =                              +                 + 5m1             +
                                                                                                                                   6u1.
       The expressions (B-3a, b) and (B—4a, b) imply the following equations for the

expected price level in market z and its economy-wide counterpart.

        (B-5a)            EPt =        tl'        +
                                                      $1(x2m
                                                                 +
                                                                      1T3u +7t4C(z)) +                            2(i2m            +
                                                                                                                                        p3u)

        (B-5b)            EP =                    +
                                                      1(x2m
                                                                 +
                                                                      ir3u)
                                                                                      +
                                                                                              2(2m               +


since      the economy-wide average value of ct(z) is zero. Theanalogous expressions for

the expected future price level are


        (B-6a)           EzPt+i =          l1+i        +
                                                           -y'1(x2m
                                                                       +
                                                                               JT3u
                                                                                              +
                                                                                                      ir4c(z))
                                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                                          y2(i2m
                                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                                                                 lLI3ut)


            EPi = t1Pt+i
        (B-6b)                                         +
                                                           i1(2m
                                                                       +       ru)                +
                                                                                                          Y2(2m
                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                             i3u).
where   EP =0 +irM
    t-1 t+l      1 t+l

       Now, use (B-5) and (B-6) to eliminate expectational terms in (B-i) and (B-2).

Then, the requirement that the resulting expressions hold identically with (B-3a, b)

leads to a set of restrictions on the ir and                                       cofficients that may be solved to

yield:           =   c(+n)       -
                                     d9, x1 =         l, 2 = {b2               -
                                                                                   a(l-y2)}/A,                   r3 =        {g     +   c       +
                                                                                                                                                     db2}/A,
   =
       l/{b(l-1)},         715
                                     = m'     +       c}, 6 =        f/U           ÷c} and                       =   +n,                =       0,
   =
       tb(l-1)       +
                         a(l--y1)}/A,        13       = {l÷db(l-1)}/A,                    i5
                                                                                                          = -f/U         +   c},
           +   c},   where A =
                                      b(g     +   c    +
                                                           db2)[(l-1)                 +
                                                                                                      (l-y]      +   b(l      +
                                                                                                                                   db(l-B1))
       +
               (l_y2)].
                                                                      -B3-




Conditional Expectations

     The requirement that expectations are rational restricts the solution values

of the      and -   coefficients.                See King (l981a, appendix) for a detailed discussion

in a parallel context.

                                                              222
        (B-7a)
                          =    1
                                             - r32]             ouam

                          =
                               1             2
                                                     ÷
                                                                 2 22
        (B-7b)


                                                                             -
        (B-7c)        1 =      6                                                 32)0u0m}

                          = 1                    2                    2 22               26 - 35) 23 - 32)u0m
                                                                                                                  22
        (B-7d)              6             2Sam +           p3r6o )        (irc)     +




where      =          -                 222                  22 22 22                               that 23 -   32 =
                213       r312) 0u0m + 2°m + 14)3G ]4° Noting
it can be shown that
                                                                              22
                                                                             cc
                           =
        (B-8)
                               aa2         ÷ {[a(l-y1) + b(l-1)]2c2 + [l+db(l1)]2a2}c2

                                                                      -

Further,       employing the fact l =                                 -                 it follows that
                                                             23 2 3
                               -f       [l-i-db(l-1 )]          +     fu b(l- 1 )       + f a
                                                                                           u
        (B-9)         l=            m

                                                         1 + c + af
                                                                           ul
Comparable simplifications for                               and 2 may also be obtained. However, these

expressions will not be relevant to the discussion below.


Output Response and Variance

        Working with the local supply schedule and expression (B5a) for EPt it

follows that yt(z) ym + yu + y(z) is equal to
                                                                         -. B4 -




             (3—10)         y(z)       b(ir2 -                   - 2p2)m                + b(ir3 —
                                                                                                            81113
                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                        82tJ3)u + b1r4(l_pct(z)

Using the above conditional expectations formulae, it may be shown that y =
              22              -              2
                                                     and using the TF and i coefficients, this simplifies to
                                  7r3i2)}o
         =                                                            which is negative since the form of (Th-S) restricts
             -81(l+db(l-1))a2/fb(l-1)2o2},
     <         < 1. Analogously, it can be shown that                                             =                      +
                                                                                                       81(b(1-1)
which is positive for values of                                  that are in the interval 0                                       < 1. Further,

                                        it follows that y = 1.
since              =
                       l/{b(l-1)},
             The variance of output about its full information value, y(z) = kS + E(Z)

thus has the form V(yt(z) -                                      =
                                                 y(z))                y2a2             + y2o2. Working with the first-stage

simplifications of y and                                 this may be shown to equal b21(l-81)iro2. Using the

value of                  it follows that V(yt(z) -                                      =
                                                                          y(z))
             The following special cases correspond to the policy rules discussed in the text:

             Money Stock Rule                =   0, f =              f    =   0).        In this case and the next, all

disturbances are strictly temporary, so that current prices and interest rates

do not respond to past shocks (i                                     116 =       =6           =       0).     Consequently, agents' expec-
4-   4-4       rsC i-I,..e e,-,.4 e
                           .c,,+ ,.              1                    .,,4-    - ,.-. A
                                                                              rs1in           S 4-i,                ArrLl_   4-       ,-..,-
                                                                                                                                  jJ.LJc5      Ji   4




rates         (y1 =        = 0).      We denote the value of                                 that solves (8-8) as

             Combination Policy                           0, f =          f        =   0).    Although the value of g is relevant

for the response of nominal interest rates and the price level to m and u shocks

(entering in the coefficients 2' 113k 2' and                                                          it is not relevant for the response

of output to any shock. For example, continuing the manipulation discussed in the

context of output variance above, it may be shown that b(rr2 -                                                                    -             =
                                                                                                                        1112
                                                         Since            does not depend on the value of                                      in this
-{l+d(l-81)]a2/{b(l-81)2a2}.
case (see (8-8) above with                           =    0), it follows that the response of output to

shocks is independent of                                 A similar demonstration can be made for 'u and y.
                                                  - B5 -




       FedJxzck      Policy        =                       0). The value of l is affected by the
                                        m
selection of f, f, as may be seen by substituting (B-9) into (B-8). Unfortunately,

the complicated form of the resulting restriction has precluded determination of a

minimum variance (using values of f and                    as controls). Nevertheless, the variance

can be lowered below that of a pure money stock policy. For example, if 1FB is set

equal to _-      , then       it follows that l coefficient satisfies the following (simpler)

restriction (derived from B-8).

                                        22
                                       Ga
                                        urn
                22                22          —FB 22 22
             0u0m + (a+b) a + [l+db(l-1 )] a}rr4o


where an over-bar (B) is used to distinguish this special case from the more

general solution. The selection of f = 0 and f =                               yields   the desired value
                                              m                  u    a(a+b)
   —FB     b —1B
of l =

        Struct'irtzl   Refoams. To analyze the impact of the structural reforms outlined

in the text, we replace d with d+4 in restriction (B-8), under the assumption that

   =      = 0 as in the money supply rule case. The resulting value is denoted

2. The Pegged Interest Rate

       Under the assumption that the interest rate is pegged at the level RT, the

money supply is demand determined

                       s      d                   T
       (B—il)         Mt=Mt=Pt+dyt_cR i-v
Consequently, we hypothesize that the money stock is governed by the following

undetermined coefficients representation,


       (B-12)         Mt =    o   + PlMt +    + p3Ut.


As discussed by Sargent-Wallace (1975) and McCallum (1980), there is a price level

determinancy problem if the condition M =                      is the only aspect of monetary policy.
                                                           M
                                                             - B6 -



By initially considering the system under full information, it is easy to

exposit this indeterminacy and the additional constraint that we impose on

monetary policy to make the price level determinate. Under full current

information, agents are assumed to know the shocks u, Vt and c(z). Consequently,

the ii and p coefficients are determined by the requirement that the local price

equations (B-l) and (B-3a) and the money stock equations (B-il) and (B-l2) hold

identically, when EPt+i =                      +                                                +
                                                   Tii(Mt) and EPt= Pt =                             TiiMt + Ti2v +Ti3u
have been substituted in. The restrictions on the constant terms andthe coefficients

on Mt are             =
                          -(+irn_      RT) +                 ='         =         +    d - cRT,          and p1
                                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                           Ti1.   Now,

if the nominal interest rate target is not equal to +ir1n, then it follows that

there is no value of Ti0 that solves                          =   aA          T                          T.
                                                                                                If R is equal to
                                                       710        E(hnln_R            + ire.

T+711fl, then there is no meaningful restriction on ri0.

           In   order to have a system of interest rate pegging that uniquely determines the

price level and money stock, one must provide some kind of nominal anchor. This can

be done in a number of ways, all of which are essentially related. In this appendix,

we impose the conditions that the peg be consistent (RT =                                      +n)   and that the money

stock obeys EM jI* =                        with     the latter condition insuring that p0 = 0 and that

      =    1.   Consequently, it follows that                     =   d + cRT and that                    =   1.       We think

of this condition as requiring that the monetary authority "settle up" at the end

of each period, returning to a preannounced path for the money stock (Mt).

           Under incomplete information, the peg case is actually simpler because agents

have only a single signal about current conditions, the local price P(z). Con-
                                                                                                                   P
sequently, the expectations about the price level are EPt =                                                   + i(P(z) -
                                                                                                                                    tEiPt)
                          p
           + rriM + 1(rr2v + ir3u + rr4(z)), where                          p =        22           22    22 22 22
                                                                                               + 1130)/(7120 + 7130 +
     110                                                                          (712a                                              7140)
is    the single "regression coefficient."

           Working through analogous restrictions to those in the previous case yields

the following solution values for the TI and p                         coefficients,            in terms of the
                                                  -B7-




structural parameters and the regression coefficient : r0 -                                     + c(÷n), i =            1,
                                                                                          = 1 and 13 =
   =   O   ¶3 =   l/(a+b(l-)),     ¶4 =    l/b(l-)           p = 0,            =
                                                                                                               713.
                                                                                                                       As

discussed in the text, the fact that 2 = 0 and p2 =                        1   involves the full accommodation

of money demand shock under an interest rate peg. These solutions imply that the

restriction on the regression coefficient simplifies to
                                                                                    =            + {a+b(l-)2a}.
3. Comparison of Output Variances

       Our comparison of the money stock policy (or combination policy), the peg,

the feedback policy and structural reform is straightforward since in all cases the

variance is equivalent to 1/(l_1l). Consequently to show the variance rela-

tionship discussed in the text (Vpeg >            V      >
                                                              VFB
                                                                     and VMS >
                                                                                    VSR
                                                                                          for        >   0),   it is

simply necessary to show that            P > MS    >   -FB and             >   SR   for     >   0.       The following

relationships implicitly determine the alternative l coefficients.


       p =    2     2              P222
             au'u       +
                            [a+b(l-1fl   2°
       MS2/{a2 +            {a+b(l-)]2a2      +
                                                   [l+db(l-)]                      6U}

                                                                                            2 2

       B2/{2+a(l+aFB) +                   b(l-)]7ra              +   l+db(l         B)1712 U}

                                                                     Recall    that        can be obtained by
where 714 =
              l/b(l-1),       with the appropriate .

setting d = d+q in the expression for f3 .                   Notice that all the 's are between
                          2       MS    P
zero and one and that as a ÷                  ÷ 8i.
       We have found it easiest to use a graphical approach, after taking the

transformation of variables (w =
                                              P
                                                       WMS
                                                             =
                                                                 l-   MS
                                                                           and WFB l_l ).
                                                                                            FB
                                                                                                         Then,
                                                                             -B8-




the restrictions can be written as
                                 2
                             a         w
             a1bw 2              E_-       P
G(w )
   p             bw,         a
                                       l-wP
                                 u
                                 2                                  2
             a+bwMS 2 a                    i+dbwMS 2 E                       =
                 bw          a
                                                bw
                                                  MS           am                F(w)
                                 u


                                                           2
             a(l÷(lwFB)) +                 bw          a                     i+dbu              2
                                                FB12 c              +                                   - F(WFB)
I(w)
                           bwFB                        a
                                                           U
                                                                         1
                                                                                 bw'                m

For any w in the interval 0 < w <                              1,       note that G(w) <                  1-1(w)   <   1(w).       A graph of these

functions (Figure B-i) shows the uniqueness of the solutions for w and the fact that

             <             which implies that FB > MS                                   >       FB       Finally, it is direct that an

increase in d (say, to d+4) shifts the 1-1 function up to the right, so that WSR >

for     >   0.     In turn, this implies that                                       <   MS
                                                                                            1

                                                                    Figure B-i
        F, G, H, I
                                                                                                           F




                                                                                                                               I
        2              2
                                                                                                                               H




                                                                                                                               C




                                                                                                                                    w
