                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                FIRM-SPECIFIC CAPITAL AND
                            THE NEW KEYNESIAN PHILLIPS CURVE

                                            Michael Woodford

                                          Working Paper 11149
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11149


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




I would like to thank Lutz Weinke for calling my attention to a mistake in my previous analysis of this model,
Larry Christiano for helpful discussions, and Mauro Roca for research assistance. This research supported
by the National Science Foundation through a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Firm-Specific Capital and the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 11149
February 2005
JEL No. E30

                                              ABSTRACT

        A relation between inflation and the path of average marginal cost (often measured by unit
labor cost) implied by the Calvo (1983) model of staggered pricing --- sometimes referred to as the
“new-Keynesian Phillips curve” --- has been the subject of extensive econometric estimation and
testing. Standard theoretical justifications of this form of aggregate-supply relation, however, either
assume (i) the existence of a competitive rental market for capital services, so that the shadow cost
of capital services is equated across firms and sectors at all points in time, despite the fact that prices
are set at different times, or (ii) that the capital stock of each firm is constant, or at any rate
exogenously given, and so independent of the firm's pricing decision. But neither assumption is
realistic. The present paper examines the extent to which existing empirical specifications and
interpretations of parameter estimates are compromised by reliance on either of these assumptions.
        The paper derives an aggregate-supply relation for a model with monopolistic competition
and Calvo pricing in which capital is firm-specific and endogenous, and investment is subject to
convex adjustment costs. The aggregate-supply relation is shown to again take the standard "new-
Keynesian" form, but with an elasticity of inflation with respect to real marginal cost that is a
different function of underlying parameters than in the simpler cases studied earlier. Thus the
relations estimated in the empirical literature remain correctly specified under the assumptions
proposed here, but the interpretation of the estimated elasticity is different; in particular, the
implications of the estimated Phillips-curve slope for the frequency of price adjustment is changed.
Assuming a rental market for capital results in a substantial exaggeration of the infrequency of price
adjustment; assuming exogenous capital instead results in a smaller under-estimate.
Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1009B I.A.B., mc3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
A popular specification in recent analyses of alternative monetary policies is
the “new-Keynesian” Phillips curve,

                                     πt = ξŝt + βEt πt+1 ,                   (1.1)

where πt is the rate of inflation, ŝt is the departure of the (average) log of
real marginal cost from its steady-state value, the coefficient ξ > 0 depends
on the degree of stickiness of prices, and 0 < β < 1 is a utility discount
factor that, under an empirically realistic calibration, must nearly equal 1.
As is well known, this relation follows (in a log-linear approximation) from
the Calvo model of staggered price-setting under certain assumptions.1 The
implications of (1.1) for the co-movement of the general level of prices and
marginal cost have been subject to extensive econometric testing, beginning
with the work of Gali and Gertler (1999) and Sbordone (2002).
    In standard derivations, (1.1) follows from the optimal pricing problem
of a firm that adjusts the price of its product at random intervals, under the
assumption that the marginal cost St (i) of supplying a given good i in period
t is given by a function of the form

                                     St (i) = S(yt (i); Xt ),                 (1.2)

where yt (i) is the quantity sold of good i in that period, and Xt is a vector
of variables that firm i takes to be unaffected by its pricing decision. Under
the further assumption of a demand curve of the form yt (i) = Y (pt (i); Xt ),
this implies that marginal cost can be expressed as a function of the price
pt (i) that i chooses to charge in that period, together with variables that are
unaffected by its actions.
     The specification (1.2) is in turn correct as long as all factors of production
are either purchased on a spot market (at a price that is independent of the
quantity used by i), or completely fixed. In particular, one can treat the case
    1
        See, e.g., Woodford (2003, chap. 3, sec. 2.2).


                                                    1
in which capital is not a variable factor of production (and output is simply a
concave function of the variable labor input, as in Woodford, 2003, chap. 3),
or the case in which capital is variable, but capital services are obtained on a
rental market (as in Gali and Gertler, 1999, and the baseline case considered
in Sbordone, 2002).2 Matters are more complex, however, under the more
realistic assumption that capital is endogenous and firm-specific. That is,
we shall assume that each firm accumulates capital for its own use only, and
that (as in standard neoclassical investment theory) there are convex costs
of more rapid adjustment of an individual firm’s capital stock. In this case,
St (i) will depend not only on the quantity that firm i produces in period t,
but also on the firm’s capital stock in that period, and this latter variable
depends on the firm’s decisions in previous periods, including its previous
pricing decisions. The dynamic linkages in a firm’s optimal price-setting
decision are therefore more complex in this case than is assumed in standard
derivations of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve.
     Here I treat the optimal price-setting problem in a model with firm-
specific capital, and show that once again a relation of the form (1.1) can
be derived.3 Hence the econometric estimates reported by authors such as
Gali and Gertler (1999) and Sbordone (2002) can be interpreted without
making assumptions as restrictive as those papers had appeared to rely upon.
However, the coefficient ξ is a more complex function of underlying model
parameters, such as the frequency with which prices are re-optimized, in the
case that capital is firm-specific.
     This is potentially of considerable importance for the interpretation of
econometric estimates of the coefficient ξ. Estimates of ξ are often inter-
preted in terms of the frequency of price of adjustment that they imply,
given estimated or calibrated values for other model parameters. (Indeed, in
many papers in the literature, beginning with Gali and Gertler, 1999, equa-
tion (1.1) is estimated in a form that results directly in an estimate of the
   2
     Both assumptions lead to a relation of the form (1.1). However, the interpretation of
the coefficient ξ in terms of underlying model parameters is different in the two cases, as
discussed in Sbordone (2002).
   3
     The derivation here corrects the analysis given in Woodford (2003, chap. 5, sec. 3),
to take account of an error in the original calculations noted by Sveen and Weinke (2004).



                                                2
frequency of price adjustment rather than of the elasticity ξ.) Furthermore, it
is often argued that estimated values of ξ are so small as to imply that prices
are sticky for an implausibly long length of time; and this is taken to cast
doubt on the realism of the Calvo pricing model and hence of the aggregate-
supply specification (1.1). But the mapping between the frequency of price
adjustment and the value of ξ is different in the case of firm-specific capital
than under the more common assumption of a rental market for capital ser-
vices.4 The assumption of a rental market for capital substantially weakens
the degree of strategic complementarity among the pricing decisions of dif-
ferent firms — or alternatively, it reduces the importance of real rigidities in
the sense of Ball and Romer (1990) — with the consequence that ξ is larger
for any given frequency of price adjustment. It then follows that a small
estimated value of ξ will be taken to imply very infrequent price adjustment.
But allowing for firm-specific capital can make the implied frequency of price
adjustment much greater, as shown in section 4.4 below.
    The fact that an assumption that capital is firm-specific will lead to a
lower estimate of the degree of price stickiness was first demonstrated by
Sbordone (1998), and also illustrated by Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido
(2001). However, in these papers, the treatment of capital as firm-specific is
accompanied (at least implicitly) by an assumption that the capital stock of
each firm is exogenously given, as in the analysis in Woodford (2003, chap.
3), rather than responding endogenously to the firm’s incentives to invest.
This is because it is only in this case that a specification of the form (1.2)
remains consistent with the assumption of firm-specific capital. The analysis
here presents, for the first time, an analysis of aggregate supply in the case
that capital is both firm-specific and endogenous.5 This case is a good deal
   4
     It is also different under the assumption of a fixed quantity of capital for each firm, as
noted above; but that simple model is disconfirmed by the observation that capital varies
over time, and indeed that investment spending is substantially affected by monetary
disturbances.
   5
     Subsequent to the first circulation of these notes, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004) and
Altig et al. (2005) have built on the analysis here to examine the consequences of en-
dogenous firm-specific capital for the estimated frequency of price adjustment in empirical
versions of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve. These authors extend the present analysis
to more complicated versions of (1.1) that allow a closer fit to aggregate U.S. time series.



                                                  3
more complicated to analyze, but it turns out still to be possible to derive
an aggregate-supply relation that (in a log-linear approximation) takes the
simple form (1.1).
     The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, I introduce a model of firm-
specific investment demand with convex costs of adjustment of an individual
firm’s capital stock, with particular attention to the way in which standard
neoclassical investment theory must be modified when the firm is not a price-
taker in its product market, but instead fixes its price for a period of time and
fills whatever orders it may receive. In section 3, I then consider the price-
setting problem of such a firm, under the assumption that the price remains
fixed for a random interval of time, and characterize the joint dynamics of the
firm’s price and its capital stock. Finally, in section 4, I derive the model’s
implications for the form of the aggregate-supply relation that connects the
overall inflation rate with the overall level of real activity, and discuss the
consequences for the inference about the frequency of price adjustment that
can be drawn from an estimate of the elasticity ξ in (1.1).


2     Investment Demand when Prices are Sticky
I wish to analyze the relation between inflation and aggregate output in
a model with staggered pricing (modeled after the fashion of Calvo (1983)
and Yun (1996)) and endogenous capital accumulation. The main source of
complication in this analysis is the assumption that the producers of indi-
vidual differentiated goods (that adjust their prices at different dates) invest
in firm-specific capital which is relatively durable, so that the distribution of
capital stocks across different firms (as a result of differing histories of price
adjustment) matters, and not simply the economy’s aggregate capital stock.
Nonetheless, I shall show that (in the same kind of log-linear approximation
that is used in standard derivations of the New Keynesian Phillips curve) it is
possible to derive structural relations that constitute the “aggregate supply
block” of a macro model, which involve only the economy’s aggregate capital
stock, aggregate output, and overall index of prices.
    A first task is to develop a model of optimizing investment demand by
suppliers with sticky prices, and that are demand-constrained as a result.

                                           4
As in the sticky-price models with exogenous capital presented in Woodford
(2003, chap. 3), there is a continuum of differentiated goods, each supplied
by a single (monopolistically competitive) firm. The production function for
good i is assumed to be of the form

                           yt (i) = kt (i)f (At ht (i)/kt (i)),                   (2.1)

where f is an increasing, concave function, with f(0) = 0. I assume that each
monopoly supplier makes an independent investment decision each period;
there is a separate capital stock kt (i) for each good, that can be used only in
the production of good i.
    I also assume convex adjustment costs for investment by each firm, of
the usual kind assumed in neoclassical investment theory. Increasing the
capital stock to the level kt+1 (i) in period t + 1 requires investment spending
in the amount It (i) = I(kt+1 (i)/kt (i))kt (i) in period t. Here It (i) represents
purchases by firm i of the composite good, defined as the usual Dixit-Stiglitz
aggregate over purchases of each of the continuum of goods (with the same
constant elasticity of substitution θ > 1 as for consumption purchases).6 In
this way, the allocation of investment expenditure across the various goods
is in exactly the same proportion as consumption expenditure, resulting in a
demand curve for each producer that is again of the form
                                             Ã            !−θ
                                                 pt (i)
                               yt (i) = Yt                      ,                 (2.2)
                                                  Pt

but where now aggregate demand is given by Yt = Ct + It + Gt , in which ex-
pression Ct is the representative household’s demand for the composite good
for consumption purposes, Gt is the government’s demand for the composite
good (treated as an exogenous random variable), and It denotes the integral
of It (i) over the various firms i.
      I assume as usual that the function I(·) is increasing and convex; the
convexity implies the existence of costs of adjustment. I further assume that
near a zero growth rate of the capital stock, this function satisfies I(1) = δ,
I 0 (1) = 1, and I 00 (1) = ²ψ , where 0 < δ < 1 and ²ψ > 0 are parameters.
   6
     See Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for discussion of this aggregator and its consequences
for the optimal allocation of demand across alternative differentiated goods.

                                                  5
This implies that in the steady state to which the economy converges in
the absence of shocks (which here involves a constant capital stock, as I
abstract from trend growth), the steady rate of investment spending required
to maintain the capital stock is equal to δ times the steady-state capital stock
(so that δ can be interpreted as the rate of depreciation). It also implies that
near the steady state, a marginal unit of investment spending increases the
capital stock by an equal amount (as there are locally no adjustment costs).
Finally, in my log-linear approximation to the equilibrium dynamics, ²ψ is
the parameter that indexes the degree of adjustment costs. A central goal of
the analysis is consideration of the consequences of alternative values for ²ψ ;
the model with exogenous firm-specific capital presented in Woodford (2003,
chaps. 3, 4) is recovered as the limiting case of the present model in which
²ψ is made unboundedly large.
    Profit-maximization by firm i then implies that the capital stock for pe-
riod t + 1 will be chosen in period t to satisfy the first-order condition

  I 0 (gt (i))   =      Et Qt,t+1 Πt+1 {ρt+1 (i) +

                                        gt+1 (i)I 0 (gt+1 (i)) − I(gt+1 (i))} ,        (2.3)
where gt (i) ≡ kt+1 (i)/kt (i), ρt+1 (i) is the (real) shadow value of a marginal
unit of additional capital for use by firm i in period t + 1 production, and
Qt,t+1 Πt+1 is the stochastic discount factor for evaluating real income streams
received in period t + 1. Expressing the real stochastic discount factor as
βλt+1 /λt , where λt is the representative household’s marginal utility of real
income in period t and 0 < β < 1 is the utility discount factor, and then
log-linearizing (2.3) around the steady-state values of all state variables, we
obtain

λ̂t + ²ψ (k̂t+1 (i) − k̂t (i))   =   Et λ̂t+1 +

                        [1 − β(1 − δ)]Et ρ̂t+1 (i) + β²ψ Et (k̂t+2 (i) − k̂t+1 (i)),   (2.4)
where λ̂t ≡ log(λt /λ̄), k̂t (i) ≡ log(kt (i)/K̄), ρ̂t (i) ≡ log(ρt (i)/ρ̄), and vari-
ables with bars denote steady-state values.
    Note that ρt+1 (i) would correspond to the real “rental price” for capital
services if a market existed for such services, though I do not assume one

                                                  6
here.7 It is not possible in the present model to equate this quantity with
the marginal product, or even the marginal revenue product of capital (using
the demand curve (2.2) to compute marginal revenue). For suppliers are
demand-constrained in their sales, given the prices that they have posted; it
is not possible to increase sales by moving down the demand curve. Thus the
shadow value of additional capital must instead be computed as the reduction
in labor costs through substitution of capital inputs for labor, while still
supplying the quantity of output that happens to be demanded. In this way
I obtain                            Ã                                    !
                                      f (h̃t (i)) − h̃t (i)f 0 (h̃t (i))
                    ρt (i) = wt (i)                                        ,
                                               At f 0 (h̃t (i))
where wt (i) is the real wage for labor of the kind hired by firm i and
h̃t (i) ≡ At ht (i)/kt (i) is firm i’s effective labor-capital input ratio.8 I can
alternatively express this in terms of the output-capital ratio for firm i (in
order to derive an “accelerator” model of investment demand), by substitut-
ing (2.1) to obtain

                            wt (i) −1
                 ρt (i) =         f (yt (i)/kt (i))[φ(yt (i)/kt (i)) − 1],             (2.5)
                             At
where φ(y/k) is the reciprocal of the elasticity of the function f , evaluated
at the argument f −1 (y/k).
    As in the baseline model treated in Woodford (2003, chap. 3), I shall
assume a sector-specific labor market. In this case, the first-order condition
for optimizing labor supply can be written in the form

                                 vh (f −1 (yt (i)/kt (i))kt (i)/At ; ξt )
                      wt (i) =                                            ,            (2.6)
                                                   λt
where labor demand has been expressed as a function of the demand for good
i. This can be log-linearized as

                               ŵt (i) = ν(ĥt (i) − h̄t ) − λ̂t ,
   7
     The case in which there is a rental market for capital services is instead considered in
section 4.2 below.
   8
     Note that in the case of a flexible-price model, the ratio of wt (i) to the denominator
would always equal marginal revenue, and so this expression would equal the marginal
revenue product of capital, though it would be a relatively cumbersome way of writing it.

                                                   7
where ν > 0 is the elasticity of the marginal disutility of labor with re-
spect to labor supply, and h̄t is an exogenous disturbance to preferences,
indicating the percentage increase in labor supply needed to maintain a con-
stant marginal disutility of working. Substituting (2.6) into (2.5) and log-
linearizing, I obtain
               Ã                    !
                         φh
       ρ̂t (i) = νφh +        ωp (ŷt (i) − k̂t (i)) + ν k̂t (i) − λ̂t − ωqt ,        (2.7)
                       φh − 1
where φh > 1 is the steady-state value of φ(y/k), i.e., the reciprocal of the
elasticity of the production function with respect to the labor input, and
ωp > 0 is the negative of the elasticity of the marginal product f 0 (f −1 (y/k))
with respect to y/k. The composite exogenous disturbance qt is defined as

                             qt ≡ ω −1 [ν h̄t + (1 + ν)at ]

where at ≡ log At ; it indicates the percentage change in output required to
maintain a constant marginal disutility of output supply, in the case that the
firm’s capital remains at its steady-state level.9 Substituting (2.7) into (2.4),
I then have an equation to solve for the dynamics of firm i’s capital stock,
given the evolution of demand ŷt (i) for its product, the marginal utility of
income λ̂t , and the exogenous disturbance qt .
    As the coefficients of these equations are the same for each firm, an equa-
tion of the same form holds for the dynamics of the aggregate capital stock (in
our log-linear approximation). The equilibrium condition for the dynamics
of the capital stock is thus of the form

  λ̂t + ²ψ (K̂t+1 − K̂t )   =     β(1 − δ)Et λ̂t+1 +

        [1 − β(1 − δ)][ρy Et Ŷt+1 − ρk K̂t+1 − ωEt qt+1 ] + β²ψ Et (K̂t+2 − K̂t+1 ),
                                                                               (2.8)
where the elasticities of the marginal valuation of capital are given by
                                φh
          ρy    ≡     νφh +          ωp     >       ρk   ≡    ρy − ν     >     0.
                              φh − 1
   9
     That is, qt measures the output change that would be required to maintain a fixed
marginal disutility of supply given possible fluctuations in preferences and technology, but
not taking account of the effect of possible fluctuations in the firm’s capital stock. With
this modification of the definition given in Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for the model with
exogenous capital, qt is again an exogenous disturbance term.

                                                8
The implied dynamics of investment spending are then given by

                               Iˆt = k[K̂t+1 − (1 − δ)K̂t ],                           (2.9)

where Iˆt is defined as the percentage deviation of investment from its steady-
state level, as a share of steady-state output, and k ≡ K̄/Ȳ is the steady-state
capital-output ratio.
    Thus far I have derived investment dynamics as a function of the evolution
of the marginal utility of real income of the representative household. This
is in turn related to aggregate spending through the relation λt = uc (Yt −
It − Gt ; ξt ), which we may log-linearize as

                               λ̂t = −σ −1 (Ŷt − Iˆt − gt ),                        (2.10)

where the composite disturbance gt reflects the effects both of government
purchases and of shifts in private impatience to consume.10 Finally, be-
cause of the relation between the marginal utility of income process and the
stochastic discount factor that prices bonds,11 the nominal interest rate must
satisfy
                       1 + it = {βEt [λt+1 /(λt Πt+1 )]}−1 ,
which one may log-linearize as

                             ı̂t = Et πt+1 + λ̂t − Et λ̂t+1 .                        (2.11)

The system of equations (2.8) – (2.11) then comprise the “IS block” of
the model. These jointly suffice to determine the paths of the variables
{Ŷt , Iˆt , K̂t , λt }, given an initial capital stock and the evolution of short-term
real interest rates {ı̂t − Et πt+1 }. The nature of the effects of real interest-rate
expectations on these variables is discussed further in Woodford (2004).
  10
     Note that the parameter σ in this equation is not precisely the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution in consumption, but rather C̄/Ȳ times that elasticity. In a model with
investment, these quantities are not exactly the same, even in the absence of government
purchases.
  11
     See Woodford (2003, chaps. 2, 4) for further discussion of the stochastic discount
factor and the Fisher relation between the nominal interest rate and expected inflation.




                                                 9
3     Optimal Price-Setting with Endogenous
      Capital
I turn next to the implications of an endogenous capital stock for the price-
setting decisions of firms. The capital stock affects a firm’s marginal cost,
of course; but more subtly, a firm considering how its future profits will be
affected by the price it sets must also consider how its capital stock will
evolve over the time that its price remains fixed.
    I begin with the consequences for the relation between marginal cost and
output. Real marginal cost can be expressed as the ratio of the real wage to
the marginal product of labor,
                                              wt (i)
                          st (i) =        0  −1
                                                               .                   (3.1)
                                      At f (f (yt (i)/kt (i)))
Again writing the factor input ratio as a function of the capital/output ratio,
and using (2.6) for the real wage, we obtain
                                 vh (f −1 (yt (i)/kt (i))kt (i)/At ; ξt )
                      st (i) =                                                     (3.2)
                                     λt At f 0 (f −1 (yt (i)/kt (i)))
for the real marginal cost of supplying good i. This can be log-linearized to
yield
                  ŝt (i) = ω(ŷt (i) − k̂t (i) − qt ) + ν k̂t (i) − λ̂t , (3.3)
where ŝt (i) ≡ log(st (i)/s̄), and ω ≡ ωw + ωp ≡ νφh + ωp > 0 is the
elasticity of marginal cost with respect to a firm’s own output.
    Letting ŝt without the index i denote the average level of real marginal
cost in the economy as a whole, I note that (3.3) implies that

                ŝt (i) = ŝt + ω(ŷt (i) − Ŷt ) − (ω − ν)(k̂t (i) − K̂t ).       (3.4)

Then using (2.2) to substitute for the relative output of firm i in (3.4), one
obtains
                    ŝt (i) = ŝt − (ω − ν)k̃t (i) − ωθp̃t (i),          (3.5)
where p̃t (i) ≡ log(pt (i)/Pt ) is the firm’s log relative price, and k̃t (i) ≡ k̂t (i) −
K̂t is its log relative capital stock. Note also that the average level of real
marginal cost satisfies

                         ŝt = ω(Ŷt − K̂t − qt ) + ν K̂t − λ̂t .                  (3.6)

                                                  10
    Following the same logic as in Woodford (2003, chap. 3), the Calvo price-
setting framework implies that if a firm i resets its price in period t, it chooses
a price that satisfies the (log-linear approximate) first-order condition
                          ∞
                          X
                              (αβ)k Êti [p̃t+k (i) − ŝt+k (i)] = 0,                        (3.7)
                          k=0

where 0 < α < 1 is the fraction of prices that are not reset in any period.
Here I introduce the notation Êti for an expectation conditional on the state
of the world at date t, but integrating only over those future states in which
i has not reset its price since period t. Note that in the case of any aggregate
state variable xt (i.e., a variable the value of which depends only on the
history of aggregate disturbances, and not on the individual circumstances
of firm i), Êti xT = Et xT , for any date T ≥ t. However, the two conditional
expectations differ in the case of variables that depend on the relative price
or relative capital stock of firm i. For example,
                                                           k
                                                           X
                            Êti p̃t+k (i)   = p̃t (i) −         Et πt+j ,                   (3.8)
                                                           j=1

for any k ≥ 1, since firm i’s price remains unchanged along all of the histories
that are integrated over in this case. Instead, the expectation when one
integrates over all possible future states conditional upon the state of the
world at date t is given by

                Et p̃t+1 (i) = α[p̃t (i) − Et πt+1 ] + (1 − α)Et p̂∗t+1 (i),                 (3.9)

where p̂∗t (i) is the (log) relative price chosen when i reconsiders its price at
date t. (Similar expressions can be given for horizons k > 1.)
   Substituting (3.5) for st+k (i) and (3.8) for Êti p̃t+k (i) in (3.7), one obtains

(1 + ωθ)p̂∗t (i) =
                                                                                      
                ∞
                X                                          k
                                                           X
     (1 − αβ)        (αβ)k Êti ŝt+k + (1 + ωθ)                πt+j − (ω − ν)k̃t+k (i)   (3.10)
                k=0                                        j=1

for the optimal relative price that should be chosen by a firm that resets its
price at date t. This relation differs from the result obtained in Woodford


                                                     11
(2003, chap. 3) for a model with exogenous capital only in the presence of
the Êti k̃t+k (i) terms.
    The additional terms complicate the analysis in several respects. Note
that the first two terms inside the square brackets are aggregate state vari-
ables, so that the distinction between Êti and Et would not matter in this
expression, were it not for the dependence of marginal cost on i’s relative
capital stock; it is for this reason that the alternative form of conditional
expectation did not have to be introduced in Woodford (2003, chap. 3).
However, in the model with endogenous capital, it is important to make this
distinction when evaluating the Êti k̃t+k (i) terms.12 Furthermore, these new
terms will not have the same value for all firms i that reset their prices at
date t, for they will depend on i’s relative capital stock k̃t (i) at the time
that prices are reconsidered; hence p∗t (i) is no longer independent of i, as in
the model with exogenous capital (or a model with an economy-wide rental
market for capital). And finally, (3.10) is not yet a complete solution for the
optimal price-setting rule, since the value of the right-hand side still depends
on the expected evolution of i’s relative capital stock; and this in turn de-
pends on the expected evolution of i’s relative price, which depends on the
choice of p̂∗t (i). A complete solution for this decision rule requires that one
consider the effect of a firm’s relative price on the evolution of its relative
capital stock.


3.1      Dynamics of the Relative Capital Stock
Equation (2.8) implies that i’s relative capital stock must evolve in accor-
dance with the relation

       ²ψ (k̃t+1 (i) − k̃t (i)) = [1 − β(1 − δ)][ρy Et (ŷt+1 (i) − Ŷt ) − ρk k̃t+1 (i)]

                                                +β²ψ Et (k̃t+2 (i) − k̃t+1 (i)).
  12
    It is the failure to distinguish between Êti and Et in evaluating these terms that
results in the incorrect calculations in the treatment of the present model in Woodford
(2003, chap. 5) noted by Sveen and Weinke (2004).




                                                  12
Again using i’s demand curve to express relative output as a function of the
firm’s relative price, this can be written as

                         Et [Q(L)k̃t+2 (i)] = ΞEt p̃t+1 (i),                 (3.11)

where the lag polynomial is

              Q(L) ≡ β − [1 + β + (1 − β(1 − δ))ρk ²−1      2
                                                    ψ ]L + L ,


and
                         Ξ ≡ (1 − β(1 − δ))ρy θ²−1
                                                ψ > 0.

I note for later reference that the lag polynomial can be factored as

                         Q(L) = β(1 − µ1 L)(1 − µ2 L).

Given that Q(0) = β > 0, Q(β) < 0, Q(1) < 0, and that Q(z) > 0 for all
large enough z > 0, one sees that µ1 , µ2 must be two real roots that satisfy
0 < µ1 < 1 < β −1 < µ2 .
    Equation (3.11) can not yet be solved for the expected evolution of the
relative capital stock, because of the dependence of the expected evolution of
i’s relative price (the “forcing term” on the right-hand side) on the expected
evolution of the relative capital stock itself, for reasons just discussed. How-
ever, one may note that insofar as i’s decision problem is locally convex, so
that the first-order conditions characterize a locally unique optimal plan, the
optimal decision for i’s relative price in the event that the price is reset at
date t must depend only on i’s relative capital stock at date t and on the
economy’s aggregate state. Thus a log-linear approximation to i’s pricing
rule must take the form

                               p̂∗t (i) = p̂∗t − ψ k̃t (i),                  (3.12)

where p̂∗t depends only on the aggregate state (and so is the same for all i),
and ψ is a coefficient to be determined below.
    Note that the assumption that the firms that reset prices at date t are
drawn with uniform probability from the entire population implies that the
average value of k̃t (i) over the set of firms that reset prices is zero (just as it
is over the entire population of firms). Hence p̂∗t is also the average relative

                                               13
price chosen by firms that reset prices at date t, and the overall rate of price
inflation will be given (in our log-linear approximation) by
                                          1−α ∗
                                   πt =      p̂ .                         (3.13)
                                           α t
Substitution of this, along with (3.12), into (3.9) then yields

                     Et p̃t+1 (i) = αp̃t (i) − (1 − α)ψ k̃t+1 (i).        (3.14)

    Similarly, the optimal quantity of investment in any period t must depend
only on i’s relative capital stock in that period, its relative price (which
matters as a separate argument of the decision rule in the event that the
price is not reset in period t), and the economy’s aggregate state. Thus a
log-linear approximation to i’s investment rule must imply an expression of
the form
                           k̃t+1 (i) = λk̃t (i) − τ p̃t (i),            (3.15)
where the coefficients λ and τ remain to be determined. This in turn implies
that

               Et k̃t+2 (i) = λk̃t+1 (i) − τ Et p̃t+1 (i)
                           = [λ + (1 − α)τ ψ]k̃t+1 (i) − ατ p̃t (i),

using (3.14) to substitute for Et p̃t+1 (i) in the second line. Using this to
substitute for Et k̃t+2 (i) in (3.11), and again using (3.14) to substitute for
Et p̃t+1 (i), we obtain a linear relation that can be solved for k̃t+1 (i) as a
linear function of k̃t (i) and p̃t (i). The conjectured solution (3.15) satisfies
this equation, so that the first-order condition (3.11) is satisfied, if and only
if the coefficients λ and τ satisfy

                                   R(λ; ψ) = 0,                           (3.16)

                               (1 − αβλ)τ = Ξαλ,                          (3.17)
where
                 R(λ; ψ) ≡ (β −1 − αλ)Q(βλ) + (1 − α)Ξψλ
is a cubic polynomial in λ, with a coefficient on the linear term that depends
on the value of the (as yet unknown) coefficient ψ. Condition (3.16) involves

                                             14
only λ (given the value of ψ); given a solution for λ, (3.17) then yields a
unique solution for τ , as long as λ 6= (αβ)−1 .13
   The dynamics of the the relative capital stock given by (3.15), together
with (3.14), imply an expected joint evolution of i’s relative price and relative
capital stock satisfying
                                                                    
        E p̃ (i)   α + (1 − α)τ ψ −(1 − α)ψλ   p̃t (i) 
        t t+1     =                                         .                    (3.18)
         k̃t+1 (i)        −τ             λ         k̃t (i)

This implies convergent dynamics — so that both the means and variances
of the distribution of possible future values for i’s relative price and relative
capital stock remain bounded no matter how in the future one looks, as long
as the fluctuations in the average desired relative price p̂∗t are bounded — if
and only if both eigenvalues of the matrix in this equation are inside the unit
circle. This stability condition is satisfied if and only if

                                       λ < α−1 ,                                  (3.19)

                                     λ < 1 − τ ψ,                                 (3.20)
and
                                         1−α
                                λ > −1 −      τ ψ.                      (3.21)
                                         1+α
These conditions must be satisfied if the implied dynamics of firm i’s capital
stock and relative price are to remain forever near enough to the steady-state
values around which I have log-linearized the first-order conditions for the
solution to the linearized equations to accurately approximate a solution to
the exact first-order conditions. Hence the firm’s decision problem has a
solution that can be characterized using the local methods employed above
only if equations (3.16) – (3.17) have a solution (λ, τ ) satisfying (3.19) –
(3.21). I show below that a unique solution consistent with these bounds
exists, in the case of large enough adjustment costs.
  13
     It is obvious from (3.17) that no solution with λ = (αβ)−1 is possible, as long as
Ξ > 0, as we assume here (i.e., there exists some cost of adjusting capital). Even in the
case that Ξ = 0, such a solution would violate condition (3.19) below, so one can exclude
this possibility.




                                              15
3.2          The Optimal Pricing Rule
I return now to an analysis of the first-order condition for optimal price-
setting (3.10). The term that depends on firm i’s own intended future be-
havior is proportional to
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                                  (αβ)k Êti k̃t+k (i).
                                            k=0

It is now possible to write this term as a function of i’s relative capital stock
at the time of the pricing decision and of the expected evolution of aggregate
variables, allowing me to obtain an expression of the form (3.12) for the
optimal pricing rule.
    Equation (3.15) for the dynamics of the relative capital stock implies that
                                                                                  k
                                                                                  X
                     Êti k̃t+k+1 (i)   =   λÊti k̃t+k (i)   − τ [p̃t (i) − Et         πt+j ]
                                                                                  j=1

for each k ≥ 0, using (3.8) to substitute for Êti p̃t+k (i). This can be integrated
forward (given that14 |λ| < (αβ)−1 ), to obtain
    ∞
    X
            (αβ)k Êti k̃t+k (i) = (1 − αβλ)−1 k̃t (i)
    k=0
                                                          ∞
                                                               "                                   #
                                    αβ                   X
                          −τ                   p̃t (i) −    (αβ)k Et πt+k .                               (3.22)
                             (1 − αβ)(1 − αβλ)           k=1
       Substitution of this into (3.10) then yields
                          ∞
                          X                              ∞
                                                         X                                        1 − αβ
φp̂∗t (i)   = (1 − αβ)                  k
                              (αβ) Et ŝt+k + φ               (αβ)k Et πt+k − (ω − ν)                    k̃t (i),
                          k=0                            k=1                                     1 − αβλ
where
                                                  αβ
                                φ ≡ 1 + ωθ − (ω − ν)τ   .               (3.23)
                                               1 − αβλ
The solution to this equation is a pricing rule of the conjectured form (3.12)
if and only if the process p̂∗t satisfies
                                            ∞
                                            X                             ∞
                                                                          X
                   φp̂∗t = (1 − αβ)             (αβ)k Et ŝt+k + φ             (αβ)k Et πt+k ,            (3.24)
                                            k=0                           k=1
  14                                                                      −1
    Note that (3.20) – (3.21) jointly imply that λ > −α . Hence any solution consistent
with the stability conditions derived in the previous section must imply convergence of
the infinite sum in (3.22).

                                                              16
where ŝt is defined by (3.6), and the coefficient ψ satisfies

                                                  1 − αβ
                                φψ = (ω − ν)             .                            (3.25)
                                                 1 − αβλ
Note that this last equation can be solved for ψ, given the values of λ and
τ ; however, the equations given earlier to determine λ and τ depend on the
value of ψ. Hence equations (3.16), (3.17), and (3.25) comprise a system of
three equations that jointly determine the coefficients λ, τ, and ψ of the firm’s
optimal decision rules.
     This system of equations can be reduced to a single equation for λ in the
following manner. First, note that for any conjectured value of λ 6= 0, (3.16)
can be solved for ψ. This defines a function15

                                          (1 − αβλ)Q(βλ)
                              ψ(λ) ≡ −                   .
                                             (1 − α)βΞλ

Similarly, (3.17) defines a function16

                                                αΞλ
                                    τ (λ) ≡           .                               (3.26)
                                              1 − αβλ

Substituting these functions for ψ and τ in (3.25), one obtains an equation in
which λ is the only unknown variable. Multiplying both sides of this equation
by (1 − α)β(1 − αβλ)Ξλ,17 one obtains the equation

                                        V (λ) = 0,                                    (3.27)

where V (λ) is the quartic polynomial

V (λ) ≡ [(1+ωθ)(1−αβλ)2 −α2 β(ω−ν)Ξλ]Q(βλ)+β(1−α)(1−αβ)(ω−ν)Ξλ.
                                                                           (3.28)
    Finally, one can write the inequalities (3.19) – (3.21) as restrictions upon
the value of λ alone. One observes from the above discussion that the product
  15
     The function is not defined if λ = 0. However, since Q(0) 6= 0, it is clear from (3.16)
that λ 6= 0, for any economy with some adjustment costs (so that Ξ is finite).
  16
     The function is not defined if λ = (αβ)−1 , but that value of λ would be inconsistent
with (3.20) and (3.21) holding jointly, as noted above.
  17
     This expression is necessarily non-zero in the case of the kind of solution that we seek,
for the reasons noted in the previous two footnotes.

                                                 17
τ (λ)ψ(λ) is well-defined for all λ, and equal to −(α/1 − α)β −1 Q(βλ). Using
this function of λ to replace the terms τ ψ in the previous inequalities, one
obtains an equivalent set of three inequalities,

                                       λ < α−1 ,                                  (3.29)
                α                          α
                     β −1 Q(βλ) − 1 < λ <     β −1 Q(βλ) + 1,         (3.30)
              1+α                         1−α
that λ must satisfy.
   I can then summarize my characterization of a firm’s optimal pricing and
investment behavior as follows.

    Proposition 1. Suppose that the firm’s decision problem has a solu-
tion in which, for any small enough initial log relative capital stock and log
relative price of the individual firm, and in the case that the exogenous dis-
turbance qt and the aggregate variables Ŷt , K̂t , λ̂t , and πt forever satisfy tight
enough bounds, both the conditional expectation Et k̂t+j (i) and the condi-
tional variance vart k̂t+j (i) remain bounded for all j, with bounds that can be
made as tight as one likes by choosing sufficiently tight bounds on the initial
conditions and the evolution of the aggregate variables.18 Then the firm’s
optimal decision rules can be approximated by log-linear rules of the form
(3.12) for p̂∗t (i) in periods when the firm re-optimizes its price and (3.15) for
the investment decision k̃t+1 (i) each period. The coefficient λ in (3.15) is
a root of the quartic equation (3.27), that satisfies the inequalities (3.29) –
(3.30). The coefficient τ in (3.15) is furthermore equal to τ (λ), where the
function τ (·) is defined by (3.17), and the coefficient ψ in (3.12) is equal to
ψ(λ), where the function ψ(·) is defined by (3.25). Finally, the intercept p̂∗t
in (3.12) is given by (3.24), in which expression the process {ŝt } is defined
by (3.6).

This result gives a straightforward algorithm that can be used to solve for
the firm’s decision rules, in the case that local methods suffice to give an ap-
proximate characterization of optimal behavior in the event of small enough
  18
    Note that this is the only condition under which local log-linearizations of the kind
used above can suffice to approximately characterize the solution to the firm’s problem.


                                              18
disturbances and a small enough initial departure of the individual firm’s
situation from that of an average firm. The two decision rules (3.12) and
(3.15), together with the law of motion

                              p̃t (i) = p̃t−1 (i) − πt

for any period t in which i does not re-optimize its price, then allow a com-
plete solution for the evolution of the firm’s relative capital stock and relative
price, given its initial relative capital stock and relative price and given the
evolution of the aggregate variables {Ŷt , K̂t , λt , πt , qt }.


3.3    Existence of a Solution
Proposition 1 does not guarantee the existence of a non-explosive solution
to the firm’s decision problem. The following result, however, shows that at
least in the case of large enough adjustment costs there is a solution of the
kind characterized in Proposition 1.

    Proposition 2. Let household preferences, the production function,
the rate of depreciation of capital, and the frequency of price changes all be
fixed, but consider alternative specifications of the investment adjustment-
cost function I(·), all of which are twice differentiable, increasing, convex,
and satisfy I(1) = δ, I 0 (1) = 1. Then for any adjustment-cost function for
which the value of ²ψ ≡ I 00 (1) > 0 is large enough, the polynomial (3.27) has
a unique real root λ satisfying (3.29) – (3.30). It follows that the firm decision
problem has a solution of the kind described in Proposition 1. Furthermore,
in this solution 0 < λ < 1, and τ, φ, and ψ are all positive. In the limit as
Ξ → 0, λ → 1, τ → 0, φ → 1 + ωθ, and
                                     ω−ν
                               φ→           > 0.
                                     1 + ωθ


     This result can be established by considering the way in which the poly-
nomial (3.27) depends on the value of Ξ, which in turn varies inversely with
²ψ . Note that the steady state allocation associated with zero inflation (or


                                            19
flexible prices) is determined independently of the assumed degree of adjust-
ment costs, and so the values of the parameters α, β, δ, ν, ω, θ, ρy , and ρk are
all given, regardless of the variation considered in the value of ²ψ . The co-
efficient Ξ is then equal to a positive constant divided by ²ψ , so that one
may equivalently consider the consequences of varying the value of Ξ while
holding fixed the values of the parameters listed above. I am then interested
in the roots of V (λ) as the value of Ξ approaches zero.
     Since the definition (3.28) involves the polynomial Q(z), it is first neces-
sary to consider how this polynomial depends on the value of Ξ. One observes
that
                         Q(z) = z 2 − (1 + β + cΞ)z + β,
where
                                      ρk
                                 c≡        > 0.
                                      ρy θ
One can then write
                                                1
                   V (λ; Ξ) = V̄ (λ) + VΞ (λ)Ξ + VΞΞ (λ)Ξ2 ,
                                                2
where the polynomials

                V̄ (λ) ≡ (1 + ωθ)(1 − αβλ)2 β(1 − λ)(1 − βλ),

VΞ (λ) ≡ β(1 − αβλ)[1 − α(1 + β) + αβλ](ω − ν)λ − (1 + ωθ)(1 − αβλ)2 cλ,
and VΞΞ (λ) are each independent of the value of Ξ.
    When Ξ = 0, the roots of V (λ) are simply the roots of V̄ (λ), which are
easily seen to be λ1 = 1, λ2 = β −1 , and λ3 = λ4 = (αβ)−1 . By continuity,
any real roots in the case of a small enough positive value of Ξ will also have
to be close to one of the roots of V̄ (λ).
    It is easily seen that no such root can satisfy the inequalities (3.29) –
(3.30), unless it is a root near 1. Because Q(βλ2 ; 0)Q(1; 0) = 0, the right-
most term in (3.30) is equal to 1, so that the second inequality is violated
when λ = λ2 , Ξ = 0. By continuity, the second inequality of (3.30) will also
necessarily be violated by any root near λ2 in the case of any small enough
value of Ξ. Similarly, because Q(βλ3 ; 0) = Q(α−1 ; 0) = α−1 (α−1 − β)(1 − α),
the right-most term is negative, and the second inequality is again violated,

                                          20
when λ = λ3 = λ4 , Ξ = 0. Hence any roots near these will also violate the
inequality in the case of any small enough value of Ξ. Thus there can be at
most one root of (3.27) that satisfies the inequalities for small positive values
of Ξ, and it must be near 1.
    Because V̄ 0 (1) < 0, V (λ) will continue to have a real root λ1 (Ξ) near 1
for all small enough values of Ξ, and the implicit function theorem implies
that
                               dλ1          VΞ (1)
                                   (0) = − 0 .
                                dΞ          V̄ (1)
Since

         VΞ (1) = β(1 − αβ)(1 − α)(ω − ν) − (1 + ωθ)(1 − αβ)2 c
                  < (1 − αβ)2 [(ω − ν) − (1 + ωθ)c]
                  = (1 − αβ)2 [(ωρ−1
                                  y − 1)ν − c] < 0,


using the fact that ρy > ω in the final line, and

                  V̄ 0 (1) = −(1 + ωθ)β(1 − β)(1 − αβ)2 < 0,

it follows that
                                 dλ1
                                      (0) < 0.
                                  dΞ
Thus there is a real root 0 < λ1 < 1 for all small enough positive values of
Ξ. This root necessarily also satisfies (3.29).
   Since Q(β; 0) = 0, the left-most term of (3.30) is near -1 for all small
enough values of Ξ; hence the first inequality of (3.30) is satisfied by the root
λ1 as well. However, both sides of the second inequality are equal to 1 when
Ξ = 0; thus in order to determine whether the inequality holds when Ξ > 0,
one must determine the sign of the derivative
                            "                               #
                       d           α Q(βλ1 (Ξ); Ξ)
                   D≡    λ1 (Ξ) −
                      dΞ          1−α    β

at Ξ = 0. Since
                     d                           dλ1
                       Q(βλ1 (Ξ); Ξ) = −β(1 − β)     − βc
                    dΞ                           dΞ



                                          21
                       Table 1: Numerical parameter values.

                                        β        0.99
                                        ν        0.11
                                       φ−1
                                        h        0.75
                                       ωp        0.33
                                    (θ − 1)−1    0.15
                                        δ        0.12



at Ξ = 0, it follows that
                                  1 − αβ dλ1      α
                            D =               +       c
                                   1 − α dΞ     1−α
                                  (ω − ν) − (1 + ωθ)c
                                =
                                    (1 − β)(1 + ωθ)
                                  [(ωρ−1
                                       y − 1)ν − c]
                                =                   < 0.
                                   (1 − β)(1 + ωθ)

Thus for all small enough Ξ > 0, the second inequality of (3.30) holds as
well, and λ = λ1 (Ξ) is the solution asserted to exist in the proposition.
    It then follows from (3.26) that associated with this solution is a positive
value of τ , and that τ → 0 as Ξ → 0. It similarly follows from (3.23) that the
associated value of φ is positive for all small enough values of Ξ, and that
φ → 1 + ωθ as Ξ → 0. Finally, it follows from these results and (3.25) that
the associated value of ψ is positive,19 and that it approaches the positive
limit stated in the proposition as Ξ → 0. Proposition 2 is thus established.
    Proposition 2 guarantees that a solution to the firm’s optimization prob-
lem that can be characterized using the local methods employed above will
exist for at least some economies, namely, those in which adjustment costs
are large enough. The proposition also implies that in the limit of large
adjustment costs, the optimal price-setting rule approaches the one derived
in Woodford (2003, chap. 3) under the assumption of an exogenously given
capital stock for each firm. Thus the exogenous-capital model represents a
 19
      Recall that our assumptions require that ω > ν.



                                                22
            10

             9                                               unique real root
                                                             no real root
             8

             7


          εψ 6
             5

             4

             3

             2

             1

                 0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6    0.7       0.8        0.9   1
                                              α



Figure 1: Values of α and ²ψ for which a solution of the kind characterized
in Proposition 1 exists.

useful approximation to the equilibrium dynamics in a model with endoge-
nous capital accumulation, if adjustment costs are large enough.
    Numerical exploration of the properties of the polynomial (3.27) suggests
that adjustment costs do not have to be large in order for the analysis given
above to apply. In Figure 1, model parameters are assigned the values given
in Table 1,20 while the values of α and ²ψ are allowed to vary. The figure
indicates for which part of the α − ²ψ plane the polynomial (3.27) has a
unique real root satisfying the bounds (3.29) – (3.30). Except in the case of
very high values of α (α > 0.93, corresponding to an average interval between
price changes longer than 3.5 years), a unique real root of this kind exists in
the case of any ²ψ > 0. If we suppose that ²ψ = 3 (the calibration used in
Woodford, 2004), then a solution exists in the case of any α less than 0.978
(i.e., as long as prices are changed at least once every 11 years, on average).
  20
    These are the same parameter values used in the numerical illustrations in Woodford
(2004), which are in turn chosen for comparability with the numerical analyses of related
models in Woodford (2003). (The justification for interest in these values is discussed in
both of those sources.) Thus, for example, in Figure 1, one sees that if α = 0.66, a unique
solution exists for all possible values of ²ψ ; this explains why it is possible to present
solutions for alternative values of ²ψ in Figure 1 of Woodford (2004). In this calibration
of the model, periods are understood to correspond to quarters.


                                               23
In the case of very high values of α, a solution does not exist, except in the
case of very high values of ²ψ ;21 and when it does not, the solution to the
firm’s problem cannot be characterized using the local methods employed
above.22 But such high values of α are clearly not empirically realistic, so we
need not be concerned with this case.


4      Inflation Dynamics
I now consider the implications of the analysis above for the evolution of the
overall inflation rate. I show that the model of price-setting presented above
implies the existence of a new-Keynesian Phillips curve of the form (1.1), and
then consider the interpretation of empirical estimates of the slope coefficient
ξ in this relation.


4.1     A New-Keynesian Phillips Curve
Recall that the average log relative price set by firms that reoptimize at date
t is given by (3.24). This equation can be quasi-differenced (after dividing
by φ23 ) to yield

                   p̂∗t = (1 − αβ)φ−1 ŝt + αβEt πt+1 + αβEt p̂∗t+1 .

Then, using (3.13) to substitute for p̂∗t , one obtains a relation of the form
(1.1), where
                                  (1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                             ξ≡                   .                       (4.1)
                                        αφ
    Equation (1.1) is the corrected form of equation (3.17) in Woodford (2003,
chap. 5). Together with (3.6), it provides a complete characterization of
  21
     It may appear from the figure that no solution is possible when α exceeds 0.99, but
this is because the vertical axis is truncated at ²ψ = 10. If α = 0.995, a solution exists in
the case of all ²ψ > 22.2; if α = 0.999, a solution exists in the case of all ²ψ > 88.2. Thus
a solution does always exist in the case of large enough adjustment costs, in accordance
with Proposition 2.
  22
     This may, for example, be due to a failure of the firm’s problem to be locally convex.
I do not further investigate the problem here, as it does not appear to arise in cases of
practical interest.
  23
     It follows from (3.25) that φ 6= 0, given that (as already discussed) λ 6= (αβ)−1 .

                                                24
the equilibrium dynamics of inflation, given the evolution of Ŷt , K̂t , and
λ̂t . This pair of equations can be thought of as constituting the “aggre-
gate supply block” of the model with endogenous capital. They generalize
the aggregate-supply equation of the constant-capital model (expounded in
Woodford, 2003, chap. 3) to take account of the effects of changes in the cap-
ital stock on real marginal cost, and hence on the short-run tradeoff between
inflation and output.
      In the constant-capital model, (3.6) (after using (2.10) to substitute for
λ̂t ) reduces to
                         ŝt = ω(Ŷt − qt ) + σ −1 (Ŷt − gt ),
which can be equivalently written as

                                  ŝt = (ω + σ −1 )Ỹt ,                            (4.2)

where Ỹt is the “output gap,” defined as the (log) difference between ac-
tual and flexible-price equilibrium output. Substituting this relation into
(1.1), one obtains the familiar output-gap formulation of the new-Keynesian
Phillips curve,
                             πt = κỸt + βEt πt+1 ,                   (4.3)
where κ ≡ (ω + σ −1 )ξ > 0.
   In the model with endogenous (and firm-specific) capital, instead, (4.2)
takes the more general form

                             ŝt = (ω + σ −1 )Ỹt − σ −1 I˜t ,                      (4.4)

where I˜t indicates the gap between actual investment (specifically, the value
of Iˆt ) and its flexible-price equilibrium level.24 If one substitutes this relation
instead into (1.1), one obtains a generalization of (4.3),

                             πt = κỸt − κI I˜t + βEt πt+1 ,

where κ is defined as before, but now κI ≡ σ −1 ξ > 0. Thus while (1.1)
continues to apply, the relation between inflation and real activity is no longer
  24
    See Woodford (2004) for further discussion of the definition of this and related “gap”
variables in this model.


                                               25
as simple as (4.3). This is a further reason (in addition to the lack of simple
empirical measures of the flexible-price equilibrium level of output) why it
has been appropriate for the empirical literature to focus more on estimation
of the inflation equation (1.1) than of the corresponding aggregate-supply
relation.
    As with equation (3.17) in Woodford (2003, chap. 5), equation (1.1)
implies that one can solve for the inflation rate as a function of current and
expected future real marginal cost, resulting in a relation of the form
                                     ∞
                                     X
                              πt =         Ψj Et ŝt+j .                   (4.5)
                                     j=0

The correct formula for these coefficients is given by

                                  Ψj = ξβ j ,

just as in the model with constant capital discussed in Woodford (2003, chap.
3). Hence the coefficients do not decay as rapidly with increasing j as is shown
in Figure 5.6 of Woodford (2003), in the case of finite adjustment costs.
Nor do the coefficients ever change sign with increasing j, as occurs in the
figure. In the case that ξ > 0 (as implied by the calibrated parameter values
proposed below), an increase in the expected future level of real marginal
costs unambiguously requires that inflation increase; and the degree to which
inflation determination is forward-looking is even greater than is indicated
by the figure in Woodford (2003).


4.2    The Case of a Rental Market for Capital
I now briefly compare the results obtained above to those that would be
obtained under the assumption of a competitive rental market for capital
services. In the literature, when models of staggered pricing have allowed for
endogenous capital accumulation (as, for example, in Yun, 1996, or Chari et
al., 2000), they have typically assumed that firms purchase capital services
on a competitive rental market, rather than accumulating firm-specific cap-
ital as in the model above. This alternative assumption is of considerable
convenience, since it allows price-setting decisions to be analyzed separately


                                              26
from the decision to accumulate capital.25 However, while the assumption
of an economy-wide rental market for capital is purely a convenience in the
case of standard real business-cycle models (i.e., one-sector models with a
competitive goods market), it is no longer innocuous in a model where firms
are price-setters, and so must consider the consequences for their profits of
setting a price different from that of their competitors. As we shall see, alter-
native assumptions about the way in which capital services can be obtained
(with a production technology that is otherwise the same) lead to different
conclusions regarding aggregate dynamics. In particular, the predicted slope
of the Phillips-curve tradeoff can be affected to an extent that is quantita-
tively significant.
    I shall consider two versions of a model with a competitive rental market
for capital services. In each case, the production technology and the tech-
nology of capital accumulation are as described in section 1, except that now
capital goods are either accumulated by households and rented to the firms
that produce the goods that are used for consumption and investment, or
they are accumulated by a special set of firms that accumulate capital and
then rent capital services to the goods-producing firms. (Our equilibrium
relations will be the same, whether capital is accumulated by households or
by a special set of firms.) There is assumed to be a competitive market for
capital services each period, with rental rate ρt in period t. (Note that this
rental rate is no longer indexed by the firm that uses the capital.)
    It follows that for each household or firm i that accumulates capital, its
holdings of capital {kt (i)} must evolve in accordance with the first-order
condition (2.3), except that now the firm-specific shadow value ρt+1 (i) is
replaced by the market rental rate ρt+1 , with the same value for all i. Log-
linearization of this condition again leads to a relation of the form (2.4) for
each i, but with ρ̂t+1 (i) replaced simply by ρ̂t+1 . Assuming that one starts
from a symmetric distribution of capital k0 (i) = K0 for all i, one will similarly
have a common capital stock kt (i) = Kt in all subsequent periods, since each
household or firm solves an identical optimization problem. The aggregate
capital stock will then also evolve in accordance with (2.3) or, up to a log-
  25
    The same assumption was used, for example, in the DSGE model with oligopolistic
pricing of Rotemberg and Woodford (1992).


                                           27
linear approximation, in accordance with (2.4).
     An optimal demand for capital services by a goods-producing firm i [now
not to be confused with a firm i that accumulates capital!] again requires
that the firm’s output/capital ratio satisfy (2.5), though (2.5) is now a first-
order condition for a firm that takes as given the cost of capital services ρt ,
rather than a definition of the shadow value of additional capital services; and
ρt (i) must now be replaced by the common rental rate ρt for all i. There are
two possible assumptions that may be made regarding labor inputs. In the
literature, when a rental market for capital services is assumed, it is often also
assumed that all sectors hire the same kind of labor, and that there is a single
economy-wide labor market as well; this is the case of “homogeneous factor
markets” treated in Woodford (2003, chap. 3).26 In this case, every firm i
faces a common wage, so that wt (i) = wt . It then follows from (2.5) that
each firm i will choose a common output/capital ratio; firms with higher
demand for their products (because of lower prices) will choose to use a
proportionately higher quantity of capital services, and a proportionately
higher quantity of labor as well. It then follows from (3.1) that the marginal
cost of output supply will be the same for all firms i, and independent of the
quantity produced by any firm, so that st (i) = st for all i, where the common
real marginal cost st is an increasing function of both ρt and wt . Equation
(3.5) then reduces simply to
                                   ŝt (i) = ŝt .
   In this case, frequently assumed in previous derivations of the new-Keynesian
Phillips curve, (3.7) implies that the optimal relative price that should be
  26
    It is the case assumed in the derivation of a new-Keynesian Phillips curve in Gali and
Gertler (1999), and in the baseline case considered in Sbordone (1998, 2002). Note that a
single economy-wide labor market is also assumed in the analysis of the consequences of
an exogenous firm-specific capital stock in Sbordone (1998, 2002) and in Gali, Gertler and
Lopez-Salido (2001). For this reason, the formula for ξ(α) presented by those authors for
the case of firm-specific capital differs from the one derived in Woodford (2003, chap. 3)
under the assumption of industry-specific labor markets. Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004)
also assume an economy-wide labor market even in their model with firm-specific capital,
though in their case each firm’s capital stock is endogenous as in the model developed
here.




                                               28
chosen by a firm that resets its price at date t is given by
                                                                          
                                      ∞
                                      X                          k
                                                                 X
                p̂∗t (i) = (1 − αβ)       (αβ)k Êti ŝt+k +          πt+j    (4.6)
                                      k=0                        j=1

instead of (3.10). In this case, the quantities inside the brackets are not
firm-specific, and there is no need to distinguish between the conditional
expectations Êti [·] and Et [·]. Nor is there any need to solve for the dynamics
of a firm’s relative capital stock in order to evaluate the right-hand side of
(4.6). The right-hand side of (4.6) is the same for all i, and thus gives the
value of p̂∗t . Equation (4.6) then leads directly to an inflation equation of the
form (1.1), with
                                   (1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                            ξh ≡                    > 0.                     (4.7)
                                           α
    Alternatively, we may assume the existence of a sector-specific labor mar-
ket for each sector, as in the model developed in this paper for the case of
firm-specific capital, or the model of “specific factor markets” treated in
Woodford (2003, chap. 3). In this case, the real wage for the type of la-
bor hired by firm i is given by a sector-specific labor supply equation (2.6).
Substituting this into (2.5) and log-linearizing, we again obtain equilibrium
relation (2.7) for each firm i, except that ρ̂t (i) must now be replaced by the
common rental rate ρ̂t . Because ρt is now the same for all firms, this condi-
tional for cost-minimizing production by firm i implies that the firm’s relative
capital stock will be a monotonic function of its relative sales, so that

                          ρk (k̂t (i) − K̂t ) = ρy (ŷt (i) − Ŷt )             (4.8)

for all i at any date.
    The marginal cost of production of each firm i is again given by (3.4), but
we can now use (4.8) to substitute for the firm’s relative demand for capital
as a function of its relative sales. Then, again using (2.2) to substitute for
the relative sales of firm i, one obtains

                                 ŝt (i) = ŝt − χθp̃t (i)                      (4.9)

instead of (3.5), where
                          ωρk − (ω − ν)ρy       νωp
                   χ≡                     =             > 0.
                                ρk          ρk (φh − 1)

                                                29
Note that there is no longer any dependence on the firm’s relative capital
stock (which is no longer a state variable for the firm’s optimization problem).
   Once again substituting (4.9) for st+k (i) and (3.8) for Êti p̃t+k (i) in (3.7),
one now obtains
                                                                                 
                                     ∞
                                     X                                  k
                                                                        X
       (1 + χθ)p̂∗t (i) = (1 − αβ)       (αβ)k Êti ŝt+k + (1 + χθ)         πt+j    (4.10)
                                     k=0                                j=1

for the optimal relative price that should be chosen by a firm that resets
its price at date t. One can again replace the conditional expectation Êti [·]
by Et [·], and one again observes that p̂∗t (i) is the same for all i, so that one
can replace p̂∗t (i) by p̂∗t . Relation (4.10) is then of the same form as relation
(3.24) for the model above with endogenous but firm-specific capital, but
with the coefficient φ in the earlier equation here replaced by 1 + χθ. One
again obtains a pricing relation of the form (1.1), but with elasticity
                                     (1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                             ξr ≡                    > 0.                              (4.11)
                                        α(1 + χθ)
    Thus each model leads to a Phillips-curve relation of the same form (1.1),
except that in each case the elasticity ξ > 0 is a different function of under-
lying model parameters. The quantitative difference made by the alternative
assumptions can be illustrated through a numerical example. Let us again
assume the parameter values given in Table 1, and furthermore now specify
that ²ψ = 3, as assumed in Woodford (2004). Figure 2 then plots the value
of ξ corresponding to any given frequency of price change (indicated by the
value of α on the horizontal axis), under each of four possible assumptions.
The function ξh (α) defined in (4.7) indicates how the elasticity ξ in (1.1)
varies with α in the case of homogeneous factor markets. The function ξr (α)
defined in (4.11) applies instead in the case of industry-specific labor but an
economy-wide rental market for capital. The function ξf (α) defined in (4.1)
applies instead in the case of industry-specific labor and firm-specific capi-
tal.27 And finally, the function ξc (α) is the corresponding relation derived in
Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for the case of the model with industry-specific
  27
     As shown in Figure 1, the function ξf is only defined for values of α lower than a
critical value on the order of 0.978. The other functions are defined for all values of α
between 0 and 1.

                                                 30
        0.5
                                                                                   ξ
                                                                                    h
                                                                                   ξr
                                                                                   ξf
                                                                                   ξ
                                                                                    c
        0.4




        0.3

   ξ


        0.2




        0.1




         0
              0   0.1   0.2     0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6     0.7    0.8     0.9        1
                                               α


Figure 2: The relation between ξ and α under four alternative assumptions
about factor markets.

labor and a constant quantity of firm-specific capital.28 The function ξc (α)
corresponds to the limit of ξf (α) as ²ψ is made unboundedly large; it follows
from Proposition 1 that this is given by

                                      (1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                              ξc ≡                    > 0.
                                         α(1 + ωθ)

    We see from the figure that any given value of α (in the range for which
all four functions are defined), the model with homogeneous factor markets
implies the highest value of ξ, as in this case the model possesses the fewest
sources of “real rigidities” in the sense of Ball and Romer (1990). The fact
that an increase in demand in one part of the economy bids up the price of
factor inputs throughout the economy creates a source of “strategic substi-
tutability” between the pricing decisions in different sectors of the economy
 28
      This is called the model with “specific factor markets” in Woodford (2003, chap. 3).


                                                31
(the fact that others keep their prices low increases your marginal cost of
production, and so gives you a reason for higher prices, rather than lower
ones); this speeds up the rate of adjustment of the aggregate price index to
changes in demand conditions.29 There are greater real rigidities, and hence
a flatter Phillips curve, in the case of industry-specific labor markets, even
if we continue to assume an economy-wide rental market for capital services;
for in this case, an increase in demand in one part of the economy still bids up
the price of capital services throughout the economy, but does not similarly
affect wages in other sectors. There are still greater real rigidities, and a still
flatter Phillips curve, if we assume firm-specific investment, because in this
case an increase in demand in one part of the economy which increases the
shadow value of capital there has no immediate effect on the shadow cost of
capital services in other parts of the economy.
    Real rigidities are the greatest if we assume, as in the model with “specific
factor markets” in Woodford (2003, chap. 3), that the capital stock of each
firm is exogenously given, and hence never affected by differential shadow
values of capital in different sectors. In the model with endogenous firm-
specific capital developed here, a sustained higher shadow value of capital
in part of the economy will eventually raise the shadow value of capital
services everywhere, as a result of differential rates of investment in the
sectors with differing shadow values of capital. Thus capital is still reallocated
among sectors in response to rate-of-return differentials, albeit with a delay,
as long as investment adjustment costs are not too large. However, the
figure shows that in our calibrated example, an empirically realistic level of
adjustment costs result in a value of ξ that is quite close to what would be
implied by the exogenous-capital model with firm-specific capital (though
slightly larger), while it is considerably lower than would be implied by the
assumption of instantaneous reallocation of capital across sectors so as to
equalize the shadow value of capital services. Thus the implicit assumption
of an exogenously evolving capital stock in derivations of the Phillips curve for
  29
      See Woodford, 2003, chap. 3, for further discussion of why the Phillips curve is
relatively steep in this case, building upon the seminal treatment by Kimball (1995). The
discussion there, conducted under the assumption of an exogenously given capital stock,
still gives the essential insight into why the specificity of factor markets matters.



                                              32
models with firm-specific capital by authors such as Sbordone (1998) appears
not to have been a source of any great inaccuracy.30 The endogeneity of
the capital stock is instead of greater significance for predictions about the
equilibrium responses of inflation or output to aggregate disturbances, as
shown in Woodford (2004), because of the effects of the endogenous rate of
investment on the evolution of real marginal cost, as indicated by equation
(4.4).


4.3     Additional Sources of Real Rigidities
Even the model with firm-specific capital developed above still abstracts
from a number of possible sources of real rigidities. Here I briefly consider
the effects of two generalizations that are discussed in more detail (though
in the context of a model with exogenous capital) in Woodford (2003, chap.
3, sec. 1.4).
    First, I shall now suppose that each differentiated good is produced using
not only labor and capital, but also intermediate inputs produced by other
industries. As in Rotemberg and Woodford (1995), I assume a production
function of the form
                                  "                                   #
                                 kt (i)f (At ht (i)/kt (i)) mt (i)
                    yt (i) = min                           ,       ,
                                          1 − sm             sm

generalizing (2.1), where f (·) has the same properties as before, mt (i) denotes
the quantity of materials inputs used by firm i in period t, and 0 ≤ sm < 1 is
a parameter of the production technology that can be identified, for purposes
of calibration, with the share of materials costs in the value of gross output.
The materials inputs are measured in units of the composite good.
  30
    Coenen and Levin (2004) also discuss the role of firm-specific capital in increasing
real rigidities, in the context of a model with Taylor-style fixed-period price commit-
ments, which allows separate econometric identification of the length of time between
price changes, on the one hand, and the elasticity of a firm’s desired relative price with re-
spect to aggregate output, on the other. They are concerned with whether the estimated
value of the latter elasticity can be reconciled with the microfoundations of the firm’s
pricing decision, and argue that allowing for firm-specific capital is important in doing so.
Like Sbordone (1998) and Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2001), they assume that each
firm’s capital stock is fixed in analyzing this issue.


                                                 33
       The shadow value to firm i of an additional unit of capital is then given
by

                    wt (i) −1
         ρt (i) =         f ((1 − sm )yt (i)/kt (i))[φ((1 − sm )yt (i)/kt (i)) − 1],
                     At
generalizing (2.5), where φ(·) is the same function as before. But because the
log deviation of (1 − sm )yt (i)/kt (i) from its steady-state value is equal to the
log deviation of yt (i)/kt (i) from its steady-state value, the log-linear relation
(2.7) continues to apply, regardless of the size of the materials share.
    With intermediate inputs, the real marginal cost of production can be
written as
                           st (i) = (1 − sm )sVt A (i) + sm ,                (4.12)
where sVt A (i) is the real marginal cost of producing a unit of ’real value
added’, by which I mean the homogeneous-degree-one aggregate of primary
factors of production given by kt (i)f (At ht (i)/kt (i)). Equation (3.2) further-
more takes the more general form

                                  vh (f −1 ((1 − sm )yt (i)/kt (i))kt (i)/At ; ξt )
                    sVt A (i) =                                                     .
                                      λt At f 0 (f −1 ((1 − sm )yt (i)/kt (i)))

Substituting this into (4.12) and log-linearizing, I obtain

               ŝt (i) = (1 − µsm )[ω(ŷt (i) − k̂t (i) − qt ) + ν k̂t (i) − λ̂t ],     (4.13)

generalizing (3.3), where µ ≡ θ/(θ − 1) > 1 is the steady-state markup (ratio
of price to marginal cost).31 The reduced elasticity of real marginal cost with
respect to the firm’s level of production when sm is positive (but less than
µ−1 ) indicates greater real rigidities.
    Second, I shall suppose that substitution possibilities among the differen-
tiated goods are no longer necessarily described by the familiar Dixit-Stiglitz
aggregator that leads to the constant-elasticity demand function (2.2) for
individual goods. If I instead assume only that the aggregator belongs to
the more general family of homogeneous-degree-one functions considered by
  31
    In the case of the model with generalized preferences introduced in the next paragraph,
this relation still applies, but θ > 1 indicates the steady-state elasticity of substitution
among differentiated goods, rather than a coefficient of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator.


                                                       34
Kimball (1995), the elasticity of demand varies with the relative price of (and
hence the relative demand for) individual good i. The relative demand for
an individual good is again a decreasing function of the relative price,32 but
the function need not be a constant-elasticity function, as in (2.2).
    As a result, the desired markup of the supplier’s price over the marginal
cost of supply will no longer be a constant µ > 1, but rather a function
µ(yt (i)/Yt ) of the relative output of the good, where Yt is aggregate output,
defined using the Kimball aggregator. To a log-linear approximation, the
deviation of the log desired markup from its steady-state level (that I shall
again call µ) is equal to ²µ ỹt (i), where ²µ is the elasticity of the function µ(·),
evaluated at the steady state (i.e., at a relative output of 1), and ỹt (i) is the
log relative output. The demand function can again be log-linearized to yield

                                         ỹt (i) = −θp̃t (i),

where θ > 1 is now the steady-state elasticity of demand (and not necessarily
also the elasticity near a relative price other than 1). One can then show that
the first-order condition for optimal price-setting under Calvo staggering of
price changes takes the form
                     ∞
                     X
                         (αβ)k Êti [p̃t+k (i) − (1 + θ²µ )−1 ŝt+k (i)] = 0,               (4.14)
                     k=0

generalizing (3.7), just as in Woodford (2003, chap. 3). The only difference
here is that real marginal cost will depend on the firm’s endogenous, firm-
specific capital stock in the way treated above. One observes directly from
(4.14) that a value ²µ > 0 will increase the degree of real rigidities, by reduc-
ing the sensitivity of the desired relative price to variations in real marginal
cost, and hence to variations in the firm’s output.
    Substituting (4.13) into (4.14), I now obtain
                                                                                     
                                ∞
                                X                            k
                                                             X
       Γ1 p̂∗t (i) = (1 − αβ)       (αβ)k Êti ŝt+k + Γ1         πt+j − Γ2 k̃t+k (i) ,   (4.15)
                                k=0                          j=1

  32
    As in the model developed above, it is assumed that both household preferences and
the production technology of firms depends only on the quantity purchased of the com-
posite good defined by this aggregator. Hence the purchases of each buyer, for whatever
purpose, will be distributed across differentiated goods in the same proportions.

                                                     35
generalizing (3.10), where

         Γ1 ≡ 1 + θ²µ + (1 − µsm )ωθ,            Γ2 ≡ (1 − µsm )(ω − ν).

Here only the expressions for Γ1 and Γ2 have become more complex. One
can then show, using the same reasoning as above, that the solution to the
firm’s optimization problem is characterized by Proposition 1, except that
(3.23) must be replaced by
                                                αβ
                             φ ≡ Γ1 − Γ2 τ           ,                     (4.16)
                                             1 − αβλ
and (3.28) must be replaced by

 V (λ) ≡ [Γ1 (1 − αβλ)2 − α2 βΓ2 Ξλ]Q(βλ) + β(1 − α)(1 − αβ)Γ2 Ξλ. (4.17)

   One can similarly obtain once again an aggregate-supply relation of the
form (1.1), where the elasticity ξ is defined by (4.1), but now using the
generalized definition (4.16) of φ. Alternatively, one can write the aggregate-
supply relation as
                             πt = ξŝVt A + βEt πt+1 ,                   (4.18)
in which case
                             (1 − µsm )(1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                       ξ≡                              ,                   (4.19)
                                         αφ
where φ is defined by (4.16), using the fact that

                              ŝt = (1 − µsm )ŝVt A ,

from a log-linearization of (4.12). The alternative form (4.18) is actually
the one that is estimated in the literature, since (under the assumption of
a Cobb-Douglas production function for ‘value added’) it is sVt A rather than
st that is proportional to real unit labor cost (the proxy for “marginal cost”
that is used in empirical work).
    The additional sources of real rigidities affect the value of ξ associated
with a given average frequency of price adjustment, as shown in Figure 3. As
in Woodford (2003, chap. 3, sec. 1.4), I shall consider the consequences of an
intermediate input share such that µsm = 0.6, and a non-constant elasticity
of substitution among differentiated goods such that θ²µ = 1. The figure

                                            36
           0.5
                                                                baseline
          0.45                                                  intermed. inputs
                                                                Kimball prefs.
                                                                both
           0.4

          0.35

           0.3

      ξ
          0.25

           0.2

          0.15

           0.1

          0.05

            0
                 0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8     0.9        1
                                             α



Figure 3: The relation between ξ and α with additional sources of real rigidi-
ties.

plots the functional relation ξ(α) defined by (4.1) for each of four possible
combinations of parameter values: the baseline case, in which sm = 0, ²µ = 0;
a case with intermediate inputs, in which µsm = 0.6, though again ²µ = 0; a
case with Kimball preferences, in which sm = 0 but θ²µ = 1; and finally, a case
with both additional sources of real rigidities, in which µsm = 0.6, θ²µ = 1. In
all four cases, it is assumed that labor markets are industry-specific, capital
is endogenous and firm-specific, and the numerical parameters other than
those just listed are as in the case with firm-specific capital plotted in Figure
2. (The function ξ(α) in the baseline case here corresponds to the function
ξf (α) in Figure 2.)
    One observes that for each of the values of α considered, either interme-
diate inputs or Kimball preferences with ²µ > 0 lowers the implied value of
ξ, and if both departures from the baseline model are considered simulta-
neously, the implied value of ξ is still lower. Hence allowance for either of
these empirically plausible additional sources of real rigidities further reduces


                                               37
the implied slope of the Phillips curve, without any change in the assumed
frequency of price changes. The results obtained here are quite similar to
those obtained in Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for the case of a model in which
each firm’s capital stock is given exogenously (see Table 3.1 there).


4.4    Consequences for Estimates of the Frequency of
       Price Adjustment
Because alternative assumptions about the specificity of factor markets af-
fect the location of the curve ξ(α), as shown in Figure 2, it follows that the
consequences of an estimate of ξ for the frequency of price adjustment are
correspondingly different in the different cases. (One should note estimation
of the aggregate-supply relation (1.1) only allows an estimate of the elasticity
ξ, and provides no direct evidence regarding the frequency of price adjust-
ment, nor any way of testing which of the alternative possible assumptions
about the specificity of factor markets is the correct one.) An assumption of
specific factor markets — either that labor markets are industry-specific, or
that capital is firm-specific — increases the degree of real rigidities, relative
to an assumption of an economy-wide market for the services of that factor,
and so lowers the value of ξ corresponding to any given value of α. Conversely,
it follows that the value of α required to explain any given value of ξ — and
hence the value of α implied by any given estimate of ξ — is lower the greater
the degree of specificity of factors. Hence a given degree of sluggishness in
the adjustment of the overall price index to changes in aggregate conditions
can be reconciled with a greater degree of firm-level flexibility of prices in
the case that one assumes more specific factors of production.
    This is illustrated by the calculations reported in Table 2. The numerical
parameter values given in Table 1 are again assumed, and in addition (in
the case of the model with firm-specific capital) it is assumed that ²ψ = 3,
as in the baseline case considered in Woodford (2004). The first panel of
the table then indicates the value of α that would be implied by a given
estimate of the elasticity ξ, under each of three different possible assumptions
about factor markets: homogeneous factor markets; industry-specific labor
markets but a rental market for capital services; and industry-specific labor


                                          38
Table 2: Interpretation of the estimated value of ξ under alternative assump-
tions about factor markets.


                                    Implied values of α
                 ξ        homo. fact.    rental mkt     firm-spec.
               0.05          .804           .757           .630
               0.04          .823           .779           .663
               0.03          .845           .806           .703
               0.02          .872           .840           .754



                                    Implied values of T
                 ξ        homo. fact.    rental mkt     firm-spec.
               0.05          4.57           3.59           2.16
               0.04          5.13           4.01           2.43
               0.03          5.94           4.65           2.84
               0.02          7.32           5.71           3.55



markets together with endogenous, firm-specific capital. The range of values
considered for ξ in the table corresponds to the range of values found in
empirical estimates of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve (1.1) for the US.33
  33
    For example, Gali and Gertler (1999) report an estimate of 0.023 when they estimate
the “reduced form” equation (1.1) using US data. When they use an alternative GMM
estimation approach that yields estimates of α (under the assumption of homogeneous
factor markets) rather than of ξ, the values of ξ implied by the reported estimates (that
vary depending on the sample and moment conditions used) are mostly in the range of 0.02
to 0.04. (It should noted that when Gali and Gertler report estimates of α, they are really
only estimating a nonlinear transformation of the elasticity ξ that would correspond to α
under the assumption of homogeneous factor markets, and do not attempt any test of the
homogeneous-factor assumption.) Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2001) similarly report
estimates of α using US data that imply values of ξ equal to 0.03 or 0.04. Sbordone (2002)
obtains an estimate of 0.055 for US data using a different estimation technique, while
Sbordone (2004) obtains an estimate of 0.025 for US data using yet another approach.




                                               39
The second panel of the table shows the implied values of
                                               −1
                                       T ≡          ,
                                              log α

the average time (in quarters) that a price remains fixed,34 for each of the
same possible estimates of ξ under each of the same three possible assump-
tions about factor markets.
    One observes that the assumption made regarding factor markets has a
substantial effect on the implied frequency of price adjustment, given any
estimate of the slope of the Phillips curve ξ. If, for example, one estimates
a slope ξ = 0.02 — and some estimates using US data are this low, though
most reported estimates have been at least somewhat larger — then under
the assumption of homogeneous factor markets (and the other parametric
assumptions in Table 1), one would conclude that the estimate implied an
average time between price changes of over 7 quarters. This is implausibly
long, given microeconomic evidence on the frequency of price changes, so that
one might well conclude that the model cannot account for the observed facts
about price adjustment, no matter how well it might fit the joint evolution
of overall inflation and average marginal cost. Assuming instead that labor
markets are industry-specific, however, would reduce the implied average
time between price changes to less than 6 quarters, even if one continues to
assume a rental market for capital services. And allowing for firm-specific
capital would further reduce the implied average time between price changes,
to only three and a half quarters. This is no longer so implausible, given the
evidence in surveys such as that of Blinder et al. (1998) that many prices in
the US are changed only once a year or less.
  34
     In the literature, estimates of α are often converted into estimates of the average time
between price changes using the alternative formula T = 1/(1 − α). This latter formula
is correct if one takes the discrete-time model (in which all prices change, if they change
at all, at a single time each quarter) literally; but it has the unappealing feature that no
matter how flexible prices may be (and how steep the estimated Phillips curve may be
as a result), T must always equal at least 3 months. The formula here assumes instead
that there is a constant hazard rate ρ in continuous time for price changes, and that an
estimate of α is an estimate of e−ρ . This means that if one estimates a steep enough
Phillips curve, and hence infers a value of α close enough to 1, the inferred value of T may
be arbitrarily small.


                                                40
    My finding that an assumption that capital is firm-specific reduces the
average time between price changes implied by estimates of the aggregate-
supply relation (1.1) confirms the previous results of Sbordone (1998) and
Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2001), obtained under an implicit assump-
tion that each firm’s capital stock is constant, or evolves exogenously. Figure
2 shows that the assumption of a constant (or exogenous) capital stock would
imply even slightly greater real rigidities than exist in the case of an endoge-
nous but firm-specific capital stock; but the numerical error resulting from
that simplifying assumption is not great, at least if investment adjustment
costs are of the size assumed here.35 For example, in the case that ξ = 0.02,
under the assumptions of exogenous capital and industry-specific labor mar-
kets, the value of α would be 0.740 and the value of T would be 3.28, rather
than the values shown in the third column of Table 2. Allowance for a real-
istic degree of endogenous adjustment of each firm’s capital stock does not
dramatically change those conclusions.
    The implied average times between price adjustments shown in Table 2
may still seem a bit too long to square with microeconomic evidence, even
in the case of firm-specific capital, especially if ξ is estimated to take a value
between 0.2 and 0.3. (Blinder et al., 1998, report a median time between
price changes of 3 quarters; but Bils and Klenow, 2004, instead report a
median of less than 2 quarters.) However, a value of ξ of this magnitude
can be reconciled with even greater frequencies of adjustment of individual
prices, if additional empirically plausible sources of real rigidities are taken
into account.
    Table 3 shows the values of α and T implied by alternative estimates of ξ,
under alternative assumptions about the importance of intermediate inputs
and the degree to which the aggregator that defines the composite good
differs from the Dixit-Stiglitz form. All numerical parameters except sm and
²µ take the same values as in Table 2, and in each case it is now assumed
that labor markets are industry-specific and capital is firm-specific. (Thus
  35
    As shown in Woodford (2004), adjustment costs of roughly this size are needed to
explain the observed size of output response to an identified monetary policy shock, in the
context of a simple new-Keynesian model that incorporates the model of investment and
price-setting decisions developed here.



                                               41
Table 3: Interpretation of the estimated value of ξ under alternative as-
sumptions about input/output structure and substitutability of differentiated
goods.


                                  Implied values of α
          ξ      baseline     intermed. inputs      Kimball       both
        0.05       .630             .584              .598        .528
        0.04       .663             .619              .633        .564
        0.03       .703             .662              .674        .609
        0.02       .754             .716              .728        .669



                                  Implied values of T
          ξ      baseline     intermed. inputs      Kimball       both
        0.05       2.16             1.86              1.95        1.56
        0.04       2.43             2.09              2.18        1.75
        0.03       2.84             2.42              2.54        2.02
        0.02       3.55             3.00              3.15        2.48



the “baseline” case in Table 3 corresponds to the “firm-specific” column of
Table 2.) The values assumed for sm and ²µ in the alternative cases are the
same as in Figure 3.
   One observes the average time between price changes implied by any
given estimate of ξ falls in the case that one assumes either of the additional
sources of real rigidities, and falls by even more if one assumes both. Making
corrections of both type that remain within the range of empirically plausible
parameter values, one finds that a Phillips-curve slope of only 0.02 can be
consistent with a average period between price changes that is less than 2.5
quarters. A Phillips-curve slope of 0.04 can instead be consistent with an
average period between price changes that is well below 2 quarters. Since
point estimates of this magnitude for ξ are obtained in a number of studies
(and it is within the 95 percent confidence interval in an even larger number of


                                         42
cases), one cannot say that estimates of ξ are too small to be consistent with
microeconomic evidence regarding the frequency with which prices change.
    I conclude that there is no necessary conflict between the parameter val-
ues that are required to explain the comovement between overall inflation
and aggregate output, as indicated by Phillips curves estimated using ag-
gregate time series, on the one hand, and the parameter values required for
consistency with microeconomic observations, on the other. The appearance
of a “micro/macro conflict” results from simplifying assumptions in familiar
derivations of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve that are not actually neces-
sary in order to obtain a relation between aggregate time series of that form,
and that are not realistic, either. When one adopts more realistic (or at the
very least, no less realistic) assumptions — industry-specific labor markets,
firm-specific capital, intermediate inputs required for production, and a non-
constant elasticity of substitution among differentiated goods for both con-
sumption and investment purposes — the discrepancy between the frequency
of price adjustment that is required to explain the aggregate co-movements
and the one that is indicated by microeconomic data disappears.36
    I have given particular attention to the importance of allowing for firm-
specific capital because, in the case that one allows for endogenous capital
accumulation, the assumption that capital is firm-specific results in a non-
trivial complication in the analysis. It turns out, however, that the same
form of equilibrium relation between inflation dynamics and the evolution of
average real marginal cost can be derived under this assumption. Moreover,
the relation between the slope of the Phillips curve and the frequency of
price adjustment that can be derived under the simpler assumption of an
exogenously given capital stock for each firm turns out to be fairly accurate
as an approximation to the correct relation in the case of an empirically
realistic size of adjustment costs for investment. Hence the conclusions of
  36
     A similar conclusion is reached by Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004) and Altig et al.
(2005) in the context of econometric models that allow for endogenous, firm-specific cap-
ital, following the analysis presented above. While these authors place particular stress
on the role of firm-specific capital in reconciling the microeconomic and macroeconomic
evidence, the assumption of an aggregator of the Kimball form that departs substantially
from the Dixit-Stiglitz case is also important for the quantitative results of Eichenbaum
and Fisher.


                                              43
the earlier literature (beginning with Sbordone, 1998) that drew inferences
about the frequency of price adjustment from estimated Phillips curves under
the implicit assumption of an exogenous capital stock are found to have been
essentially correct, even if a more precise inference can be made using the
analysis given here.




                                       44
References
 [1] Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper
     Linde, “Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cy-
     cle,” NBER working paper no. 11034, January 2005.

 [2] Ball, Laurence and David Romer, “Real Rigidities and the Non-
     neutrality of Money,” Review of Economic Studies 57: 183-203 (1990).

 [3] Bils, Mark, and Pete Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of
     Sticky Prices,” Journal of Political Economy 112: 947-985 (2004).

 [4] Blinder, Alan S., Elie R.D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B.
     Rudd, Asking About Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price
     Stickiness, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1998.

 [5] Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Frame-
     work,” Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 383-398 (1983).

 [6] Coenen, Guenter, and Andrew T. Levin, “Identifying the Influences of
     Nominal and Real Rigidities in Aggregate Price-Setting Behavior,” Eu-
     ropean Central Bank working paper no. 418, November 2004.

 [7] Eichenbaum, Martin, and Jonas Fisher, “Evaluating the Calvo Model
     of Sticky Prices,” NBER working paper no. 10617, June 2004.

 [8] Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural
     Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44: 195-222
     (1999).

 [9] Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido, “European Infla-
     tion Dynamics,” European Economic Review 45: 1237-1270 (2001).

[10] Kimball, Miles, “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist
     Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27: 1241-1277 (1995).

[11] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, “Dynamic General Equilib-
     rium Models with Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets,” in T.F.


                                       45
    Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton, NJ: Prince-
    ton University Press, 1995.

[12] Sbordone, Argia M., “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price
     Stickiness,” IIES Seminar Paper no. 653, Stockholm University, October
     1998.

[13] —- —-, “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 265-292 (2002).

[14] —- —-, “Do Expected Future Marginal Costs Drive Inflation Dynam-
     ics?” unpublished manuscript, Rutgers University, February 2004.

[15] Sveen, Tommy, and Lutz Weinke, “Pitfalls in the Modeling of Forward-
     Looking Price Setting and Investment Decisions,” working paper, Uni-
     versitat Pompeu Fabra, February 2004.

[16] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of
     Monetary Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

[17] —- —-, “Inflation and Output Dynamics with Firm-Specific Invest-
     ment,” unpublished manuscript, Princeton University, May 2004.

[18] Yun, Tack, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and
     Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37: 345-370 (1996).




                                       46
