NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY IS LONG-HORIZON LESS RISKY?
A DURATION-BASED EXPLANATION OF THE VALUE PREMIUM
Martin Lettau
Jessica Wachter
Working Paper 11144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11144
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005

We thank Andy Abel, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Leonid Kogan, Sydney Ludvigson, Anthony Lynch,
Stijn Van Niewerburgh, and seminar participants at the 2004 NBER Summer Institute, Duke University, New
York University, the University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Martin Lettau and Jessica Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium
Martin Lettau and Jessica Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 11144
February 2005
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a dynamic risk-based model that captures the high expected returns on value
stocks relative to growth stocks, and the failure of the capital asset pricing model to explain these
expected returns. To model the difference between value and growth stocks, we introduce a crosssection of long-lived firms distinguished by the timing of their cash flows. Firms with cash flows
weighted more to the future have high price ratios, while firms with cash flows weighted more to
the present have low price ratios. We model how investors perceive the risks of these cash flows by
specifying a stochastic discount factor for the economy. The stochastic discount factor implies that
shocks to aggregate dividends are priced, but that shocks to the time-varying price of risk are not.
As long-horizon equity, growth stocks covary more with this time-varying price of risk than value
stocks, which covary more with shocks to cash flows. When the model is calibrated to explain
aggregate stock market behavior, we find that it can also account for the observed value premium,
the high Sharpe ratios on value stocks relative to growth stocks, and the outperformance of value
(and underperformance of growth) relative to the CAPM.
Martin Lettau
Department of Finance, Suite 9-190
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu

Jessica Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

This paper proposes a dynamic risk-based model that captures the high expected returns
on value stocks relative to growth stocks, and the failure of the capital asset pricing model
to explain these expected returns. The value premium, first noted by Graham and Dodd
(1934), is the finding that assets with high ratios of price to fundamentals (growth stocks)
have low expected returns relative to assets with low ratios of price to fundamentals (value
stocks). This finding by itself is not necessarily surprising, as it is possible that the premium
on value stocks represents a compensation for bearing systematic risk. However, Fama and
French (1992) show that the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and
Lintner (1965) cannot account for the value premium. The CAPM predicts that expected
returns should rise with the beta on the market portfolio; however, value stocks have higher
expected returns yet do not appear to have higher betas than growth stocks.
To model the difference between value and growth stocks, we introduce a cross-section
of long-lived firms distinguished by the timing of their cash flows. Firms with cash flows
weighted more to the future have high price ratios, while firms with cash flows weighted
more to the present have low price ratios. Drawing an analogy to bonds, we can say that
growth firms are high-duration assets while value firms are low-duration assets.
We model how investors perceive the risks of these cash flows by specifying a stochastic
discount factor for the economy, or equivalently, an intertemporal marginal rate of substitution for the representative agent. Our model for the stochastic discount factor shares some
of the features of the external habit formation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). As
in the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the riskfree rate is constant. Moreover, we
allow the price of risk to vary, implying that at certain times, investors require a greater return per unit of risk to hold equities than at others. A key difference is the relation between
the price of risk and the aggregate dividend. In the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
they are tightly linked: a shock to the aggregate dividend moves agents closer to their habit
level and raises the return they require for bearing risk.1 In our model the return investors
require for bearing risk moves independently of the aggregate dividend. We show that the
1

In the benchmark case of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), aggregate dividends and aggregate consump-

tion are the same. Campbell and Cochrane also examine a case where dividends are correlated with consumption. Because of this correlation, there is still a link between dividends and the price of risk.

1

correlation between the aggregate dividend and the price of risk determines, in large part,
the ability of the model to fit the cross-section.
We require our model to explain not only the cross-section of assets based on price ratios,
but also aggregate stock market behavior. Firms are distinguished by their cash flows which
are defined in terms of shares of the aggregate dividend. We specify share processes that are
stationary, and explore the robustness of our results to different models of the share process.
This modeling strategy, also employed by Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) and Santos
and Veronesi (2004), ensures that the economy is stationary, and that all future dividends are
marketed. We assume that log dividend growth is normally distributed with a time-varying
mean. We calibrate the dividend process to match conditional and unconditional moments
of the aggregate dividend process in the data. Stochastic discount factor parameters are
chosen to fit the time series of aggregate stock market returns. Expected excess returns on
equity are time-varying in the model, implying excess volatility and return predictability.
We find that the model can match unconditional moments of the aggregate stock market
and produce predictability of dividends and returns close to that found in the data.
To test whether our model can capture the value premium, we sort firms into portfolios in
simulated data. We find that risk premia, risk-adjusted returns, and Sharpe ratios increase
as portfolios move from growth to value. The value premium (the return on a strategy
that is long the extreme value portfolio and short the extreme growth portfolio) is between
3.4% and 5.2% (depending on the share process) compared with a value premium of 4.9%
in the data when portfolios are formed on the basis of book-to-market. The CAPM alpha
on the value-minus-growth strategy is between 4.7% and 6.2%, compared with 5.6% in the
data. These results do not arise because value stocks are more risky according to traditional
measures; standard deviations and market betas increase slightly and then decrease, implying
that the extreme value portfolio has a lower standard deviation and beta than the extreme
growth portfolio. Our model therefore matches the magnitude of the value premium, and
the outperformance of value portfolios relative to the CAPM, that is found in the data.
Our paper builds on previous literature that uses the concept of duration to better understand the cross-section of stock returns. Using the decomposition of returns into cash
flow and discount rate components proposed by Campbell and Mei (1993), Cornell (1999)
shows that growth companies, such as Amgen, whose cash flows are mainly idiosyncratic,
may have high betas because of the duration of these cash flows, and the induced sensitivity
2

of prices to market-wide changes in discount rates. Leibowitz and Kogelman (1993) show
that accounting for the sensitivity of the value of long-run cash flows to discount rates can
reconcile various measures of equity duration. Dechow, Sloan, and Soliman (2002) measure
cash flow duration of value and growth portfolios; they find that empirically, growth stocks
have higher duration than value stocks and that this contributes to their higher betas. Brennan and Xia (2003) show in a theoretical model that the beta on an asset increases in the
maturity of the cash flows. Santos and Veronesi (2004) develop a model that links time
variation in betas to time-variation in expected returns through the channel of duration,
and show that this link is present in industry portfolios. Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003)
decompose the market return into news about cash flows and news about discount rates.
They show that growth stocks have higher betas with respect to discount rate news than
value stocks, consistent with the view that growth stocks are high duration assets. These
papers all show that discount-rate risk is an important component of total volatility, and
that growth stocks seem particularly subject to this discount-rate risk.
This paper also relates to the large and growing body of empirical literature that explores the correlations of returns on value and growth stocks with sources of systematic
risk. This literature looks at either conditional versions of traditional models (Jagannathan
and Wang (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Zhang and Petkova (2002)), or identifies
a new source of risk that covaries more with value stocks than with growth stocks (Lustig
and VanNieuwerburgh (2002), Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2002), Yogo (2003)). Another
strand of literature relates observed returns on value and growth stocks to aggregate market returns or macro-economic factors (Brennan, Wang, and Xia (2003), Campbell, Polk,
and Vuolteenaho (2003), Liew and Vassalou (2000), Parker and Julliard (2005), Vassalou
(2003)). The results in these papers raise the question of what it is, fundamentally, about
the cash flows of value and growth stocks that produces the observed patterns in returns.
Other work examines the dividends on value and growth portfolios directly: Bansal, Dittmar,
and Lundblad (2003) and Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2002) find evidence that the cash
flows of value stocks covary more with aggregate cash flows. The results in these papers
raise the question of why this observed covariation leads to the value premium. Building
on the work of Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) and Zhang
(2005) propose general equilibrium models that produce a cross-section of book-to-market
ratios, where growth stocks have lower expected returns than value stocks. However, these
3

models do not account for the classic finding of Fama and French (1992) that value stocks
outperform and growth stocks underperform relative to the CAPM.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 organizes and updates the evidence that
portfolios formed on the basis of prices scaled by fundamentals produce spreads in expected
returns. We show that when value is defined by book-to-market, earnings-to-price, or cashflow-to-price, the expected return, Sharpe ratio, and alpha tend to increase as portfolios
move from growth to value. The differences in expected returns and alphas between value
and growth portfolios are statistically and economically large.
Section 3 presents our model for aggregate dividends and the stochastic discount factor.
As a first step to solving for prices of the aggregate market and firms, we solve for prices
of claims to the aggregate dividend m-periods in the future (zero-coupon equity). Because
zero-coupon equity has a well-defined maturity, it provides a convenient window through
which to view the role of duration in the model. Moreover, as the model has similarities
to essentially affine term structure models (Dai and Singleton (2003), Duffee (2002)), the
prices and risk premia on zero-coupon equity have interpretable, closed-form expressions.
The aggregate market is the sum of all of the zero-coupon equity claims. We then introduce
a cross-section of long-lived assets, defined by their shares in the aggregate dividend. These
assets are themselves portfolios of zero-coupon equity, and together their cash flows and
market values sum up to the cash flows and market values of the aggregate market.
Section 4 studies the implications of our model for the time series and the cross-section.
We calibrate the model using the time series of the aggregate returns, dividends, and the
price-dividend ratio. After choosing parameters to match aggregate time-series facts, we
examine the implications for zero-coupon equity. We find that the parameters necessary to
fit the time series imply risk premia, Sharpe ratios, and alphas for zero-coupon equity that
are increasing in the maturity. Betas and volatilities are non-monotonic, and thus do not
explain the increase in risk premia. This shows that the model has the potential to explain
the value premium. We then choose parameters of the share process to approximate the
distribution of dividend, earnings, and cash flow growth found in the data, and produce
realistic distributions of price ratios. We examine several functional forms for the shares.
When share processes are calibrated in this way, and the resulting assets are sorted into
portfolios, our model can explain the observed value premium.
Section 5 describes the intuition for our results. We show that the covariation of asset
4

returns with the shocks depends on the duration of the asset. Consistent with the results of
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003), growth stocks have greater betas with respect to discount
rates than value stocks. This is the duration effect: because cash flows on growth stocks are
further in the future, their prices are more sensitive to changes in discount rates. Growth
stocks also have greater betas with respect to changes in expected dividend growth. Value
stocks, on the other hand, have greater betas with respect to shocks to near-term dividends.
The price investors put on bearing the risk in each of these shocks determines the rates
of return on value and growth stocks. While shocks to near-term dividends are viewed as
risky by investors, shocks to expected future dividends are hedges under our calibration.
Moreover, though discount rates vary over time, shocks to discount rates are independent of
shocks to dividends and are therefore not priced directly. Even though long-horizon equity is
riskier according to standard deviation and market beta, it is not seen as risky by investors
because it loads on risks investors do not mind bearing.

2

Evidence on the value premium

Much previous literature has shown that portfolios of stocks with high ratios of prices to
fundamentals have low future returns compared to stocks with low ratios of prices to fundamentals.2 In this section, we update and organize this evidence by running statistical tests
on portfolios formed on ratios of market to book value, price to earnings, price to dividends,
and price to cash flow. We show that in all cases, the sorting produces differences in expected returns that cannot be attributed to market beta. Moreover, the alpha relative to
the CAPM tends to increase in the measure of value. In our model, firms are distinguished
on the basis of their cash flows, thus earnings, dividends, and cash flows are equivalent. For
this reason, it is especially of interest to investigate whether the value effect is apparent in
portfolios formed according to different measures of value.
Table 1 shows summary statistics for portfolios of firms sorted into deciles on the basis
of the three characteristics described above, as well as on the basis of book-to-market. Data,
available from the website of Ken French, are monthly, from 1952 to 2002. Excess returns
2

See Graham and Dodd (1934), Basu (1977, 1983) , Ball (1978), Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985),

Jaffe, Keim, and Westerfield (1989), and Fama and French (1992). Cochrane (1999) surveys recent literature
on the value effect.

5

are computed by subtracting monthly returns on the one-month Treasury Bill from the
portfolio return. The first panel reports the mean excess return, the second the standard
error on the mean, the third the standard deviation of the return, and the fourth the Sharpe
ratio. Means and standard deviations are in annual percentage terms (multiplied by 1200
√
in the case of means and 12 × 100 in the case of standard deviations). Each panel reports
results for the earnings-to-price ratio, the cash-flow-to-price ratio, the dividend yield, and

the book-to-market ratio.
Panel 1 shows that for all measures except the dividend-yield, the mean excess return
increases as one moves from the bottom scaled-price decile (growth stocks) to the top scaledprice decile (value stocks). The increase is usually, but not always, monotonic. As shown in
Panel 2, the average return on the portfolio that is long the extreme value portfolio and short
the extreme growth portfolio is highly statistically significant, again except when portfolios
are formed on the basis of the dividend yield.
Panel 3 shows that the standard deviation of the excess return tends to decrease as one
moves from the bottom decile to the top. This holds for all four scaled-price measures.
Finally, Panel 4 shows that the Sharpe ratio increases as one moves from the bottom decile
to the top across all four scaled-price measures. For example, when portfolios are formed
on the basis of the earnings-to-price ratio, the bottom decile (growth) has a Sharpe ratio
of 0.24. The Sharpe ratio increases steadily as the earnings-to-price ratio increases; the top
decile has a Sharpe ratio of 0.72. Value stocks not only deliver high returns; they deliver
high returns per unit of standard deviation.
The results in Table 1 suggest that portfolios formed on the basis of earnings-to-price,
cash-flow-to-price, dividend yield, and book-to-market, may be closely related. This is confirmed in Table 2, which shows the correlation of the bottom and top deciles. For the bottom
decile (growth), the correlations are 0.93 or above; for the top decile (value), the correlations
are 0.74 or above. In both cases, deciles formed by sorting on the dividend-yield are less
highly correlated with the deciles formed by sorting on the other three variables than the
deciles formed by sorting on the other three variables are with each other. This is consistent
with the results in Table 1, which shows that results based on sorting on the dividend-yield
were somewhat different than the other variables.
Following the same format as Table 1, Table 3 shows alphas, standard errors on alphas,
betas, standard errors on betas, and R2 statistics when portfolios are formed on the basis of
6

each measure of value. The alpha is the intercept from an OLS regression of excess returns
on the portfolio on excess returns on the value-weighted NYSE-AMEX-NASDAQ index,
multiplied by 1200. Beta is the slope from this regression. The alpha for the portfolio that
is long the extreme value portfolio and short the extreme growth portfolio is statistically
significant for all four sorting variables. Panel 1 of this table confirms the classic result
that value stocks have high alphas relative to the CAPM. The story is consistent across all
sorting variables, including the dividend-yield: alphas are negative for growth stocks, rise as
one moves from growth to value, and are positive for value stocks. As Panel 3 shows, betas
tend to decline as one moves from growth to value, except for the extreme value portfolio.
Thus value stocks have positive alphas relative to the CAPM, and relatively low betas.
This section shows that, in the data, value stocks have higher expected excess returns
and higher Sharpe ratios than growth stocks. Value stocks have large positive alphas relative
to the CAPM, while growth stocks have negative alphas. Moreover, value stocks do not have
higher standard deviations or higher betas than growth stocks. Thus any story that explains
the value premium needs to take into account the fact that value stocks do not appear to be
riskier than growth stocks according to traditional measures of risk. These empirical results
not only hold when value is defined by the book-to-market ratio, they hold when value is
defined according to the earnings-to-price or cash-flow-to-price ratios.

3

The model

This section presents our model. The first subsection discusses the assumptions on aggregate
cash flows and on the stochastic discount factor. The second subsection solves for prices on
equity that pays the aggregate dividend in a fixed number of years from now; we refer to these
claims as “zero-coupon equity” and they form the building blocks of our more complex assets.
Interpretable, closed-form expressions are available for prices and conditional risk premia for
zero-coupon equity. The third subsection describes how zero-coupon equity aggregates up to
the market. The fourth subsection discusses the model for long-lived assets in terms of their
shares in the aggregate dividend. These assets, like the aggregate market, are portfolios of
zero-coupon equity and their prices can be determined accordingly. Thus the intuition for
risk premia and price variation for zero-coupon equity can be transferred to these long-lived
assets.
7

3.1

Dividend growth and the stochastic discount factor

The model has three shocks: a shock to dividend growth, a shock to expected dividend
growth, and a shock to the preference variable. To model these shocks in a parsimonious
fashion, we let ²t+1 denote a 3 × 1 vector of independent normal shocks that have zero mean,
unit standard deviation, and that are independent of any variables observed at time t. Let

Dt denote the aggregate dividend in the economy at time t, and dt = ln Dt . The aggregate
dividend is assumed to follow the process
∆dt+1 = g + zt + σd ²t+1 ,

(1)

where zt follows the AR(1) process
zt+1 = φz zt + σz ²t+1 ,

(2)

with 0 ≤ φz < 1. The conditional mean of dividend growth is g + zt . Multiplying the shocks

on dividend growth and zt+1 are 1 × 3 vectors σd and σz . The conditional standard deviation
p
of ∆dt+1 equals ||σd || = σd σd0 . Similarly, the conditional standard deviation of zt equals
√
||σz || = σz σz0 , while the conditional covariance is given by σd σz0 . This model for dividend
growth is also explored by Bansal and Yaron (2003), and by Campbell (1999).

We directly specify the stochastic discount factor for this economy. It is assumed that
the price of risk is driven by a single state variable xt that follows the AR(1) process
xt+1 = (1 − φx )x̄ + φx xt + σx ²t+1 ,

(3)

with 0 ≤ φx < 1. As above, σx is a 1 × 3 vector. This specification for the price of risk
is used in a continuous-time setting by Brennan, Wang, and Xia (2003). For simplicity, we

assume that the real riskfree rate, denoted r f = ln Rf , is constant. Lastly, we need to make
an assumption about which risks in the economy are priced. We could follow the affine term
structure literature (see, e.g., Duffie and Kan (1996)) and allow all three shocks to be priced.
For simplicity, and to reduce the number of degrees of freedom, we assume that only dividend
risk is priced. This allows us to compare our models to the external habit formation models
of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), where the one
shock to the stochastic discount factor comes from aggregate consumption. The assumption
that only dividend risk is priced implies that shocks to zt and shocks to xt will only be priced
insofar as they correlate with ∆dt+1 .
8

This specification of xt , rf , and the fact that only dividend risk is priced completely pins
down the stochastic discount factor. We set
½
¾
1 2
f
Mt+1 = exp −r − xt − xt ²d,t+1
2

(4)

where
²d,t+1 =

σd
²t+1 .
||σd ||

The conditional log-normality of Mt+1 implies that

1
1
ln Et [Mt+1 ] = −rf − x2t + x2t σd σd0 ||σd ||−2
2
2
f
= −r .
Therefore, it follows from no-arbitrage that r f is indeed the riskfree rate. The maximum
Sharpe ratio will be achieved by the asset that is most negatively correlated with M t+1 . Following the same argument as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), we note that the maximum
Sharpe ratio is given by
σt (Mt+1 ) p x2
= e t − 1 ≈ |xt |.
Et [Mt+1 ]
The question naturally arises of how to interpret the variable xt . In the models of Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), the price of risk is a decreasing function of the surplus consumption ratio. Conditionally, the price of risk is perfectly
negatively correlated with consumption growth (and hence aggregate dividend growth). The
corresponding assumption here would be to set σx /||σx || = −σd /||σd ||. However, we depart

from these papers by assuming that shocks to xt+1 are uncorrelated with shocks to ∆dt+1 and
shocks to zt+1 . In our model, shocks to xt+1 can be interpreted as shocks to preferences or
changes in sentiment. These shocks are uncorrelated with changes in fundamentals. Below,
we explain the implications for security returns of this departure from habit formation.

3.2

Prices of zero-coupon equity

The building-blocks of the long-lived assets in our economy are “zero-coupon” equity. 3 Let
Pnt be the price of an asset that pays the aggregate dividend n periods from now. In this
3

The notion of breaking the aggregate dividend into its zero-coupon claims, and using affine term structure

techniques to calculate the value of these claims is also applied in Ang and Liu (2003), Bakshi and Chen
(1996), Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2004), Johnson (2002), Wachter (2003), and Wilson (2003).

9

subsection, we solve for the price of zero-coupon equity in closed form. Let Rn,t+1 denote
the one-period return on zero-coupon equity maturing in n periods. That is,
Rn,t+1 =

Pn−1,t+1
.
Pnt

(5)

The returns Rn,t+1 form a term structure of equities, analogous to the term structure of
interest rates. No-arbitrage implies the following Euler equation:
Et [Mt+1 Rn,t+1 ] = 1,

(6)

which implies that Pnt and Pn−1,t satisfy the recursive relation
Pnt = Et [Mt+1 Pn−1,t+1 ] ,

(7)

P0t = Dt ,

(8)

with boundary condition

because equity maturing today must be worth the aggregate dividend. We conjecture that
a solution to (7) and (8) satisfies
Pnt
= F (xt , zt , n) = exp {A(n) + Bx (n)xt + Bz (n)zt } .
Dt

(9)

By the boundary condition, it must be that A(0) = Bx (0) = Bz (0) = 0. Substituting (9)
into (7) produces
·

¸
Dt+1
F (xt+1 , zt+1 , n − 1) = F (xt , zt , n).
Et Mt+1
Dt

(10)

Matching coefficients on zt , xt and the constant implies that
Bz (n) =

1 − φnz
,
1 − φz

(11)

while Bx (n) and A(n) satisfy
µ

σ0
Bx (n) = Bx (n − 1) φx − σx d
||σd ||

¶

− (σd + Bz (n − 1)σz )

σd0
||σd ||

1
0
,
A(n) = A(n − 1) − r f + g + Bx (n − 1)(1 − φx )x̄ + Vn−1 Vn−1
2

where
Vn−1 = σd + Bz (n − 1)σz + Bx (n − 1)σx ,
10

(12)
(13)

and Bx (0) = 0, A(0) = 0. This confirms the conjecture (9).4
Note that Bz > 0 for all n. Intuitively, the higher is zt , the higher is expected dividend
growth, hence the higher is the price of equity that pays the aggregate dividend in the future.
Because expected dividend growth is persistent, and because Dt+n cumulates shocks between
t and n, the greater is n, the greater the effect of changes in zt on the price. Thus Bz is
increasing in n, and converges to 1/(1 − φz ) as n approaches infinity.

The behavior of Bx is more complicated. In our benchmark case of σx σd0 = 0, Bx (n) < 0

for all n. An increase in xt leads to an increase in risk premia and a decrease in prices.5 We
further explore the intuition behind Bx (n) in Section 4. Finally, An is a constant term that
determines the level of price-dividend ratios. The level depends on the average growth rate
of dividends less the riskfree rate, as well as on the average level of the price of risk (x̄). The
0
remaining term, 12 Vn−1 Vn−1
is a Jensen’s inequality adjustment, and arises because we are

taking the expectation of a log-normal variable.
In order to understand risk premia on the more complicated assets, it is helpful to understand risk premia on zero-coupon equity. Define rn,t+1 = ln Rn,t+1 . To gain an understanding
of the model, we compute ln Et [Rn,t+1 /Rf ] = Et [rn,t+1 − rf ] + 21 σt (rn,t+1 )σt (rn,t+1 )0 , following
Campbell (1999).6 It follows from (9) that rn,t+1 can be written as
rn,t+1 = Et [rn,t+1 ] + σt (rn,t+1 )²t+1 ,

(14)

σt (rn,t+1 ) = Vn−1 = σd + Bx (n − 1)σx + Bz (n − 1)σz .

(15)

where

Therefore returns are conditionally log-normally distributed, and we can re-write the conditional Euler equation (6) as
·
½
¾¸
1 2
f
Et exp −r − xt − xt ²d,t+1 + Et [rn,t+1 ] + σt (rn,t+1 )²t+1
= 1.
2
4

The fact that price-dividend ratios are exponential affine in the state variables invites a comparison

to the affine term structure literature, where bond prices are exponential affine in the state variables. In
fact, this model is related to the essentially affine class of continuous-time term structure models explored
by Dai and Singleton (2003) and Duffee (2002). Our model is essentially affine rather than affine because
the stochastic discount factor is quadratic, as a result of the homoscedastic price-of-risk variable. Ang and
Piazzesi (2003) examine a discrete-time essentially affine term structure model.
5
In an alternative setting, it might be that (σd + Bz (n − 1)σz )σd < 0. In this case, an increase in xt

would decrease risk premia and increase prices.
6
When we match the simulated model to the data, we will compute E[Rt+1 − Rf ].

11

Taking logs of both sides and solving for the expectation produces the relation
1
σ0
Et [rn,t+1 − rf ] + σt (rn,t+1 )σt (rn,t+1 )0 = σt (rn,t+1 ) d xt
2
||σd ||
= (σd + Bx (n − 1)σx + Bz (n − 1)σz )

σd0
xt . (16)
||σd ||

Risk premia on zero-coupon equity depend on the loadings on each of the sources of risk,
multiplied by the “price” of each source of risk. In our base case, the term σx σd0 disappears,
so the loading on shocks to xt , Bx (n), is not relevant for risk premia on zero-coupon equity.
In other cases we will examine, this term becomes important. Also determining risk premia
is the loading on zt , Bz (n), and the price of zt -risk, given by ||σd ||−1 σz σd0 xt . In what follows,

similar reasoning can be used to understand the price of risk of the aggregate market and of
firms, all of which are portfolios of these underlying assets.

3.3

Aggregate market

The aggregate market is the claim to all future dividends. Accordingly, its price-dividend
ratio is the sum of the ratios of price to aggregate dividends of the zero-coupon equity
described in the section above. Thus
∞

∞

Ptm X Pnt X
exp {A(n) + Bx (n)xt + Bz (n)zt } .
=
=
Dt
D
t
n=1
n=1

(17)

Appendix B gives necessary and sufficient conditions on the parameters such that (17) converges for all xt and zt . The return on the aggregate market equals:
m
Pt+1
+ Dt+1
Ptm
m
(Pt+1
/Dt+1 ) + 1 Dt+1
=
.
Ptm /Dt
Dt

m
=
Rt+1

3.4

(18)

Firms

Zero-coupon equity illustrates how duration matters for risk premia in a particularly stark
way. However, there is no obvious analogue of zero-coupon equity in the data. Instead, in the
data there are long-lived securities that pay a sequence of cash flows over time. We construct
a cross-section of securities that sum up to the aggregate market portfolio. Moreover, we
ensure that no one security comes to dominate the market portfolio over time; that is, the
12

cross-sectional distribution of dividends, returns, and ratios of prices to aggregate dividends
should be stationary. In order to accomplish this, we follow Lynch (2003) and Menzly,
Santos, and Veronesi (2004) and specify the share each security has in the aggregate dividend
process Dt+1 . The continuous-time framework of Menzly, et al. allows them to specify the
share process as stochastic, yet still keep shares between 0 and 1. This is more difficult in
discrete time, and for this reason we adopt the simplifying assumption that the share process
is deterministic.
Suppose there are N long-lived “firms” in the economy. Define an N -vector of shares,
P
si , such that si ≥ 0 and N
i=1 si = 1. At time t, we define firm i as the asset that pays

dividend si Dt today, a dividend of si+1 Dt+1 next period, etc. We specify si as a function of
i for 1 ≤ i ≤ N , and set

si = s(i−1

mod N )+1

for i > N . By this definition, firm i becomes firm i + 1 next period. For example, at time t,
firm 1 pays dividend s1 Dt and has ex-dividend price:
N −4
F
P1,t

terms

z }| {
+ · · · + sN PN −1,t + s1 PN,t + s2 PN +1,t + · · · .

= s2 P1,t + s3 P2,t

At time t + 1, this firm is now firm 2, pays dividend s2 Dt+1 , and has ex-dividend price:
N −5
F
P2,t+1

= s3 P1,t+1 + s4 P2,t+1

terms

z }| {
+ · · · + sN PN −2,t+1 + s1 PN −1,t+1 + s2 PN,t+1 + s3 PN +1,t+1 + · · · .

Equation (6) implies that these prices are consistent with no-arbitrage:
¢
¡
F
] = s2 P1,t + Et [Mt+1 (s3 P1,t+1 + · · · + sN PN −2,t+1 + s1 PN −1,t+1 + · · · )]
Et [Mt+1 s2 Dt+1 + P2,t+1
= s2 P1,t + s3 P2,t + · · · + sN PN −1,t + s1 PN,t + s2 PN +1,t + · · ·

F
= P1,t
.

More generally, firm k < N pays dividend sk Dt at time t and has ex-dividends price
N −(k+2)
F
Pk,t

= sk+1 P1,t

terms

z }| {
+ ··· +

sN PN −k,t + s1 PN −k+1,t + s2 PN −k+2,t + · · · ,

while firm N pays dividend sN Dt and has price
N −3
F
PN,t

= s1 P1,t + s2 P2,t

terms

z }| {
+ · · · + sN PN,t + s1 PN +1,t + s2 PN +2,t + · · · ,
13

and so forth. Note that firm N becomes firm 1 next period. The same argument as above
shows that these prices are consistent with no-arbitrage. This structure ensures that the
economy is stationary, that in each period the sum of the dividends across all firms equals
the aggregate dividend, and that all future dividends are marketed as of date t. Beyond
these requirements, the key element of this structure is that it generates dispersion in when
firms pay dividends. Other models of firms which generate such dispersion, such that the
distribution of firms is stationary and sums to the market should yield results similar to
those we describe below.
One implication of this modeling strategy is that ratios of prices to fundamentals forecast
future growth opportunities in the cross-section. This is consistent with findings in the
empirical literature. Bernstein and Tew (1991) show that firms with low dividend yields
have higher forecasted growth rates, as measured by the mean five-year expected growth
rate on IBES. Fama and French (1995) show that low book-to-market ratios correlate with
higher future growth in earnings and profitability. Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003)
show that low book-to-market firms have higher future return on equity than low book-tomarket firms, and that this predictive power extends fifteen years into the future.
F
Given the firm price Pk,t
, the ratio of price to the one-period dividend equals
F
F
Pk,t
Pk,t
.
=
F
s k Dt
Dk,t

(19)

F
Because Pk,t
/Dt is a function of the state variables xt and zt , the price-dividend ratio for the

firm is also a function of the state variables. Returns on the firm are given by
F
Rk,t+1

F
F
Pk+1,t+1
+ Dk+1,t+1
=
F
Pk,t
F
F
/Dk+1,t+1
) + 1 Dt+1 sk+1
(Pk+1,t+1
=
.
F
F
Dt s k
Pk,t
/Dk,t

(20)

Note that all firms in this economy are ex-ante identical; they are simply “out of phase” with
each other. Because of this, the market values of firms are very similar. A more complex
model would be required to account for differences in firm size.

14

4

Implications for Equity Returns

To study implications for the aggregate market and the cross-section, we simulate 50,000
quarters from the model. Given simulated data on shocks ²t+1 and state variables xt+1 and
zt+1 , we compute ratios of prices to aggregate dividends for zero-coupon equity from (9),
the price-dividend ratio for the aggregate market from (17), and the price-dividend ratio for
firms from (19). Returns can then be computed using (5) for zero-coupon equity, (18) for
the market, and (20) for firms.
As discussed below, we calibrate the model to the annual data set of Campbell (1999)
that begins in 1890. We update Campbell’s data (which ends in 1995) until the end of 2002.
So that our simulated values are comparable to the annual values in the data, we aggregate
up to an annual frequency. Annual flow variables (returns, dividend growth) are constructed
by compounding their quarterly counterparts. Price-dividend ratios for the market and for
firms are constructed analogously to annual price-dividend ratios in the Campbell data set.
We divide the price by the current dividend on the asset, plus the previous three quarters of
dividends on the asset.
Section 4.1 describes the calibration of our model to the aggregate time series. Section
4.2 shows the implications for the behavior of the aggregate market and dividend growth
and discusses the fit to the data. Section 4.3 discusses implications for prices and returns
on zero-coupon equity. While zero-coupon equity have no analogue in the data, they are
a useful construct in that they allow us to illustrate the properties of the model in a stark
way. Section 4.4 discusses the calibration of the share processes which determine the prices
of long-lived assets (“firms”), and describes implications of the model for portfolios formed
on the basis of scaled-price ratios.

4.1

Calibration

Following Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), we calibrate the model to provide a reasonable fit to aggregate data. We then ask whether the model can match moments of the
cross-section. In order to accurately capture the characteristics of our persistent processes,
we use the century-long annual data set of Campbell (1999), which we update through 2002.
The riskfree rate is the return on 6-month commercial paper purchased in January and rolled
over in July. Stock returns, prices, and dividends are for the S&P 500 index. More details
15

on data construction are contained in the Data Appendix of Campbell (1999). All variables
are adjusted for inflation.
We set rf equal to 1.93%, the mean of the riskfree rate in our sample. The average
dividend growth in the sample is 2.28%, therefore this is our value for g. It is less straightforward to calibrate the process zt , which determines expected dividend growth. This process,
strictly speaking, is unobservable to the econometrician. However, Lettau and Ludvigson
(2002) show that if consumption growth follows a random walk and if the consumptiondividend ratio is stationary, the consumption-dividend ratio captures all the predictability
in dividend growth. Therefore the consumption-dividend ratio can be identified with z t up
to an additive and multiplicative constant.
For the purposes of calibration, we adopt the set-up of Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) and
calibrate the autocorrelation of zt and the correlation between shocks to expected dividend
growth and shocks to zt using the consumption-dividend ratio.7 In our annual sample,
the consumption-dividend ratio has a persistence of 0.91 and a conditional correlation with
dividend growth of -0.83. This still leaves the conditional standard deviations ||σ d || and ||σz ||.
We set ||σd || to match the unconditional standard deviation of annual dividend growth in the

data.8 Our empirical results imply a standard deviation of zt that is small relative to the
standard deviation of dividend growth. Despite the fact that dividend growth is predictable
at long horizons by the consumption-dividend ratio, the consumption-dividend ratio has very
little predictive power for dividend growth at short horizons (with an R 2 of 3%). Moreover,
the autocorrelation of dividend growth is relatively low (-.09%). We show that ||σ z || = .0016

(.0032 per annum) produces similar results in simulated data.

Remaining parameters are x̄, φx , and ||σx ||. Because the variance of expected dividend

growth is small, the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio is primarily determined by
1

the autocorrelation of x. We therefore set φx = 0.87 4 = 0.966, as 0.87 is the autocorrelation
of the price-dividend ratio in annual data. We choose ||σx || to equal 0.12, or 0.24 per annum,
to match the volatility of the log price dividend ratio. We choose x̄ so that the maximal
7

An equivalent way of writing down our model would be to assume a process, called consumption, that

follows a random walk, and model the consumption-dividend ratio as an AR(1) process. Note however that
consumption plays no special role in our model.
8
The model is simulated at a quarterly frequency and aggregated up to an annual frequency. Because
dividend growth is slightly mean reverting, and because the variance of z t is small, this results in an unconditional annual standard deviation of dividend growth very close to that in the data.

16

Sharpe ratio, when xt is at its long-run mean, is 0.70. This produces Sharpe ratios for
the cross-section that are close to those in the data. Setting the maximum Sharpe ratio
√ 2
ex̄ − 1 equal to 0.70 translates into x̄ = 0.625. As discussed in the subsequent section,

this produces an average Sharpe ratio for the market that is 0.41, somewhat higher than the
data equivalent of 0.33. However, expected stock returns are measured with noise, and 0.41
is still below the Sharpe ratio in postwar data.

To link the conditional standard deviation of ∆dt+1 , zt+1 , and, xt+1 , and the conditional
correlation of ∆dt+1 and zt+1 with the vectors σd , σz , σx , we assume, without loss of generality,
that the 3 × 3 matrix



σd





 σz 


σx
is lower triangular. Thus
²1,t+1 = ²d,t+1 ,
so that σd has a nonzero first element equal to ||σd || and zero second and third elements. σz

has a nonzero first and second element and zero third element. The first two elements are
identified by ||σz || and the covariance σd σz0 . We focus on the case where xt+1 is independent
of ∆dt+1 and zt+1 , so the first and second elements of σx equal zero, and the third equals

||σx ||. Table 4 summarizes these parameter choices.

4.2

Implications for the Aggregate Market and Dividend Growth

Table 5 presents statistics from simulated data, and the corresponding statistics computed
from actual data. The volatility of the price-dividend ratio is fit exactly, and the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio is very close (0.87 in the data versus 0.88 in the model).
This is not a surprise because ||σx || and φx were set so that the model fits these parameters.
The model produces a mean of the price-dividend ratio equal to 20.1, compared to 25.6 in

the data. Matching this statistic is a common difficulty for models of this type: for example,
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) find an average price-dividend ratio of 18.2. As they explain,
this statistic is poorly measured due to the persistence of the price-dividend ratio. The model
fits the volatility of equity returns (19.2% in the model versus 19.4% in the data), though
it produces an equity premium that is slightly higher than in the data (7.9% in the model
17

versus 6.3% in the data). As with the mean of the price-dividend ratio, the average equity
premium is measured with noise. In the long-annual data set, the annual auto-correlation
of returns is slightly positive (.03). In our model, the auto-correlation is slightly negative
(-.02). The autocorrelation of dividend growth is small and negative (-.03), just as in the
data (-.09).
Table 6 reports the results of long-horizon regressions of continuously compounded excess
returns on the log price-dividend ratio in the model and in the data. In our sample, as
elsewhere (see Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1992), Fama and French (1989), and
Keim and Stambaugh (1986)), high price-dividend ratios predict low returns. The coefficients
rise with the horizon. The R2 s start small, at 0.05 at an annual horizon, and rise to 0.31
at a horizon of ten years. The t-statistics, using auto-correlation and heteroscedasticityadjusted standard errors, are significant at the 5% level. The simulated data exhibits the
same pattern. The coefficients rise with the horizon. The R 2 s start at 0.06 and rise to 0.28.
We conclude that the model generates a reasonable amount of return predictability. 9
Table 6 reports the results of long-horizon regressions of dividend growth on the pricedividend ratio. As Campbell and Shiller (1988) show, dividend growth is not predictable by
returns, contrary to what might be expected from a dividend-discount model. This result
also holds true in our data set: the coefficients from a regression of dividend growth on
the price-dividend ratio are always insignificant and are accompanied by small R 2 statistics.
In contrast, the consumption-dividend ratio predicts dividend growth. The coefficients are
significant, and the adjusted R2 statistics start at 3% for an annual horizon and rise to 25%
for a horizon of ten years.
Our model replicates both of these findings. Despite the fact that the mean of dividends is
time-varying, dividends are only slightly predictable by the price-dividend ratio. A regression
of simulated dividend growth on the simulated price-dividend ratio produces R 2 s that range
from 2% to 9% at a horizon of 10 years (in the data, the adjusted R 2 s range from 0 to
5%). By contrast, dividends are predictable by zt . Here, the R2 s range from 4% to 24%,
close to the values in the data. We conclude our model captures the pattern of dividend
9

Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) find evidence that excess returns are predictable by expected dividend

growth, as well as by the price-dividend ratio. This effect can be captured in our model by allowing shocks
to xt to be positively correlated with shocks to zt . Introducing this positive correlation has very little effect
on our cross-sectional results, hence for simplicity we focus on the case of zero correlation.

18

predictability found in the data.

4.3

Prices and Returns on Zero-Coupon Equity

Figure 1 plots the solution for A(n), Bz (n) and Bx (n) as a function of n for the parameter
values given above. A(n) is steadily decreasing. This is a necessary feature for convergence
of the solution for all xt and zt , and it makes economic sense: the further the payoff is in
the future, the lower the value of the security when the state variables are at their long-run
means. What generates the decrease is the positive average price of risk x̄ and riskfree rate
rf . Counteracting this decrease is average dividend growth g and the Jensen’s inequality
term. The net effect is that A(n) is decreasing in n.
In contrast, Bz (n) is positive, is increasing in maturity n, and asymptotes to a value
of 1/(1 − φz ). The intuition for this variable is explained in Section 3.1. As discussed in

Section 3.1, Bx (n) is negative. This implies that an increase in the price of risk xt leads to

a decrease in valuations. Note that Bx (n) is non-monotonic in n. It starts at 0, decreases to
below -1, then increases, and eventually converges to a value near -0.5. It is not surprising
that Bx (n) initially decreases in maturity. This is the duration effect: the longer the maturity,
the more sensitive is the price to changes in the discount rate. More curious is the fact that
Bx rises after a maturity of 50 quarters. This is because the duration effect is countered by
the increase in Bz (n). Because expected dividend growth and dividend growth are negatively
correlated, shocks to expected dividend growth act as a hedge. Moreover, as the plot of B z
shows, expected dividend growth becomes more important the longer the maturity of the
equity. Therefore equity that pays in the far future is less sensitive to changes in x t than
equity that pays in the medium term, though both are more sensitive than short-horizon
equity.
Figure 2 plots the ratios of price to aggregate dividends for zero-coupon equity as a
function of maturity. The top panel sets zt to be two long-run standard deviations (2||σz ||/(1−
φ2z )1/2 ) below its long-run mean, the middle panel to the long-run mean of zero, and the
bottom panel to two long-run standard deviations above the long-run mean. Each panel plots
the price-dividend ratio for xt at its long run mean and two long-run standard deviations
(2||σx ||/(1−φ2x )1/2 ) above and below the long-run mean. Not surprisingly, prices are increasing

in expected dividend growth zt for all values of xt and for all values of the maturity. Moreover,

19

for all values of the maturity and all values of zt , prices decrease in xt . The higher are
conditional expected returns, the lower are prices.
For most values of zt and xt , prices decline with maturity. Generally, the further in the
future the asset pays the aggregate dividend, the less it is worth today. Exceptions occur
when xt is two standard deviations below its long-run mean. In this cases, the premium for
holding risky securities is negative in the short term, so short-horizon payoffs are discounted
by more than long-horizon payoffs. Because xt reverts back to its long-run mean, this effect
is transitory and only holds at the short end of the equity “yield curve”. The greater is z t ,
the longer the effect persists, as when expected dividend growth is high, equity that pays the
aggregate dividend further in the future will go up in price more than equity that pays the
aggregate dividend in the present. When zt is two standard deviations above its long-run
mean and xt is two standard deviations below its long-run mean, the price of zero-coupon
equity increases with maturity out to about 7 years, and then decreases again.
Figure 3 shows statistics for annual returns on zero-coupon equity. Annual returns are
calculated by compounding quarterly returns defined by (5). The top panel shows that the
risk premium ERi,t+1 −Rf decreases monotonically with maturity. The effect is economically

large: for equity that pays a dividend in the next two years, the risk premium is 18% while
the risk premium declines to 4% for equity that pays a dividend 40 years from now.
The second panel of Figure 3 plots the volatility of annual returns. The volatility initially
increases with maturity, and then begins to decrease monotonically at a maturity of ten years.

For long-horizon equity, increased risk premia are not accompanied by increased standard
deviations. The third panel of Figure 3 shows that the unconditional Sharpe ratio declines
monotonically in maturity from a value of 0.8 to a value of 0.2. Even for short-horizon equity,
the volatility increases less than the mean. These results suggest that the model has the
potential to explain the patterns described in Table 1. Those firms that have more weight in
lower-maturity equity will have higher expected returns, higher Sharpe ratios, and possibly
lower variance, than firms that have more weight in equity of greater maturity.
Figure 4 shows the results of regressing simulated returns on zero-coupon equity on
simulated returns on the market portfolio. The top panel plots the regression alpha, the
middle panel the beta, and the last panel the R2 from the regression. As in Figure 3, returns
are annual. The first panel shows that the alpha relative to the CAPM is decreasing in
maturity over most of the range, and increases very slightly for long-duration equity. For the
20

shortest-duration equity the alpha is as high as 11%. The alpha falls below zero for equity
maturing in 5 or more years, but remains above -5%. Thus the model produces relatively
large positive alphas and relatively small negative alphas, just as in the data, as shown in
Table 3.
The second panel of Figure 4 shows the beta. The beta first increases, and then, beginning
with a maturity of about ten years, decreases slowly as a function of maturity. The betas
for zero-coupon equity lie in a relatively narrow range; the lowest beta (for very long horizon
equity) is about 0.7. The highest beta (for equity of about ten years ) is 1.5. The beta
for the shortest-horizon equity is about 0.9. This plot shows that at least for short-horizon
equity, high alphas are not necessarily accompanied by high betas. This also gives the model
the potential to match the data described in Table 3.
While the simplicity of zero-coupon equity makes it a convenient way to illustrate the
properties of the model, it does not have a direct interpretation in terms of value and growth.
The price-dividend ratio is not well-defined because zero-coupon equity only pays dividends
during a single quarter. For this reason, we turn to a model of firms: long-lived assets that
have nonzero cash flows in every period.

4.4

Implications for the Cross-Section of Returns

This section shows the implications of the model for portfolios formed on the basis of price
ratios. Following Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), we exogenously specify a share process
for cash flows on long-lived assets. In each year of simulated data, we sort these assets into
deciles based on the ratio of price to dividends (or equivalently, earnings or cash flows) and
form portfolios of the assets within each decile. This follows the procedure used in empirical
studies of the cross-section (e.g. Fama and French (1992)). We then perform statistical
analysis on the portfolio returns.
Specifying the share process
As described in Section 3.4, specifying a model for firms is equivalent to specifying a sequence
P
s1 , . . . , sN of dividend shares, such that N
i=1 si = 1. As explained in Section 3.4, firm i pays

dividend si Di,t at time t, si+1 Di,t+1 at time t + 1, etc. At time t + 1, firm i becomes firm

i + 1. We choose two functional forms for si to illustrate the implications of our model
21

for a cross-section of long-lived assets. While this model for firms is simple and somewhat
mechanical, it accomplishes our objective of creating dispersion in the timing of cash flows
across firms in a straightforward way.
The first functional form assumes that the rate of growth in the shares falls linearly in i:
µ
¶
i−1
si+1
(21)
= g0 1 −
si
N/2 − 1

for i = 1, . . . , N −1. The value of s1 is set so the weights sum to 1. For the first N/2 quarters,
the firm’s share in the aggregate dividend process grows, each year at a slower rate. After

100 quarters, the share in the aggregate dividend process declines. Eventually, the firm’s
share in the aggregate dividend process becomes negligible. At this point the share begins to
grow again, as described in Section 3.4. A possible interpretation is that the capital invested
in the dying firm is used to fund a new, growing firm.
As a robustness check, we examine a second functional form. The second functional form
assumes that the rate of growth in the shares is a positive constant g1 for the first half of
the firm’s life-cycle, and −g1 for the second half of the firm’s life-cycle. In other words,
si+1
= g1
si
for i = 1, . . . , N/2 − 1; 0 for i = N/2; and

(22)

si+1
= −g1
(23)
si
for i = N/2 + 1, . . . , N − 1. Once again, the value of s1 is set so that the weights sum to

1. We calibrate each specification for firm shares using data on the cross-section of cash
flows and price-dividend ratios. Here and throughout, we set the number of firms to be 200,
implying a 200-quarter, or equivalently, a 50-year life cycle for a firm.
We first describe the calibration for the model with linearly declining growth. The

parameter that controls the shrinking growth rate, g0 , is set so that the cross-section of
dividend growth rates matches the cross-section of firms in the sample. Because data on
earnings and cash flows are not available prior to 1952, we construct the cross-section for
data from 1952 to 2002.10 The parameter g0 is set to be 0.75/4, for a per-annum value
10

Adrian and Franzoni (2002) Ang and Chen (2003), and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003) show that

value stocks have higher betas in the pre-war period, so the CAPM performs better. By matching the crosssection to the postwar data, we choose a harder target. We also assume that agents observe the parameters
in the economy. Lewellen and Shanken (2002) show that introducing learning into a traditional model can
help in understanding value premia.

22

of 0.75. The specification (21) then implies that firms start their life cycle with an annual
growth rate of 75%, growth declines to 0% after 25 yeas, and reaches -75% after another 25
years to complete one cycle. The top panel of Figure 5 plots the implied expected growth
rate of dividends for firms in the model, as well as the cross-section of average growth rates
in earnings, dividends, and cash flows. Because the firms in our model have no debt, the
dividends in our model may be better analogues to earnings and cash flows in the data,
rather than dividends themselves. As the top panel of Figure 5 shows, the linear model with
g0 set at 0.75/4 does a reasonable job of fitting the cross-section of growth rates in the data.
The second panel of Figure 5 shows the distribution of firm price-dividend ratios in the
model, and price ratios in the data. The linearly declining growth model for shares produces
more high price-dividend ratio firms than there are in the data. These firms have high
price-dividend ratios because they have extremely low current dividends. It is possible to
construct a model that fits the distribution more closely by imposing a lower bound on the
dividend share, at the cost of a somewhat more complicated functional form for si . This
modification is pursued in Appendix A.
Figure 6 shows corresponding results for the model with constant growth in shares. When
calibrated with an annual growth rate of 20% (g1 = .20/4 = .05), the model with constant
growth produces a reasonable fit to the cross-section of dividend, earnings, and cash-flow
growth in the data, despite its simplicity. A drawback of the constant growth model is the
frequency of very high or very low dividend growth rates. This aspect of the distribution is
better matched with the linear-growth model. However, the constant-growth model produces
a superior fit to the cross-section of price ratios, as shown in the second panel of Figure 6.
We conclude that the linearly declining growth and the constant growth model produce
reasonable cross-sections of dividend growth and price-dividend ratios. As we will show,
our results for portfolio statistics are very similar, regardless of which model we use. This
suggests that our results will be robust to a range of cross-sectional distributions for firm
dividend growth.
Portfolio returns
At the start of each year in the simulation, we sort firms according to their price-dividend
ratio into deciles. We then form equal-weighted portfolios of the firms in each decile. As

23

firms move through their life-cycle, they slowly shift (on average) from the growth category
to the value category, and then revert back eventually to the growth category. Of course,
this process is not deterministic, just as it is not deterministic in the data. Shocks have
different impacts on the price-dividend ratio, the variable that determines the appropriate
decile for the firm.
Having sorted the firms into deciles at the beginning of each “year”, we compute statistical
tests on returns over the year. Table 8 shows results for the linearly declining share growth
specification; Table 9 shows results for constant share growth specification. Because the
results are quantitatively similar, we discuss only Table 8.
The first panel of Table 8 shows the expected excess return, the standard deviation, and
the Sharpe ratio for each portfolio. These simulation results should be compared to the
numbers in Table 1, which shows corresponding results for the data. The expected return
on extreme growth stocks is 4.44% per annum, while for extreme value stocks, it is 9.65%
per annum.11 A similar spread occurs in the data: the lowest book-to-market stocks have
a premium of 5.67%, while the highest have a premium of 10.55%. The model generates
reasonable volatilities; between 19% and 17%. The volatilities for book-to-market sorted
portfolios vary between 18% and 15% in the data. The model predicts that the volatility
decreases as one moves from the growth to the value portfolio, so growth stocks are actually
more volatile than value stocks, despite the lower return. This effect is also found in the
data. The model predicts that the Sharpe ratio for the extreme growth stocks is 0.23, and
for the extreme value stocks is 0.57, and that the Sharpe ratio increases in the decile number.
In the data, the low book-to-market portfolio has a Sharpe ratio of 0.32 while the high bookto-market portfolio has a Sharpe ratio of 0.57. To summarize, in the model, value stocks
have high expected returns, low volatility, and high Sharpe ratios, just as in the data. The
magnitude of the difference between value and growth is comparable to that in the data.
The second panel of Table 8 shows alphas and betas relative to the CAPM. Annual
excess portfolio returns are regressed on excess returns on the aggregate market (the claim
11

Here and throughout this section, we compare the statistics on annual returns in the model to statistics

on monthly returns in the data. The monthly data statistics are annualized as described in Section 2. We
choose this approach because it corresponds most closely to the approach taken in the empirical literature
on the value premium. Data results for annual returns are very similar to those in Tables 1-3 (except for
standard errors).

24

to all future dividends). Alpha, beta and the R2 are reported for each decile. The second
panel shows that the model can replicate the classic result of Fama and French (1992):
value portfolios have positive alphas relative to the CAPM, while growth portfolios have
negative alphas. Moreover, value portfolios tend to have lower betas than growth portfolios.
Our model predicts alphas that rise from -2.86 for the extreme growth portfolio, to 3.30
for the extreme value portfolio. In the data, the lowest book-to-market portfolio has an
alpha of -1.66, while the highest book-to-market portfolio has an alpha of 3.97. Thus the
model generates alphas of the correct magnitude, as well as a sizable spread between value
and growth. Moreover, alphas in the model are asymmetric: growth alphas are smaller in
absolute value than value alphas, as in the data.
The third panel of Table 8 runs regressions of portfolio returns on the market and on a
high-minus-low factor (HML), generated by the return on a short position in the extreme
growth portfolio and a long position in the extreme value portfolio. The purpose is to
see whether the model analogue to the high-minus-low factor of Fama and French (1992)
describes the cross-section of returns in the model, as it does in the data. We find that
the alphas nearly disappear when we add HML to the regression; they are two orders of
magnitude smaller than the alphas relative to the CAPM. Not surprisingly, the loading on
the HML factor increases in the decile; growth portfolios have a negative loading on the
HML factor, while value portfolios have a positive loading.
The final panel of Table 8 compares the unconditional correlations of the portfolios with
the stochastic discount factor, the shock to dividends, the shock to expected dividend growth
orthogonal to dividend growth, and the shock to the preference variable. The correlation
with the stochastic discount factor is lower, the greater the decile. This is consistent with
the result that the Sharpe ratio increases in the decile; it follows from the unconditional
Euler equation that the lower the correlation with the stochastic discount factor, the higher
the Sharpe ratio.
As Table 8 shows, returns on value and growth portfolios correlate differently with shocks
to the economy. Value stocks have the highest correlations with shocks to dividend growth
(correlations range from .11 for the extreme growth portfolio to .26 for the extreme value
portfolio). In contrast, growth stocks have a higher correlation with the independent component of the shock to expected dividend growth (correlations range from .21 for the extreme
growth portfolio to .17 for the extreme value portfolio). While a shock to expected dividend
25

growth raises the valuation of all portfolios, (as in the present value models of Campbell and
Shiller (1988) and Vuolteenaho (2002)), it especially affects the valuations of growth stocks,
which pay dividends in the distant future. Finally, all portfolios are negatively correlated
with shocks to the Sharpe ratio variable xt . A positive shock to xt raises expected returns,
and thus lowers prices and realized returns. Growth stocks are more negatively correlated
with xt than value stocks (correlations range from -.41 for the extreme growth portfolio to .29 for the extreme value portfolio). This is because of duration; growth stocks pay dividends
further in the future, and thus are impacted more by a shock to expected returns.
This section has shown that the model replicates the principle aspects of the value premium in the data: value stocks have high expected returns, low volatility, high Sharpe ratios,
high alphas, and low betas, relative to growth stocks. Value and growth stocks also differ
in their correlations with the underlying shocks to the economy. As the next section shows,
these differences in correlations are at the root of the model’s ability to explain the value
premium.

5

Model Intuition

What explains the model’s ability to capture the value premium? As hinted in the previous
section, the value premium arises from the differential correlations of value and growth
portfolios on underlying shocks.
Figure 8 presents another look at this issue. Rather than correlations, Figure 8 contains
betas from unconditional regressions of portfolio returns on the three shocks, and the R 2
from the unconditional regressions. Three results are apparent. First, β d is positive and
increasing as the portfolios go from growth to value, second βz is positive and decreasing
as portfolios go from growth to value, and βx is negative and increasing as firms go from
growth to value. The R2 s follow the same direction as the absolute value of the betas. It
should not be surprising that the R2 s fail to sum to 1. The three shocks account for 100% of
the conditional variance of returns. Figure 8, however, plots the results from unconditional
regressions.
The results in Figure 8 arise from the different loadings of zero-coupon equity on the
underlying shocks. As (15) shows, the loadings of returns on shocks to x and z is determined
by Bx and Bz (the loadings on the shock to d is always the same conditionally). For the
26

parameter values we estimate, Bz is positive and increasing in the maturity n while Bx is
negative, and first decreases, and then, at high maturities, increases in n (Figure 1). In the
case of Bz the increase occurs because long-horizon dividend growth matters more for assets
that pay dividends in the future; for Bx , the pattern is accounted for by the duration effect,
and because the risk price on expected dividend growth is negative. The intuition for these
patterns is explained further in Sections 3 and 4.3.
The loadings on zt for zeros is echoed for portfolios. For high price-dividend firms (growth
firms), the share of aggregate dividends is increasing. These firms place greater weight on
higher-maturity equity than on lower-maturity equity. Thus their returns load more on B z
than the returns of value firms, which place more weight on lower maturity equity. The
loadings on xt are a bit different for portfolios than for zero-coupon equity. There is no
evidence of the non-monotonicity seen in Figure 1. This is because, all else equal, equity
that pays further in the future is worth less. Medium-horizon equity may therefore have a
greater weight than long-horizon equity, even for growth firms. The non-monotonicity in B x
occurs sufficiently far out in the equity term structure that it does not appear in the loadings
of portfolios.
The loadings of portfolios on various shocks present an intriguing link with the empirical
results of Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003). Using the vector auto-regression methodology of Campbell (1991), Campbell and Vuolteenaho decompose unexpected market returns
into changes in expectations of future discount rates and changes in expectations of future
dividend growth rates. Changes in expected discount rates are computed using the vector
auto-regression; changes in expected growth rates are the residual: the variation in market
returns not explained by variation in discount rates. When the market return is decomposed
in this way, Campbell and Vuolteenaho show that betas with respect to changes in expected
discount rates decrease in magnitude as portfolios go from growth to value, while betas with
respect to cash flows increase in magnitude as portfolios go from growth to value.
While not precisely analogous, shocks to xt are similar in spirit to news about discount
rates in the VAR framework of Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2003). It is therefore encouraging
that our model produces betas with respect to shocks to xt that are greater in magnitude for
growth firms than value firms. The analogue to the dividend news term is less clear in our
model. Campbell and Vuolteenaho compute this as a residual, though in our model Figure 8
shows that the residual variance is not accounted for by shocks to current or expected future
27

dividends. More of the residual is accounted for by ∆dt+1 than by shocks to zt+1 ; thus it is
also encouraging that value portfolios load more on ∆dt+1 than growth portfolios.
Figure 8 shows that value and growth portfolios have different loadings on the underlying
shocks in the economy. How this translates into risk premia depends on the prices of risk
of these shocks. Equation (16) provides an illustration of how conditional risk premia on
zero-coupon equity vary based on loadings on different shocks. As discussed in Section 4.1
we estimate that shocks to expected dividend growth zt are negatively correlated with shocks
to realized dividend growth, based on dividend and consumption data. This empirical result
implies that expected dividend growth has a negative risk price; because it is negatively
correlated with shocks to realized dividend growth it serves as a hedge and reduces risk
premia.
We assume that shocks to xt carry a zero risk price; shocks to xt are assumed to be
uncorrelated with shocks to realized dividends or expected dividend growth. This assumption
represents a departure from the models of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly,
Santos, and Veronesi (2004), where shocks to the price of risk are, conditionally, perfectly
negatively correlated with shocks to aggregate dividends. What role does this assumption
play in our analysis?
To answer this question, consider the equation for the conditional risk premium for equity
that matures next period, versus the conditional risk premium for equity that matures two
periods from now. By (16), equity that matures next period has a risk premium of
ln Et [R1,t+1 /Rf ] = ||σd ||xt .
Equity that matures two periods from now has a risk premium of
µ
¶
||σz ||
f
ln Et [R2,t+1 /R ] = 1 − ρdx ||σx || + ρdz
||σd ||xt ,
||σd ||
where

σd σx0
||σd ||||σx ||
represents the conditional correlation between ∆dt+1 and xt+1 , and
ρdx =

ρdz =

σd σz0
||σd ||||σz ||

represents the conditional correlation between ∆dt+1 and zt+1 . The risk premium on equity
that matures next period is equal to the quantity of risk – the standard deviation of dividends
28

– multiplied by the price of risk xt . For equity maturing two periods from now, there is also
the risk due to changes in xt and changes in zt . The latter effect will be relatively small
because σz is a small fraction of σd . Whether long-horizon equity has a lower risk premium
than short-horizon equity is due in large part to the sign of the correlation of dividend growth
with xt . In particular, ρdx < 0 leads to relatively higher premia for long-horizon equity, while
ρdx > 0 leads to relatively lower premia for long-horizon equity.
We make this statement precise by solving the model under three different possibilities
for ρdx . Figure 7 plots risk premia on zero-coupon equity when ρdx = 0 (our base case),
ρdx = −.5, and ρdx = .5. For ρdx = 0, Panel A shows that risk premia decrease in maturity,

as long as xt > 0 (as it is most of the time). The reason for this decrease is the negative

correlation between ∆dt+1 and zt+1 . In contrast, for ρdx = −.5, Panel B shows that risk

premia generally increase in the maturity. Long-horizon equity (i.e. growth stocks) have

greater risk premia than short-horizon equity. This occurs even though ρdz is negative, as in
Panel A. Even a modest correlation of -.5 between dividends and the price-of-risk overrides
the effect of ρdz . The case of ρdx < 0 is of special interest because it corresponds to the
correlation between the price of risk and aggregate dividends in external habit models. In
the models of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004),
shocks to the aggregate dividend (which is identified with consumption) increase surplus
consumption, and therefore lower the amount of return investors demand for taking on risk.
Indeed, in a term structure context, Wachter (2003) shows that the model of Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) implies that long-horizon assets exhibit greater risk premia than short
horizon assets for exactly this reason. Long-horizon assets load more negatively on the shock
to discount rates; if discount rates are negatively correlated with consumption (or dividends)
then long-horizon assets will command greater risk premia.
An alternative is to set the correlation between dt+1 and xt+1 to be positive. This case
is illustrated in Panel C. Under this assumption, risk premia fall more dramatically in the
maturity than when dt+1 and xt+1 are uncorrelated and the premium for short-horizon equity
is greater.
These results at first suggest that a model that seeks to explain the value premium should
set ρdx > 0, rather than ρdx = 0 as we assume. However, the sign of ρdx has time series
implications as well as cross-sectional ones. We are able to calibrate our model to match the
time series of aggregate stock returns, as well the cross-section of value and growth portfolios
29

because our model produces reasonable risk premia in the aggregate. For ρdx > 0, this may
not be the case. Figure 7 shows that the greater is ρdx , the lower are risk premia in the
economy, for all but the shortest-maturity equity. As an asset that pays cash flows in the
future, equity must load negatively on xt . If investors view xt -risk as a hedge (ρdx > 0), this
makes equity less risky. On the other hand, if xt moves in the same direction as dividends
(ρdx < 0), equity becomes more risky. Explaining the level of the equity premium is therefore
easiest when ρdx < 0 and hardest when ρdx > 0. The assumption that ρdx < 0 is part of what
enables Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) to explain
the high variance and the high premium commanded by stock returns, with comparatively
little variance in fundamentals. Faced with this tension between the time series and the cross
section, we choose to set the correlation between dividend growth and xt at zero.
This section has shown that ρdx , in combination with the duration effect and the correlation between current and future dividend growth, makes long-horizon equity less risky than
short-horizon equity. It creates a large premium on value stocks, while at the same time
limiting their risk. We hope that future work will reveal micro-economic foundations that
determine this important parameter.

6

Conclusion

This paper has proposed a parsimonious model of the stochastic discount factor that accounts
for both the aggregate time series behavior of the stock market, and for the relative risk and
return of value and growth stocks. At the root of the model is a dividend process calibrated
to match the aggregate dividend process in the data, and a stochastic discount factor with
a single factor, xt , proxying for investors’ time-varying preference for risk. Time-varying
preferences for risk allow the model to capture the excess volatility and return predictability
found in the data. Our specification for xt allows for interpretable closed-forms solutions for
asset prices and risk premia.
A key difference between our model and external habit models, which also feature timevarying preferences for risk, is that xt does not arise from fluctuations in aggregate dividends.
This may seem like a small detail but it is key to the model’s ability to explain how value
stocks can have both higher returns and less risk than growth stocks. In our model, growth
and value stocks differ based on the timing of their cash flows. Growth stocks have more of
30

their cash flows in the future. They are high-duration assets, and thus their returns covary
more with the price of risk xt . We have shown that for growth stocks to have relatively
low returns, it must be the case that investors do not fear shocks to xt . This only occurs
if the conditional correlation of the price of risk with dividend growth is zero or positive.
We assume the correlation is zero. In contrast, external habit models assume a correlation
of negative one. Shocks to the price of risk are feared as much, if not more, than shocks to
cash flows.
Our proposed resolution of the value puzzle is risk-based. Value stocks, as short-horizon
equity, vary more with fluctuations in cash flows – the fluctuations that investors fear the
most. Growth stocks, as long-horizon equity, vary more with fluctuations in discount rates,
which are independent of cash flows and which investors do not fear. As we have shown,
such a resolution accounts for the time series behavior of the aggregate market, the relative
returns of value and growth stocks, and the failure of the capital asset pricing model to
explain these returns.

31

7

Appendix

A

Including a Lower Bound in the Share Specification

Including a lower bound in the share specifications (21) and (22)–(23) allows for a superior
fit to the cross-section of price ratios. For a model with shares si , we can define a new share
process ŝi such that
ŝi = s + si (1 − N s)
where N is the number of firms, and 0 ≤ s < 1/N . Then the sequence ŝ1 , . . . , ŝN is positive,
sums to 1, and thus forms a well-defined share process. Moreover, s will be a lower bound

on the share of the aggregate dividend.
Figure 9 shows the results for linearly declining growth, when the share process has a
lower bound of s = 0.1%. This change implies fewer firms with very high growth rates,
and fewer firms with higher price dividend ratios. The distribution of dividend growth and
the distribution of price ratios provide a closer match to the data, as shown in Figure 9.
Introducing a lower bound to the constant growth case has a similar effect, as shown in
Figure 10. Tables 10 and 11 show that the behavior of the cross-section of returns is similar
to the cases when there are no lower bound. Qualitatively, the effects are similar to the case
where there is no lower bound. The alpha for the extreme value portfolio is 2.6% for the
linear growth case, and 2.7% for the constant growth case, while the alpha for the extreme
growth stocks is -2.2% for the linear growth case and -2.0% for the constant growth case.

B

Convergence of the Price-Dividend Ratio

Because xt and zt can take on both positive and negative values, a necessary (but not
sufficient) condition for (17) to converge for all values of xt and zt is that Bx (n) and Bz (n)
approach finite values as n → ∞. Bz converges if and only if:
|φz | < 1

(24)

Let
λ = σd /||σd ||
Assuming (24) holds, Bx converges if and only if
|φx − σx λ| < 1
32

(25)

Given (24)
lim Bz (n) =

n→∞

Define B̄x to be the solution to

1
≡ B̄z
1 − φz

B̄x = B̄x (φx − σx λ) − (σd +

σz
)λ
1 − φz

Then
B̄x = −
Given (24) and (25), it follows that

(σd + σz /(1 − φz )) λ
1 − (φx − σx λ)

lim Bx (n) = B̄x

n→∞

and
lim Vn = σd +

n→∞

Finally, let

σz
+ B̄x σx ≡ V̄
1 − φz

1
Ā = −r + g + B̄x (1 − φx )x̄ + V̄ V̄
2
It follows from the recursion for An that for N sufficiently large
A(n) ≈ Ān + constant
for n ≥ N , and therefore
∞
X

n=N

©

exp {A(n) + Bz (n)zt + Bx (n)xt } ≈ exp constant + B̄z zt + B̄x xt

∞
ªX

n=N

© ª
exp Ān .

It follows that necessary and sufficient conditions for convergence are (24), (25), and
1
−r + g + B̄x (1 − φx )x̄ + V̄ V̄ < 0
2

33

(26)

References
Adrian, Tobias, and Francesco Franzoni, 2002, Learning about beta: An explanation of the
value premium, unpublished paper, MIT.
Ang, Andrew, and Joseph Chen, 2003, CAPM over the long run: 1926-2001, Working Paper,
Columbia University and University of Southern California.
Ang, Andrew, and Jun Liu, 2003, How to discount cash flows with time-varying expected
returns, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics with macroeconomic and latent variables, Journal of Monetary Economics
50, 745–787.
Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen, 1996, Inflation, asset prices, and the term structure of
interest rates in a monetary economy, Review of Financial Studies 9, 241–275.
Ball, R., 1978, Anomolies in relationships between securities’ yields and yield-surrogates,
Journal of Financial Economics 6, 103–126.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2003, Interpreting risk premia across size, value, and industry portfolios, Working Paper, Duke University, Indiana
University, and University of Michigan.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2003, Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1977, The Investment Performance of Common Stocks in Relation to Their
Price to Earnings Ratios: A Test of the Efficient Market Hypothesis, Journal of Finance
32, 663–82.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and return for
NYSE common stocks: Further Evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129–156.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steve Grenadier, 2004, Stock and bond returns with
moody investors, Working paper, Columbia University, Stanford University, and University of Michigan.
34

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth
options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553–1607.
Bernstein, Richard, and Bernard Tew, 1991, The equity ’yield curve’, Journal of Portfolio
Management pp. 35–39.
Brennan, Michael J., Ashley W. Wang, and Yihong Xia, 2003, Estimation and test of a
simple model of intertemporal asset pricing, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia, 2003, Risk and valuation under an intertemporal
capital asset pricing model, forthcoming, Journal of Business.
Campbell, John Y., 1991, A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns, Economic Journal
101, 157–179.
Campbell, John Y., 1999, Asset prices, consumption, and the business cycle, in J.B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, eds.: Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume I (North-Holland,
Amsterdam ).
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
251.
Campbell, John Y., and Jianping Mei, 1993, Where do betas come from? Asset pricing
dynamics and the sources of systematic risk, Review of Financial Studies 6, 567–592.
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, Growth or glamour?,
Working Paper, Harvard University and Northwestern University.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations
of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 58, 495–514.
Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, Bad beta, good beta, Working Paper,
Harvard University.
Cochrane, John H., 1992, Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, Review of Financial Studies 5, 243–280.

35

Cochrane, John H., 1999, New facts in finance, Economic Perspectives Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago 23, 59–78.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2002, Does risk or mispricing explain the cross-section of stock prices?, Working Paper, Harvard University and
Northwestern University.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, The value spread,
Journal of Finance 58, 609–641.
Cornell, Bradford, 1999, Risk, duration, and capital budgeting: New evidence on some old
questions, Journal of Business 72, 183–200.
Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth Singleton, 2003, Term structure dynamics in theory and reality,
Review of Financial Studies 16, 631–678.
Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Mark T. Soliman, 2002, Implied equity duration:
A new measure of equity risk, Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Duffee, Gregory R., 2002, Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models, Journal
of Finance 57, 369–443.
Duffie, Darrell, and Rui Kan, 1996, A yield-factor model of interest rates, Mathematical
Finance 6, 379–406.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns
on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 23–49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,
Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings
and returns, Journal of Finance 50, 131–155.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium Cross Section of Returns,
Journal of Political Economy 111, 693–732.

36

Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis. (McGraw Hill New York)
1 edn.
Jaffe, Jeffrey, Donald B. Keim, and Randolph Westerfield, 1989, Earnings yields, market
values, and stock returns, The Journal of Finance 44, 134–148.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3–54.
Johnson, Timothy C., 2002, Rational momentum effects, Journal of Finance 57, 585–608.
Keim, Donald B., and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond
markets, Journal of Financial Econometrics 17, 357–390.
Leibowitz, Martin L., and Stanley Kogelman, 1993, Resolving the equity duration paradox,
Financial Analysts Journal pp. 51–64.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A CrossSectional Test When Risk Premia are Time-Varying, Journal of Political Economy 109,
1238–1287.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2002, Expected Returns and Expected Dividend
Growth, NBER Working Paper No. 9605.
Lewellen, Jonathan, and Jay Shanken, 2002, Learning, asset-pricing tests, and market efficiency, Journal of Finance 57, 1113–1145.
Liew, Jimmy, and Maria Vassalou, 2000, Can Book-to-Market, Size and Momentum Be Risk
Factors that Predict Economic Growth?, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 221–245.
Lintner, J., 1965, Security Prices, Risk and Maximal Gains from Diversification, Journal of
Finance 20, 587–615.
Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn VanNieuwerburgh, 2002, Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk Premia, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Lynch, Anthony W., 2003, Portfolio choice with many risky assets, market clearing, and
cash-flow predictability, Working Paper, New York University.
37

Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Understanding Predictability, Journal
of Poitical Economy 112, 1–47.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Christian Julliard, 2005, Consumption risk and the cross section
of expected returns, Journal of Political Economy 113.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, 2002, Housing, Consumption, and
Asset Pricing, Working Paper, UCLA.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market
inefficiency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9–17.
Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Conditional betas, Working Paper, Columbia University and University of Chicago.
Sharpe, W., 1964, Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions
of Risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–444.
Vassalou, Maria, 2003, News related to future GDP growth as a risk factor in equity returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 68, 47–73.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives firm-level stock returns?, Journal of Finance 57,
233–264.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2003, A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest
rates, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Wilson, Mungo, 2003, A model of demand for dividend strips, Working Paper, Harvard
University.
Yogo, Motohiro, 2003, A Consumption-Based Explanation of the Cross Section of Expected
Stock Returns, Working Paper, Harvard University.
Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67–103.
Zhang, Lu, and Ralitsa Petkova, 2002, Is value riskier than growth?, Working Paper, University of Rochester.

Table 1: Data Moments of Growth and Value Portfolios

G
Portfolio

1

Growth to Value
2

3

4

5

6

7

V

V-G

8

9

10

10-1

Mean Excess Return (% per year)
E/P

4.71

5.02

6.97

7.04

7.00

9.18

9.94

11.18

11.68

12.95

8.25

C/P

5.05

6.07

6.49

6.73

8.48

7.72

8.85

9.18

11.47

11.81

6.77

D/P

7.35

6.41

7.28

7.41

6.49

7.60

7.73

9.49

8.84

7.45

0.10

B/M

5.67

6.55

6.98

6.51

8.00

8.33

8.27

10.08

9.98

10.55

4.88

Standard Error of Mean
E/P

0.78

0.64

0.62

0.59

0.62

0.61

0.60

0.61

0.65

0.73

0.62

C/P

0.76

0.64

0.61

0.63

0.62

0.60

0.60

0.60

0.61

0.69

0.59

D/P

0.78

0.69

0.66

0.64

0.62

0.60

0.59

0.58

0.56

0.56

0.69

B/M

0.71

0.64

0.64

0.62

0.59

0.59

0.59

0.61

0.63

0.74

0.61

Standard Deviation of Excess Return (% per year)
E/P

19.35

15.93

15.49

14.78

15.43

15.04

14.87

15.29

16.11

18.11

15.40

C/P

18.99

15.95

15.24

15.75

15.43

14.95

14.96

14.98

15.14

17.24

14.57

D/P

19.36

17.11

16.31

15.85

15.43

15.00

14.58

14.37

13.93

13.83

17.08

B/M

17.77

15.89

15.82

15.42

14.65

14.73

14.74

15.11

15.71

18.46

15.15

Sharpe Ratio
E/P

0.24

0.32

0.45

0.48

0.45

0.61

0.67

0.73

0.73

0.72

0.54

C/P

0.27

0.38

0.43

0.43

0.55

0.52

0.59

0.61

0.76

0.69

0.46

D/P

0.38

0.37

0.45

0.47

0.42

0.51

0.53

0.66

0.63

0.54

0.01

B/M

0.32

0.41

0.44

0.42

0.55

0.57

0.56

0.67

0.64

0.57

0.32

Notes: Summary statistics for 10 growth to value portfolios. “D/P” are deciles computed
from sorting firms based on their dividend yields, “E/P” are sorts based on the earnings
yields, “C/P” are sorts based on the ratio of cash flows to price and “B/M” are sorts on the
book-to-market ratio. All data are from Ken French’s website. The data are monthly and
span the 1952 to 2002 period.

Table 2: Correlation of Growth and Value Portfolios
D/P

E/P

C/P

B/M

Top Growth Decile
E/P

1.00

0.98

0.93

0.96

C/P

0.98

1.00

0.93

0.97

D/P

0.93

0.93

1.00

0.94

B/M

0.96

0.97

0.94

1.00

Top Value Decile
E/P

1.00

0.94

0.76

0.85

C/P

0.94

1.00

0.74

0.85

D/P

0.76

0.74

1.00

0.75

B/M

0.85

0.85

0.75

1.00

Notes: Correlations among growth and value portfolios formed from sorting on different
variables. “D/P” are deciles computed from sorting firms based on their dividend yields,
“E/P” are sorts based on the earnings yields, “C/P” are sorts based on the ratio of cash
flows to price and “B/M” are sorts on the book-to-market ratio. All data are from Ken
French’s website. The data are monthly and span the 1952 to 2002 period.

Table 3: Performance of Growth and Value Portfolios Relative to the CAPM
CAPM: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + ²it
G
Portfolio

1

Growth to Value
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

V

V-G

10

10-1

αi (% per year)
E/P

-3.09 -1.62 0.69 0.95 0.74 3.25 4.08 5.33 5.60 6.22

9.31

C/P

-2.70 -0.54 0.19 0.24 2.33 1.79 3.01 3.46 5.75 5.34

8.04

D/P

-0.58 -0.73 0.62 0.98 0.44 1.77 2.03 4.11 3.96 3.44

4.01

B/M

-1.66 -0.17 0.33 0.22 2.12 2.37 2.59 4.30 4.05 3.97

5.63

Standard Error of αi
E/P

1.12

0.74 0.86 0.75 0.86 0.95 0.95 1.07 1.18 1.38

2.14

C/P

1.03

0.78 0.76 0.80 0.94 0.93 0.98 1.06 1.11 1.28

2.01

D/P

1.03

0.80 0.88 0.88 1.00 1.00 0.96 1.07 1.19 1.47

2.05

B/M

0.90

0.65 0.69 0.84 0.86 0.83 1.01 1.07 1.15 1.53

2.12

βi
E/P

1.18

1.01 0.95 0.92 0.95 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.92 1.02

-0.16

C/P

1.17

1.00 0.95 0.98 0.93 0.90 0.89 0.87 0.87 0.98

-0.19

D/P

1.20

1.08 1.01 0.97 0.92 0.88 0.86 0.82 0.74 0.61

-0.59

B/M

1.11

1.02 1.01 0.95 0.89 0.90 0.86 0.87 0.90 1.00

-0.11

Standard Error of βi
E/P

0.02

0.01 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03

0.04

C/P

0.02

0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02

0.04

D/P

0.02

0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03

0.04

B/M

0.02

0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03

0.04

R

2

E/P

0.83

0.89 0.84 0.87 0.84 0.80 0.80 0.75 0.73 0.71

0.02

C/P

0.85

0.88 0.87 0.87 0.81 0.80 0.78 0.75 0.73 0.72

0.04

D/P

0.86

0.89 0.85 0.84 0.79 0.77 0.78 0.72 0.63 0.43

0.27

B/M

0.87

0.91 0.90 0.85 0.83 0.84 0.76 0.75 0.73 0.65

0.01

Notes: Estimates from CAPM regressions of 10 growth to value deciles. “D/P” are deciles
computed from sorting firms based on their dividend yields, “E/P” are sorts based on the
earnings yields, “C/P” are sorts based on the ratio of cash flows to price and “B/M” are
sorts on the book-to-market ratio. All data are from Ken French’s website. The data are
monthly and span the 1952 to 2002 period.

Table 4: Parameters of the Model
∆dt+1 = g + zt + σd ²t+1
zt+1 = φz zt + σz ²t+1
xt+1 = (1 − φx )x̄ + φx xt + σx ²t+1
¾
½
σd
1 2
f
²t+1
Mt+1 = exp −r − xt − xt
2
||σd ||
Variable

Value

g

2.28%

rf

1.93%

x̄

0.625

φz

0.91

φx

0.87

||σd ||

0.145

||σz ||

0.0016

Correlation of ∆d and z shocks

-0.83

Correlation of ∆d and x shocks

0

Correlation of z and x shocks

0

||σx ||

0.24

Implied volatility parameters
Variable

Values

σd

[ 0.0724, 0, 0 ]

σz

[ -0.0013, 0.0009, 0 ]

σz

[ 0, 0, 0.12 ]

Notes: Model parameters are calibrated to aggregate data starting in 1890 and ending in
2002. The model is simulated at a quarterly frequency. The unconditional mean of dividend
growth g, the riskfree rate rf , the persistence variables φx and φz , and the conditional
standard deviations ||σd ||, ||σd ||, ||σd ||, are in annual terms (i.e. 4g, φ4x , 2||σd ||). Parameters g,

rf , and ||σd || are set to match their data counterparts. Parameters φz and the correlation
between shocks to z and shocks to ∆d are set to match their data counterparts, assuming

that the the conditional mean of dividend growth is the log of the consumption-dividend
ratio in the data.

Table 5: Aggregate Asset Pricing Implications
Data

Model

E(P/D)

25.55

20.96

σ(p − d)

0.38

0.38

0.87

0.88

6.33%

7.87%

19.41%

19.19%

0.03

-0.04

Sharpe ratio of market

0.33

0.41

AC of ∆d

-0.09

-0.04

σ(∆dt )

14.48%

14.43%

AC of p − d

E[Rm − Rf ]

σ(Rm − Rf )
m

AC of R − R

f

Notes: Aggregate moments implied by the parameter values in Table 4. The model is
simulated for 50,000 quarters and returns, dividends, and price ratios are aggregated to an
annual frequency. The data are annual, start in 1890, and end in 2002.

Table 6: Long Horizon Regressions – Excess Returns
Horizon in Years
1

2
PH

m
i=1 rt+i

β1
t-stat
R2

-0.12
(-2.39)
[0.05]

4

6

8

10

-0.86
(-2.97)
[0.25]

-1.09
(-3.54)
[0.31]

f
− rt+i
= β0 + β1 (pt − dt ) + ²t

Data
-0.23
(-2.44)
[0.08]

-0.37
(-2.01)
[0.10]

-0.60
(-2.24)
[0.16]

Data up to 1994
β1
t-stat

-0.21
(-3.45)

-0.39
(-4.04)

-0.61
(-3.17)

-0.89
(-4.08)

-1.16
(-5.81)

-1.34
(-6.22)

R2

[0.07]

[0.13]

[0.19]

[0.30]

[0.41]

[0.44]

-0.49
[0.23]

-0.58
[0.26]

-0.65
[0.28]

Model
β1
R2

-0.11
[0.06]

-0.21
[0.11]

-0.36
[0.18]

Notes: Long-horizon regressions of excess returns on the price-dividend ratio in annual data
from 1890-2002 and in data simulated from the model. For each data regression, the table
reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and adjusted R2 statistics in square brackets. Significant data coefficients using the
standard t-test at the 5% level are highlighted in bold face.

Table 7: Long Horizon Regressions – Dividend Growth
Horizon in Years
1

2

4

6

8

10

Data
PH

i=1

β1
t-stat
R2

0.02
(0.56)
[-0.01]

β1
t-stat
R2

0.10
(2.30)
[0.03]

∆dm
t+i = β0 + β1 (pt − dt ) + ²t

-0.01
-0.04
-0.12
-0.23
(-0.23)
(-0.34)
(-0.85)
(-1.26)
[-0.01]
[-0.01]
[0.00]
[0.02]
PH
m
i=1 ∆dt+i = β0 + β1 (ct − dt ) + ²t
0.18
(2.52)
[0.06]

0.34
(3.05)
[0.13]

0.56
(3.42)
[0.24]

-0.31
(-1.61)
[0.05]

0.65
(3.56)
[0.26]

0.68
(3.78)
[0.25]

0.29
[0.09]

0.33
[0.09]

22.23
[0.21]

25.81
[0.24]

Model
PH

i=1

β1
R2

0.05
[0.02]

∆dm
t+i = β0 + β1 (pt − dt ) + ²t

0.09
[0.03]
PH
i=1

β1
R2

3.73
[0.04]

7.09
[0.07]

0.17
[0.06]

0.24
[0.08]

∆dm
t+i = β0 + β1 zt + ²t
13.19
[0.13]

18.13
[0.18]

Notes: Long-horizon regressions for dividend growth in annual data from 1890-2002 and in
data simulated from the model. For each data regression, the table reports OLS estimates
of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and adjusted R 2
statistics in square brackets. Significant data coefficients using the standard t-test at the 5%
level are highlighted in bold face.

Table 8: Growth vs. Value Portfolios: Linear Growth

G

Growth to Value

V

V-G

Portfolio

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

10-1

ERi − Rf
σ(Ri − Rf )
Sharpe Ratio

4.44
19.22
0.23

4.55
19.32
0.24

4.85
19.48
0.25

5.29
19.52
0.27

6.00
19.41
0.31

6.91
19.05
0.36

7.91
18.47
0.43

8.79
17.82
0.49

9.37
17.24
0.54

9.65
16.91
0.57

5.20
8.33
0.62

-2.86
0.99
0.96

-2.80
1.00
0.96

CAPM: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + ²it
-2.59 -2.20 -1.49 -0.47 0.76
1.94
1.01
1.02
1.02
1.00
0.97
0.93
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.98

2.84
0.89
0.95

3.30
0.86
0.94

6.17
-0.13
0.09

0.04
0.93
-0.47
1.00

CAPM
0.03
0.94
-0.46
1.00

& HML: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + γi HMLt + ²it
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.95
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.95
-0.43 -0.36 -0.25 -0.08 0.12
0.31
0.46
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.04
0.93
0.53
1.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

-0.19
0.26
0.17
-0.29

-0.19
0.27
-0.14
0.35

αi
βi
Ri2

αi
βi
γi
Ri2
ρ(Ri , M )
ρ(Ri , ²1 )
ρ(Ri , ²2 )
ρ(Ri , ²3 )

-0.08
0.11
0.21
-0.41

-0.08
0.11
0.21
-0.41

-0.09
0.12
0.21
-0.41

Unconditional Correlations
-0.09 -0.11 -0.12 -0.14
0.13
0.14
0.17
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.18
-0.41 -0.40 -0.39 -0.36

-0.16
0.22
0.18
-0.34

-0.18
0.24
0.17
-0.31

Notes: Simulated return statistics for 10 portfolios formed according to price-dividend ratios.
Parameter values for the aggregate market are as in Table 4. The model is simulated at a
quarterly frequency and returns are aggregated up to an annual frequency. Growth of the
dividend shares is assumed to decline linearly from 75% p.a. to -75% p.a. There is no lower
bound for the dividend share.

Table 9: Growth vs. Value Portfolios: Constant Growth

G

Growth to Value

V

V-G

Portfolio

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

10-1

ERi − Rf
σ(Ri − Rf )
Sharpe Ratio

5.00
19.27
0.26

5.18
19.48
0.27

5.47
19.64
0.28

5.90
19.67
0.30

6.46
19.51
0.33

7.15
19.08
0.37

7.89
18.38
0.43

8.58
17.56
0.49

9.16
16.99
0.54

10.08
17.30
0.58

5.09
8.27
0.62

-2.60
1.00
0.97

-2.52
1.01
0.97

CAPM: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + ²it
-2.31 -1.93 -1.33 -0.50 0.52
1.59
1.02
1.03
1.02
1.00
0.97
0.92
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.98

2.48
0.88
0.96

3.38
0.88
0.93

5.98
-0.12
0.07

0.05
0.95
-0.44
1.00

CAPM
0.04
0.96
-0.43
1.00

& HML: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + γi HMLt + ²it
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.95
0.93
-0.39 -0.32 -0.22 -0.09 0.08
0.26
0.40
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.05
0.95
0.56
1.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

-0.15
0.24
0.14
-0.29

-0.19
0.29
-0.16
0.34

αi
βi
Ri2

αi
βi
γi
Ri2
i

ρ(R , M )
ρ(Ri , ²1 )
ρ(Ri , ²2 )
ρ(Ri , ²3 )

-0.06
0.09
0.19
-0.41

-0.06
0.09
0.19
-0.41

-0.06
0.10
0.18
-0.41

Unconditional Correlations
-0.07 -0.08 -0.09 -0.10
0.11
0.12
0.14
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.16
0.16
-0.41 -0.40 -0.39 -0.37

-0.12
0.19
0.16
-0.34

-0.14
0.22
0.15
-0.32

Notes: Simulated return statistics for 10 portfolios formed according to price-dividend ratios.
Parameter values for the aggregate market are as in Table 4. The model is simulated at a
quarterly frequency and returns are aggregated up to an annual frequency. Growth of the
dividend shares is assumed to be constant at 20% p.a. for the first half of the life-cycle and
at -20% p.a. for the second half of the life-cycle. There is no lower bound for the dividend
share.

Table 10: Growth vs. Value Portfolios: Linear Growth with Lower Bound

G

Growth to Value

V

V-G

Portfolio

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

10-1

ERi − Rf
σ(Ri − Rf )
Sharpe Ratio

5.81
20.32
0.29

5.60
19.61
0.29

5.51
18.88
0.29

5.80
18.73
0.31

6.37
18.84
0.34

7.10
18.75
0.38

7.88
18.40
0.43

8.58
17.96
0.48

9.09
17.54
0.52

9.25
17.19
0.54

3.44
7.24
0.48

-2.15
1.07
0.98

-2.07
1.03
0.98

CAPM: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + ²it
-1.88 -1.56 -1.06 -0.32 0.60
1.53
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.95
0.98
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.99

2.26
0.92
0.97

2.59
0.89
0.96

4.73
-0.17
0.20

0.02
0.99
-0.46
1.00

CAPM
0.00
0.95
-0.44
1.00

& HML: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + γi HMLt + ²it
-0.04 -0.04 -0.02 0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.93
0.93
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
-0.39 -0.32 -0.22 -0.07 0.13
0.32
0.47
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.02
0.99
0.54
1.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

-0.13
0.23
0.15
-0.31

-0.12
0.21
-0.13
0.39

αi
βi
Ri2

αi
βi
γi
Ri2
ρ(Ri , M )
ρ(Ri , ²1 )
ρ(Ri , ²2 )
ρ(Ri , ²3 )

-0.07
0.12
0.17
-0.40

-0.07
0.12
0.18
-0.40

-0.07
0.12
0.19
-0.40

Unconditional Correlations
-0.07 -0.08 -0.09 -0.10
0.13
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.16
-0.39 -0.39 -0.38 -0.36

-0.11
0.20
0.16
-0.34

-0.12
0.22
0.15
-0.32

Notes: Simulated return statistics for 10 portfolios formed according to price-dividend ratios.
Parameter values for the aggregate market are as in Table 4. The model is simulated at a
quarterly frequency and returns are aggregated up to an annual frequency. Growth of the
dividend shares is assumed to decline linearly from 75% p.a. to -75% p.a. The lower bound
for the dividend share is 0.1%.

Table 11: Growth vs. Value Portfolios: Constant Growth with Lower Bound

G

Growth to Value

V

V-G

Portfolio

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

10-1

ERi − Rf
σ(Ri − Rf )
Sharpe Ratio

5.50
19.35
0.28

5.68
19.63
0.29

5.87
19.58
0.30

6.13
19.42
0.32

6.50
19.20
0.34

7.00
18.89
0.37

7.58
18.44
0.41

8.18
17.88
0.46

8.71
17.46
0.50

9.40
17.60
0.53

3.91
6.72
0.58

-1.97
1.01
0.98

-1.90
1.03
0.98

CAPM: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + ²it
-1.71 -1.40 -0.96 -0.36 0.40
1.24
1.03
1.02
1.01
1.00
0.97
0.94
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.99

1.99
0.91
0.97

2.69
0.91
0.96

4.67
-0.10
0.08

0.02
0.97
-0.43
1.00

CAPM
0.02
0.99
-0.41
1.00

& HML: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + γi HMLt + ²it
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.95
-0.37 -0.31 -0.21 -0.08 0.08
0.26
0.42
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.02
0.97
0.57
1.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

-0.17
0.26
0.14
-0.29

-0.19
0.27
-0.16
0.35

αi
βi
Ri2

αi
βi
γi
Ri2
i

ρ(R , M )
ρ(Ri , ²1 )
ρ(Ri , ²2 )
ρ(Ri , ²3 )

-0.09
0.15
0.19
-0.39

-0.09
0.15
0.18
-0.39

-0.09
0.15
0.18
-0.38

Unconditional Correlations
-0.10 -0.11 -0.12 -0.13
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.20
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.16
-0.38 -0.37 -0.37 -0.35

-0.14
0.22
0.16
-0.33

-0.16
0.24
0.15
-0.31

Notes: Simulated return statistics for 10 portfolios formed according to price-dividend ratios.
Parameter values for the aggregate market are as in Table 4. The model is simulated at a
quarterly frequency and returns are aggregated up to an annual frequency. Growth of the
dividend shares is assumed to be constant at 20% p.a. for the first half of the life-cycle and
at -20% p.a. for the second half of the life-cycle. The lower bound for the dividend share is
0.1%.

Figure 1: Model Solution
0
0.8

A

Bz*(1−φz)

−0.5

−1

0.6
0.4
0.2

−1.5
0

50
100
maturity (quarters)

150

0

50
100
maturity (quarters)

150

0

50
100
maturity (quarters)

150

−0.2

Bx

−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1

Notes: This figure shows the solutions of the system of algebraic equations (11)(13) for the parameter values in Table 4.

Figure 2: Price/Dividend Ratio of Zero-Coupon Equity
z = −2sd
xbar−2sd
xbar
xbar+2sd

1

n

P /D

1.5

0.5
0

0

20

40

60

80
z=0

100

120

140

160

0

20

40

60

80
z = +2sd

100

120

140

160

0

20

40

60

80
100
maturity (quarters)

120

140

160

1

n

P /D

1.5

0.5
0

1

n

P /D

1.5

0.5
0

Notes: This figure plots the ratio of the price of n-period zero-coupon equity
to the aggregate (quarterly) dividend as a function of maturity n for the parameter values
show the zero-coupon curves for
p in Table 4. The three panelsp
2
z = −2||σz ||/ 1 − φz , z =p0 and z = 2||σz ||/ 1 − φ2z . Eachppanel plots three
graphs for x = x̄ − 2||σx ||/ 1 − φ2x , x = x̄ and x = x̄ + 2||σx ||/ 1 − φ2x .

Figure 3: Properties of Zero-Coupon Equity
risk premium

20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

35
volatility

30
25
20
15

Sharpe ratio

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Notes: This figure shows return statistics for zero-coupon equity as a function of
maturity. The top panel plots risk premia of annual level returns over the riskfree
rate. The second panel plots the standard deviation of annual level returns. The
third panel plot the Sharpe ratio (risk premia dividend by standard deviation).

Figure 4: CAPM Regressions for Zero-Coupon Equity
CAPM regressions
15

alpha

10
5
0
−5

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
maturity (years)

25

30

35

40

2

beta

1.5
1
0.5
1

Rsq

0.8
0.6
0.4

Notes: This figure shows results from unconditional CAPM regressions of annual
returns of zero-coupon equity on the market return. The top panel plots α (n) ,
the middle panel plots β (n) and the bottom panel plots the R2(n) as a function of
maturity.

Figure 5: Cross-Sectional Distribution – Linear Growth

Notes: This figure compares the cross-sectional distribution of growth rates of
various cash flow measures and price ratios in the model (assuming linearly declining growth in shares) to those in the data. The top panel plots the distribution
of annual growth rates of dividends, earnings and cash flows across all firms for
the 1952 – 2002 period. Growth rates are censored at 100%. Firms that exit the
sample are assigned a growth rate of -100%. The solid line is the distribution
of annual dividend growth rates for all firms in a simulation of 50,000 quarters.
The bottom panel plots the corresponding distribution of various price multiples
in the data and in the simulated model.

Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Distributions – Constant Growth

Notes: This figure compares the cross-sectional distribution of growth rates of
various cash flow measures and price ratios in the model (assuming constant
growth in shares) to those in the data. The top panel plots the distribution of
annual growth rates of dividends, earnings and cash flows across all firms for the
1952 – 2002 period. Growth rates are censored at 100%. Firms that exit the
sample are assigned a growth rate of -100%. The solid line is the distribution
of annual dividend growth rates for all firms in a simulation of 50,000 quarters.
The bottom panel plots the corresponding distribution of various price multiples
in the data and in the simulated model.

Figure 7: Effect of ρdx on Zero-Coupon Equity
Panel A: ρdx = 0
xbar−2sd
xbar
xbar+2sd

risk premia

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
0

5

10

15
20
25
maturity (quarters)

30

35

40

Panel B: ρdx = −0.5

risk premia

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

xbar−2sd
xbar
xbar+2sd

−0.2
0

5

10

15
20
25
maturity (quarters)

30

35

40

Panel C: ρdx = 0.5
xbar−2sd
xbar
xbar+2sd

risk premia

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
0

5

10

15
20
25
maturity (quarters)

30

35

40

Notes: The three panels show risk premia for zero-coupon equity as a function of
the maturity for the parameter values in Table 4. Each panel has three graphs
that plot risk premia at the mean of xt , x̄, and plus and minus two long-run standard deviations from x̄. The top panel assumes that the correlation of dividend
shocks and shocks to xt is zero, the middle panel assumes that the correlation
of dividend shocks and shocks to xt is -0.5 and the bottom panel assumes that
the correlation of dividend shocks and shocks to xt is 0.5. All other parameter
values are identical.

Figure 8: Regressions on Fundamental Shocks
0.25

0.06
Rsq d

0.08

beta d

0.3

0.2
0.15

0.02
0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

0

10

22

0.04

20

0.035
Rsq z

beta z

0.1

0.04

18
16
14

0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

10

0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

10

0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

10

0.03
0.025

0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

0.02

10

0.4

0.25

Rsq x

−beta x

0.2
0.3

0.15
0.1

0.2

0

2
4
6
8
Portfolio (growth to value)

10

0.05

Notes: This figure plots the OLS coefficients and R2 statistics from regressions
of annual portfolio returns on the fundamental shocks. Firms are constructed
assuming linearly decreasing dividend growth. The top panels regress portfolio returns on the shock to dividends 2σd ²t , the middle panels regress portfolio
returns on the shocks to the component of expected dividend growth that is uncorrelated with the shock to dividends 2σz (2)²t (2), and the bottom panels regress
firm returns on the shocks to the Sharpe ratio 2σx ²t (note that the shocks to the
Sharpe ratio are uncorrelated with shocks to dividends and expected dividends).

Figure 9: Cross-Sectional Distributions – Linear Growth with with Lower Bound

Notes: This figure compares the cross-sectional distribution of growth rates of
various cash flow measures and price ratios in the model (assuming linearly declining growth in shares with a lower bound of 0.1%) to those in the data. The
top panel plots the distribution of annual growth rates of dividends, earnings
and cash flows across all firms for the 1952 – 2002 period. Growth rates are censored at 100%. Firms that exit the sample are assigned a growth rate of -100%.
The solid line is the distribution of annual dividend growth rates for all firms
in a simulation of 50,000 quarters. The bottom panel plots the corresponding
distribution of various price multiples in the data and in the simulated model.

Figure 10: Cross-Sectional Distributions – Constant Growth with Lower Bound

Notes: This figure compares the cross-sectional distribution of growth rates of
various cash flow measures and price ratios in the model (assuming constant
growth in shares with a lower bound of 0.1%) to those in the data. The top panel
plots the distribution of annual growth rates of dividends, earnings and cash flows
across all firms for the 1952 – 2002 period. Growth rates are censored at 100%.
Firms that exit the sample are assigned a growth rate of -100%. The solid line
is the distribution of annual dividend growth rates for all firms in a simulation
of 50,000 quarters. The bottom panel plots the corresponding distribution of
various price multiples in the data and in the simulated model.

