                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TRADE PROTECTION AND INDUSTRY WAGE STRUCTURE IN POLAND

                                            Chor-ching Goh
                                       Beata Smarzynska Javorcik

                                          Working Paper 11143
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11143


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




Forthcoming in Globalization and Poverty, edited by Ann Harrison, to be published by the University of
Chicago Press. We wish to thank Irene Brambilla, Penny Goldberg, Ann Harrison, Nina Pavcnik, Guido
Porto and Ana Revenga for helpful suggestions and Pierella Paci, Jerzy Rozanski and Jan Sasin for making
the data available to us. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the World Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2005 by Chor-ching Goh and Beata Smarzynska Javorcik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Trade Protection and Industry Wage Structure in Poland
Chor-ching Goh and Beata Smarzynska Javorcik
NBER Working Paper No. 11143
February 2005
JEL No. F16

                                            ABSTRACT

This study examines the impact of Poland’s trade liberalization 1994-2001 on the industry wage

structure. The liberalization was undertaken in preparation for Poland’s accession to the European

Union and was more pronounced in industries with larger shares of unskilled labor. Our analysis

indicates that a decrease in an industry tariff was associated with higher wages being earned by

workers employed in the industry, controlling for worker characteristics and geographic variables.

The result is robust to including year and industry fixed effects, controlling for industry-level

exports, imports, concentration, stock of foreign direct investment and capital accumulation. The

finding is consistent with liberalization increasing competitive pressures, forcing firms to restructure

and improve their productivity, which in turn translates into higher profits being shared with

workers. It could also be potentially attributed to trade liberalization lowering the costs of imported

inputs which enhances firm profitability. The result holds when skilled workers are excluded from

the sample, thus suggesting that reductions in trade barriers benefited the unskilled in terms of an

increase in wages.

Chor-ching Goh
The World Bank
1818 H St, NW
Washington, DC 20433
cgoh@worldbank.org



Beata Smarzynska Javorcik
The World Bank
1818 H St, NW
Washington, DC 20433
bjavorcik@worldbank.org
Introduction
       Rapid trade liberalizations undertaken by many developing and transition countries
during the past decade have inspired heated public discussions. Proponents of trade
liberalization posit that for developing countries, many of which are small economies with
abundant labor, opening would lead to rising wages. They point to the substantial increases in
average real wages taking place in open economies in the developing world over the last several
decades as evidence that trade does indeed increase demand for the abundant factor – labor in
this case – much like the trade theory would predict. Opponents of trade liberalization, on the
other hand, speak about the uneven distribution of gains from openness to trade and resulting
increases in wage inequality. They also claim that liberalization will lead to a “race to the
bottom” in wages, and as a consequence, to impoverishment of workers.
       There exists little conclusive evidence about the effects of trade liberalization on wages.
One shortcoming of the early literature has been the use of average industry wage data, which
are assumed to be independent of characteristics of workers in the industry, and the focus on
outcomes (e.g., exports, imports, prices) instead of policy measures (e.g., tariffs). Only recently
researchers have begun to utilize policy variables, such as tariffs, to examine the impact of
liberalization on industry wage premiums which measure the portion of wages that cannot be
explained by a worker’s or a firm’s characteristics but can be explained by a worker’s industry
affiliation. However, the conclusions of such studies have been mixed. On the one hand,
Revenga (1997) and Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) provide evidence suggesting that trade
liberalization erodes wages of workers in previously protected sectors. On the other hand,
Pavcnik et al. (2004) find no significant relationship between liberalization and industry wage
premium and Gaston and Trefler (1994) show that liberalization is associated with a higher
industry wage premium.
       In this paper, we investigate the relationship between trade liberalization and wages to
understand the channel through which trade liberalization affects the wage structure and,
indirectly, the linkage between trade and poverty. Unlike the existing studies, which are based
on the U.S. or Latin American data, this paper focuses on Poland, a Central European country
undergoing transition from planned to market economy. Factor endowments in Poland differ
from those in the countries previously examined. The share of population aged 15-75 with
college education at 9.2 percent in 1999 is lower than that in the United States, yet unlike many


                                                                                                      2
Latin American countries Poland attained universal literacy among the population due to its
socialist legacy.
       We are interested in the impact of trade liberalization on wages because it has important
implications for income inequality and poverty. Industries differ in the composition of
workforce with some having a higher proportion of skilled labor than others. If trade
liberalization erodes wages, and if tariff reduction is greater in sectors with disproportionate
percentage of unskilled labor, as was the case in Poland, then the unskilled could experience a
greater decline in earnings. As in other countries, the educational attainment is a powerful
predictor of poverty status in Poland. For instance, while fewer that 0.6 percent of households
headed by a person with college education were subject to hard poverty in 2001, the same was
true of 12 percent of households headed by an individual with a secondary vocational degree and
18 percent of households whose head had only primary education. As evident from Table 1, the
figures for medium poverty were equally striking. Moreover, this pattern persisted throughout
the whole period of our study 1994-2001 (Topinska and Kuhl, 2003).
       The effect of trade liberalization on income distribution and poverty is likely to be larger
in Poland than in other countries due to the rigidity of the Polish labor market and the slow
change in the regional distribution of economic activities (see Table A1 in Appendix I). Thus,
even a moderate change to wages across industries is likely to exacerbate the existing regional
disparities in incomes and poverty incidence illustrated in Figure 1.
       The rigidity of Poland’s labor regulations is an advantage in our analysis: with the limited
labor mobility across sectors in the short- and medium-term, a worker’s industry affiliation is the
immediate channel through which the effects of trade liberalization will be felt. As illustrated in
Figure 2, employers in Poland are more restricted in their hiring and firing decisions relative to
their counterparts in the United Kingdom, Turkey, Russia, Brazil, Colombia or Mexico, just to
name a few. Figure 2 presents the index of hiring and firing flexibility compiled by the Global
Competitiveness Report (GCR), published jointly by the Geneva-based World Economic Forum
and the Center for International Development at Harvard University in 1996. It is a country
specific measure that quantifies the average response to the survey question: “Is hiring and firing
of workers flexible enough?” It takes on the value of 6 for a very flexible labor market and 1 in
the case of the most rigid ones. Since it is based on the views of “business practitioners” in each
country, it captures not only laws on the books but also their enforcement. According to this



                                                                                                      3
index, Singapore and Hong Kong had the most flexible labor markets while Poland ranked 25th
out of 49 countries. While for Singapore and Hong Kong the index value was above 5; the
United Kingdom, Brazil, the Czech Republic, and Russia (among other countries) had an index
above 4; the index for Poland was equal to 3.6. A similar picture emerges from Figure 3, which
presents the Index on the Flexibility of Individual Dismissal compiled by Djankov et al. (2001).1
Unlike the GCR Index in the previous Figure, this index is based on the existing regulations
rather than their enforcement. In addition to rigid labor markets which hinder worker
reallocation across sectors, labor mobility across regions is limited in Poland due to housing
shortage and prohibitive rent costs (for evidence see Deichmann and Henderson, 2004, Przybyla
and Rutkowski, 2004).
           The second advantage of choosing Poland as the subject of our analysis is the fact that the
changes in its tariffs can be treated as exogenous, as they were stipulated by the Association
Agreement between the European Community and Poland signed in 1991. This agreement
predetermined the schedule of tariff reductions, which took place during the period of interest
1994-2001. Moreover, as the goal of the agreement was free movement of goods between the
two entities and Poland’s accession to what is now called the European Union, all tariffs on
manufactured products (with the exception of processed food) were brought down to zero by
2001. Poland’s trade liberalization was rapid and encompassed a drastic reduction in tariffs from
over 20 percent in leather manufacturing; and over 15 percent in wood; non-metallic; rubber and
plastic products in 1991 to zero within a decade.
           We investigate the relationship between trade liberalization and wages in an expanded
Mincerian wage equation. We pool together information from Labor Force Surveys conducted
during the 1994-2001 period into one regression. Controlling for worker-, firm-, sector- and
location-specific characteristics as well as year and industry fixed effects, we expand the wage
equation to include tariff variables. The analysis covers 14 manufacturing sectors, including
electricity production. Given the nature of the specification used, our attention is restricted to
employed individuals, and thus we do not consider the implications of trade liberalization for
unemployment.
           We find that workers in industries with lower tariffs tend to have higher wages. This
result is robust to including year and industry fixed effects, industry exports, imports,

1
    We are grateful to Simeon Djankov for providing us with the index.


                                                                                                     4
concentration and capital accumulation, in addition to controlling for detailed worker
characteristics. The result is consistent with a reduction in tariff leading to increased competitive
pressures in the liberalizing industry which forces companies to restructure and improve their
productivity, which in turn results in the gains being shared with employees. This interpretation
is in line with the findings of many studies that established a positive association between trade
liberalization and productivity.2 To further support this interpretation we employ firm level data
for the period 1996-2000 to demonstrate that trade liberalization indeed resulted in the increased
productivity in liberalizing sectors. The robust and significant relationship between a reduction
in tariff and an increase in wages is also consistent with the stylized fact that there is much
inefficiency in a planned economy; a sector that is exposed to greater foreign competition during
the transition becomes more efficient and productive. Another possible explanation for the
finding is that trade liberalization makes imported inputs cheaper which enhances profitability of
the firms relying on such inputs. Findings of Fernandes (2003) appear to support this hypothesis
but because of the aggregated nature of our industry classification, we are not able to investigate
this hypothesis in-depth.
        Further, our findings do not suggest any erosion of wages of the unskilled (i.e., “race to
the bottom” in wages) from trade liberalization as they hold when we exclude skilled workers
from the sample. Moreover, our data indicate that industries with a greater reduction in tariffs are
also those with higher proportions of the unskilled.
        This study is organized as follows. The next section presents some facts on Poland’s
trade liberalization. It is followed by a description of the empirical strategy and the data
employed in the analysis. Then we present the estimation results. The last section concludes.



Trade Liberalization in Poland
        In September 1989 Poland’s first non-communist government since the end of World II
assumed power, taking over the economy with a large budget deficit and a triple-digit inflation.
On January 1, 1990 the government implemented a bold reform program (“Balcerowicz plan”)
aimed at stabilizing the economy, beginning the process of economic liberalization and
privatization. During the initial period of transition (1990-91) Poland experienced a deep
2
  See Harrison (1994) for Cote d’Ivoire, Krishna and Mitra (1998) for India, Kim (2000) for Korea, Pavcnik (2002)
for Chile and Fernandes (2003) for Colombia.


                                                                                                                    5
recession, followed by a strong recovery with the average annual growth rate of GDP equal to
almost 5 percent during the 1992-2000 period.
       Transition to a market economy completely revolutionized Poland’s international trade.
The country moved from a centrally-planned system of exports and imports conducted by state
trading agencies under the arrangements of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance to a
free market where local producers suddenly become subject to the forces of competition. In
1991, trading under the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance collapsed and in December of
the same year Poland signed an Association Agreement with the European Community, which
was a prelude to its future membership in the European Union (EU). In July of 1995 Poland
joined the World Trade Organization. Severe recessions in Poland’s traditional export markets
coupled with lowering of tariffs in Western European countries resulted in massive reorientation
of Polish international trade from East to West.
       The Association Agreement signed by Poland (and other Central and Eastern European
countries) stipulated asymmetric phase-out of import tariffs with the goal of free trade in
industrial goods by the end of 1999. As a result, in 1999 the average Polish tariff on imports
from the EU, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA) countries was brought down to 6.5 percent, as compared to the Most-
Favored-Nation (MFN) rate of 15.6 percent and the 34.6 percent rate applied to non-WTO
members. The rapid liberalization of trade in manufacturing products was not, however,
accompanied by similar changes in agricultural goods. While in 1999, the simple average
applied MFN rate on manufacturing products was equal to 11.1 percent, the corresponding figure
for agriculture was 34.2 percent. The difference largely reflects the tariffication of variable
levies agree by Poland during the Uruguay Round. As Poland was a non-market economy for
the base years of 1986-88, selected in the Uruguay Round for estimating tariff equivalents of
non-tariff barriers prohibited on agricultural products, Poland applied the generally much higher
EU tariff rates as the basis for tariffication, and thus considerably increased its protection of the
agricultural sector (WTO 2000).
       Figure 4 shows the reduction in sectoral tariffs applied to imports from the European
Union and from the world, respectively, between 1994 and 2001. The largest reduction of 23
percentage points was observed in leather and leather products, followed by a 15-percent-point
or higher reductions in other non-metallic products; rubber and plastic products; wood and wood



                                                                                                        6
products; and other manufacturing. The smallest change was registered in tariffs on electricity
and natural gas, which were low to begin with. By 1999 all industrial products from the EU with
the exception of food, beverage and tobacco products; motor vehicles; and petroleum and
petroleum products were entering Poland duty free; however, imports from the world were still
subject to positive tariffs. As of 1999, about three-quarters of Poland’s exports and imports were
conducted under preferential trading arrangements and thus subject to preferential tariffs.
       As detailed in Appendix II, the Association Agreement predetermined the speed and
extent of trade liberalization which allows us to treat tariff changes as exogenous. Since many
agricultural products and processed foods, beverages and tobacco were excluded from the
liberalization specified in the agreement and/or remained subject to quantitative restrictions, we
will not include them in the analysis.



Related Literature
       The theoretical context for our analysis is provided by the specific factors model. The
model focuses on the short-run and assumes that factors of production are immobile across
sectors. Given the rigidities present in Poland’s labor market, this model constitutes a suitable
basis for thinking about the relationship between trade and wages in the Polish context. The
model predicts a positive association between protection and industry wages. Protection reduces
imports and reduced imports increase labor demand, which in turn increases wages. This
mechanism raises wages in the protected industry relative to the economy-wide average wage.
       The second channel through which trade and protection affect wages is imperfectly
competitive factor markets. For example, unions may extract part of the rents from protection in
the form of more jobs rather than higher wages. Unionization is not a material issue in our
analysis because the power of trade unions has been substantially weakened during the transition
process. Trade union density in Poland has dropped from 80 percent of the workforce in the
1980s to 14 percent in 2002. The highest trade union density was observed in mining (43.8
percent), and non-tradable sectors such as transport (27.3 percent), and education (27.5 percent)
(Boeri and Garibaldi, 2003).
       The third channel through which trade and protection affect wages is imperfectly
competitive product markets. Trade and protection affect the strategic interaction between firms



                                                                                                     7
which in turn affects firm performance and wages. For example, if trade protection promotes
entry into an industry by enhancing the profitability of existing firms, and if new entrants face
setup costs, then protection promotes inefficient entry and raises average production costs
(Horstmann and Markusen, 1986).
       Another strand of literature particularly relevant to a transition economy, like Poland,
which until 1990 was heavily protected and not subject to market forces and competition, is the
literature on trade liberalization and productivity. Inefficiencies and lower productivity
associated with an increase in trade protection have been illustrated in the literature using the
computable general equilibrium models (for example, Cox and Harris, 1985; Brown et al. 1992).
There is also strong evidence from findings of firm-level studies that reduction in trade
protection results in productivity improvement. The competition effect from imports has been
documented by many empirical studies (Roberts and Tybout, 1997). For instance, Pavcnik
(2002) finds that the productivity of plants in the import-competing sectors grew 3-10 percent
more than in the non-traded goods sector during trade liberalization in Chile, suggesting that
exposure to international competition forces previously shielded plants to improve their
performance. Fernandes (2003) demonstrates that trade liberalization in Colombia has increased
plant-level productivity, primarily through gains in within-plant productivity. Other studies
reaching similar conclusions include Harrison (1994) for Cote d’Ivoire, Krishna and Mitra
(1998) for India, Kim (2000) for Korea, and Hay (2001) for Brazil.



Data and Methodology
Labor Force Survey (LFS)

       The analysis is based on the data collected through the Polish Labor Force Survey (LFS).
The survey has been conducted four times each year since the fall of 1992, and we have access to
selected quarters of the surveys during the period 1992-2001. Unfortunately, it is not possible to
employ all eleven years in the analysis as the 1992 and 1993 surveys were based on a different
industry classification. Thus, our analysis covers the period of 1994 through 2001. We use the
second quarter of years 1993 through 2001, except in years 1999 and 2001, for which only
information for the first quarter was available.




                                                                                                    8
       The survey sample is representative of the country’s population. Sampling for the LFS
follows the two-stage household sampling. First, the stratification is based on voivodships
(administrative districts) and primary sampling units are sampled from each strata with
diversified sampling probability, proportional to the number of households in a primary sampling
unit. Second, a determined number of households are selected randomly from each primary
sampling unit, depending on the size of primary sampling units. For example, 8 households are
sampled from primary sampling units from rural municipalities, and 5 households are sampled
from primary sampling units from large cities.
       Between 1993 and 1998, the sample was interviewed only in the middle month of the
quarter whereas since 1999, a uniform number of randomly selected households was interviewed
in every week of the 13 weeks throughout the quarter. In each quarter about 24 thousand
households were interviewed, amounting to about 40 thousand individuals sampled. Members of
households above aged 15 were asked questions on their employment status, type of employers,
sector of employment, monthly earnings, weekly hours worked, and personal characteristics.
Unfortunately, wage information on self-employed is not available as questions about earnings
were not asked to the self-employed. Employees make up about 70 percent of the sample in the
survey, and self-employed, another 25 percent, and the remaining 5 percent are unpaid family
workers. Employment sectors are classified according to a variant of the European NACE
classification system, which includes 34 sectors, 14 of which pertain to manufacturing activities.



Empirical Framework

       We investigate the relationship between trade liberalization and wages by estimating a
reduced form model with the logarithm of real hourly wages being the dependent variable. The
real hourly wage is calculated by deflating the reported monthly wage to 1992 zlotys using the
Consumer Price Index from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics and dividing it by the
number of hours worked in the reporting week multiplied by the number of weeks (4.2). Our
sample is restricted to individuals of ages 15-75 inclusive, employed in the manufacturing and
electricity sectors. We estimate the following wage equation (1) by pooling all workers from the
1994-2001 Labor Force Surveys
(1)            ln wit = α + X it β + δ tariff jt + λ j + δ t + ε it



                                                                                                 9
where ln wit is the log of real wages of worker i employed in industry j and observed in the LFS
in year t. Note that the data set is not a true panel but consists of repeated cross-sections. Xit is
the vector of worker characteristics that include age, age squared, marital status, gender, a
dummy for the educational attainment category, a dummy for the occupation category, a dummy
for employment in the private sector, a dummy for the geographic region (voivoidship) and a
dummy for the size of the city where the worker lives. Tariffjt represents the average tariff
applied to imports of industry j’s products in year t.      j   denotes the fixed effect for the worker’s
industry affiliation, and   t   is the year fixed effect. Year fixed effects are included to absorb
economy wide shocks that may affect wages while industry dummies control for sector-specific
effects, such as for instance, prevalence of labor unions. The standard errors are clustered on
industry-year combinations to adjust for the fact that while our variable of interest (tariff) is at
the industry level, the regression is performed at the micro level (see Moulton 1990).
        Tariffjt is defined as the simple average of tariffs on products of industry j imported at
time t. We use tariffs vis-à-vis the European Union as well as tariffs pertaining to imports from
the world. We experiment with trade-weighted average tariffs and the results are similar to those
for the simple averages, therefore we report only the latter. The tariff data come from the World
Bank’s WITS database.
        We estimate the effects of tariff changes on workers’ wages while controlling for the
individual worker’s characteristics as well as for other potential influences (e.g., geographic and
sectoral variables). Later, we also allow returns to schooling to vary by years. To eliminate a
potential omitted variable bias, we also include such controls as the Herfindahl Index, measuring
concentration in the industry, capital accumulation in the industry, stock of foreign direct
investment (FDI) in the sector, sectoral imports and exports. We use lagged values to avoid
potential simultaneity bias. The Herfindahl index pertains to four largest firms in the sector and
is calculated based on firm level data from the Amadeus database covering the period 1994-2001.
The information on capital accumulation comes from various issues of the Polish Statistical
Yearbook. The FDI figures are from the Foreign Trade Research Institute (various issues). Trade
data come from the UN COMTRADE database.




                                                                                                            10
Descriptive Statistics

       Before proceeding to the empirical results, we briefly discuss the summary statistics. As
presented in Table 2, the average age of workers in our sample was 56 in 1994 and increased
steadily to 59 years in 2000. However, there was a sharp drop in 2001, with the average age
equal to only 39 years. Average hours of work remained quite steady at about 41 hours
throughout the period, with the exception of 2001 when a decline to 39 was registered. About
three quarters of workers in our sample were married, and females constituted less than half (45-
47 percent) of the sample throughout the period. In 1994, only 24 percent of workers were
employed in the private sector, but by 2001 this figure increased to 49 percent. Throughout the
second half of the 1990s, almost all employed (97 percent) considered their jobs permanent, but
in 2001 this figure dropped to 88 percent. The real average hourly wage increased by about 50
percent between 1994 and 2001.
       The educational attainments have increased during the period considered. The proportion
of workers with primary school education or less fell from 13.7 percent to 10.5 percent. The
shares of workers with general secondary education or vocational education have remained
constant at 7 percent and 35 percent, respectively. The percentage of workers with tertiary
education rose—the share of those with university degrees increased from 12 to 15 percent.
       Table 3 presents the distribution of labor across industries in each year during the 1994-
2001 period. The figures reflect structural changes taking place in the economy during this
period, namely a fall in the agricultural and mining employment and a rise of services sectors
which until 1990 had been underdeveloped. As for the latter, a particularly strong expansion was
observed in wholesale and retail trade (43 percent growth), hotel services (71 percent growth);
financial, banking and real estate services (at 43 percent). Employment in manufacturing
industries remained relatively stable with the exception of plastic and rubber products which
registered a 89 percent growth whereas machinery has contracted, halving its share.
       The changes in the economic structure have also affected the role of unions in the Polish
economy. Mining and machinery sectors used to be industries with strong union presence, but
the large fall in employment in these industries contributed to erosion of unions in Poland, as
was the case in many other European countries where sectors with highest number of union
members had contracted (Boeri and Garibaldi, 2003). Unionization has also become weaker
because of privatization and the increase in the number of smaller enterprises. Historically, 100


                                                                                                  11
percent of large state-owned enterprises (250+ employees), and 75 percent of medium-sized
state-owned enterprises (50-250 employees) had two or more unions. After being privatized,
however, only 5 percent of large private companies had unions. Moreover, unions are totally
absent in newly created small private companies (Gardawski et al., 1998). Thus, unionization is
not a significant force in Poland during the period of our analysis.
        Within each industry, we observe changes in the composition of labor force. As
illustrated in Table 4, which presents the share of unskilled workers in each industry, with the
exception of the paper and pulp manufacturing and social and communal services sector where
there have been increases in the shares of unskilled workers, the other industries registered
declines of different magnitudes. Sectors such as construction, agriculture, wood product
manufacturing and textile manufacturing experienced a limited fall (3-5 percent) in the shares of
unskilled workers, whereas industries such as banking and financial services; rubber and plastic
product manufacturing observed larger declines (44 percent, and 57 percent, respectively) over
time.
        As evident from Figure 5, sectors with a higher proportion of unskilled workers
experienced a larger reduction in import tariffs between 1994 and 2001. The correlation between
the unskilled labor share and the change in tariff is –0.644. The sector with the largest decrease
(23 percentage points) in the average tariff vis-à-vis the European Union is the leather
manufacturing in which the shares of unskilled labor were 22 percent and 17 percent in 1994 and
2001, respectively. In contrast, machinery and equipment industry had the smallest decrease (8
percent) in tariff and the shares of unskilled labor were 11 percent and 5 percent in 1994 and
2001, respectively.



Empirical Results

        Table 5 presents the full set of explanatory variables in our basic wage model which
includes year and industry dummies. Our sample encompasses manufacturing (except for the
food, beverage and tobacco sector, excluded because of the concerns regarding non-tariff barriers
and tariffs not being predetermined), and the electricity sector. The coefficients on the worker
characteristics are generally significant, with the exception of a dummy for employment in the
private sector. The coefficients also have their expected signs. Older workers tend to earn more.


                                                                                                   12
Female workers with similar characteristics earn on average less than their male counterparts;
married workers tend to earn more possibly due to marriage signaling stability; the returns to
schooling also have their expected signs with significantly higher returns for a tertiary education.
There are also wage premiums enjoyed by workers living in larger cities.
       Moving on to the variables of interest, the results suggest that industry tariffs are
negatively correlated with workers’ hourly wages, controlling for an individual worker’s
characteristics, geographic variables and employment in the private sector. Both the coefficient
on tariffs vis-à-vis the European Union as well as the coefficient on tariffs vis-à-vis the world are
negative and statistically significant at the five and the one percent level, respectively. This
finding indicates that workers in more liberalized sectors earn more controlling for all observable
characteristics of the worker, the job and the industry. This finding is robust to including year
and industry fixed effects. In this basic specification, a 10 percentage point decline in the
industry tariff vis-à-vis the EU is associated with a 2.6 percent increase in wages of workers
employed in the industry. For tariffs on imports from the world the corresponding increase in
wages is 3.4 percent.
       Next, we add to the basic model controls for industry concentration, sectoral imports and
exports to demonstrate that our results are robust to the inclusion of additional controls. In the
top panel of Table 6, we present the results for the simple average of import tariffs in a given
industry vis-à-vis the European Union. In the bottom panel, we present results employing tariffs
vis-à-vis the world. As the coefficients on worker characteristics remain very similar to those in
the basic specification, this and the following tables will only present the effects of our variables
of interest—tariffs and sector-specific characteristics. The specification in column (1) includes
the lagged value of Herfindahl index, which captures industry concentration, in addition to all
variables present in the basic specification. Controlling for the industry concentration does not
change our earlier conclusion that lower trade protection is associated with higher wages. In
column (2), we include lagged Herfindahl index and lagged imports (expressed in logarithmic
form). In the top panel with tariffs on imports from the EU we employ figures pertaining to
trade with the EU. Similarly, when tariffs vis-à-vis the world are used, trade figures pertain to
trade with the world. As before, tariffs are negatively correlated with wages. In column (3), we
include lagged exports (expressed in logarithmic form) in addition to the variables listed in the
previous column. As before, lower tariffs are associated with higher wages and the effect is



                                                                                                     13
significant at the one percent level. As for other industry-specific variables, only lagged exports
appear to be statistically significant. The positive coefficient on exports suggests that export-
oriented industries offer a wage premium to workers employed there.
        To ensure that our tariff variables do not simply proxy for the increased ability of sectors
to export, we conduct two checks. First, we calculate the correlation between the annual changes
in industry tariffs vis-à-vis the EU (or the world) and the annual changes in exports to the EU (or
the world). The correlations are quite low -.02 (.12). For imports, the corresponding figures are
-.04 (.06). Second, we estimate two additional specifications: one with contemporaneous
imports and exports but without tariffs and another one with contemporaneous imports, exports
and tariffs. If tariffs simply proxy for the sector’s ability to export, the tariff variable should lose
its significance. This is not the case, though. While contemporaneous exports are positively
correlated with industry wages, the coefficient on tariffs remains negative, similar in magnitude
to the earlier regressions and statistically significant at the one percent level. As before, industry
imports do not appear to have a statistically significant effect on wages.
        To address the concern that there may be other sector-specific time-varying factors
affecting wages, we experiment with additional controls, such as, capital accumulation, stock of
foreign direct investment and the share of unskilled labor. The first two variables are expressed
in logarithms. The last variable has been calculated based on the Labor Force Survey. All three
controls enter as first lags. Additionally, in all specifications we include the lagged value of
industry concentration. Results using tariffs vis-à-vis the European Union are presented in the
top panel of Table 7 and those using tariffs vis-à-vis the world are in the bottom panel. In
column (1), controlling for capital accumulation and the industry concentration, we still find that
lower tariffs are associated with higher wages. Also, there is a mildly positive correlation
between capital accumulation and wages. In column (2), we control for industry’s concentration
and FDI stock in the sector, and similarly we find a negative and significant relationship between
tariffs and wages. However, FDI stock does not appear to have any significant effect on wages.
In column (3), we control for capital accumulation, foreign direct investment, industry’s
concentration, and the share of unskilled labor. The effect of tariff on wages is still significantly
negative suggesting that workers in sectors with greater extent of liberalization benefit from
higher wages, even after controlling for observable individual, sectoral, and geographical
characteristics.



                                                                                                      14
       As a robustness check, we repeat the above analyses by allowing returns to schooling to
change over time. To do so, we combine our seven education categories into three groups:
tertiary, secondary and primary or less, and interact each education group with year dummies.
The results are very similar. Table 8 presents the basic specification with additional controls
such as capital accumulation, stock of foreign direct investment and the share of unskilled labor.
Ceteris paribus, workers in more liberalized sectors receive higher wages.
       As another robustness check, not reported here, we re-estimate all the specifications
correcting standard errors for clustering on industries, rather than industry-year combinations.
Doing so does not change the conclusions of the paper.
       Finally, we exclude skilled workers (i.e., those with university education) from our
sample and present the estimation results of the sub-sample of unskilled workers in Table 9 and
Table 10. The findings are very similar to those for the full sample in terms of the magnitudes of
the impact from tariff reduction and the significance levels. The findings indicate that a reduction
in the tariff is associated with wage increases for unskilled workers, after controlling for sector-
and worker-specific characteristics. Thus, reductions in trade barriers appear to have benefited
the unskilled in terms of an increase in wages.
       In summary, our results suggest that lower trade protection in Poland has been associated
with higher wages. These findings are consistent with those of Gaston and Trefler (1994) based
on cross-sectional data for the U.S. Below we discuss four potential explanations for our results.
The first potential explanation is that output mix has shifted towards the production of labor-
intensive goods, raising the return to labor relative to other factors of production. Since trade
protection was greatest prior to trade reform in labor-intensive sectors, this could explain why
workers in the sectors which had a reduction in protection appear to experience higher wages. If
this was the story, we would expect to see a shift in the pattern of production or employment
towards labor-intensive industries. The data presented in Tables 3 and A1 demonstrate,
however, that this was not the case.
       The second potential explanation is that a reduction in tariffs has been associated with an
increase in firms’ ability to export. However, as demonstrated earlier, there is hardly any
correlation between annual changes in industry tariffs and industry exports. Moreover, as
illustrated in Table 6, controlling for contemporaneous exports does not lead to a decline in the
significance level or the magnitude of the estimated effect of tariffs.



                                                                                                    15
       The third possibility is that trade liberalization increases firm productivity and
profitability through access to cheaper or better intermediate inputs. While the high level of
aggregation in our industry classification prevents us from testing this hypothesis explicitly,
empirical support for this hypothesis has been presented by Fernandes (2003). She finds that
among Colombian plants that changed their imports, most plants that experienced productivity
increases during the period of trade liberalization were also the ones that increased their reliance
on imported inputs.
       The final possibility is that trade liberalization has led to increased competitive pressures
in industries, thus forcing firms to restructure and improve their productivity. This argument is
in line with results of many firm-level studies, cited earlier, which find that trade liberalization
leads to higher productivity. This channel is even more plausible in the context of a transition
economy, like Poland, where local firms were sheltered from any kind of competition until 1990.
To provide further evidence on the plausibility of this channel, we use firm level data for the
same period to demonstrate that trade liberalization led to a higher total factor productivity in
Polish firms. To make this exercise as comparable as possible to the industry premium results
we use the same aggregation of industries and a comparable time period (1996-2000). Full
details are provided in Appendix III.



Conclusions
       In this study, we examine the relationship between changes in tariffs and wages during
Poland’s trade liberalization 1994-2001. Our results indicate that a worker’s wages are higher in
industries with a larger reduction in trade protection, after controlling for individual worker’s
characteristics, such as age, education, gender, marital status, geographic variables and
employment in the private sector. Our findings are robust to controlling for industry-level
exports and imports, degree of concentration, capital accumulation, FDI stock and the share of
unskilled workers employed. Moreover, they are not affected by controlling for unobserved but
time-invariant industry characteristics.
       This result is consistent with the argument that reduction in trade protection brings about
higher competition from imports, which can enhance worker productivity and industry
performance. The robust and significant relationship between a reduction in tariff and an



                                                                                                       16
increase in wages is also consistent with the stylized fact that there is much inefficiency in a
planned economy; a sector that is exposed to greater foreign competition during the transition
becomes more efficient and productive. Another possible explanation is that trade liberalization
improves access to cheaper or better intermediates inputs which could enhance profitability.
       In addition, we find that industries with larger reduction in tariffs are also those with
higher shares of unskilled labor. When we exclude skilled labor from our sample, the results still
hold. Thus, there is no evidence of trade liberalization leading to an erosion of wages of the
unskilled or the so called “race to the bottom”




                                                                                                   17
Bibliography
Boeri, Tito and Pietro Garibaldi. 2003. “How Far Is Warsaw from Lisbon?” Bocconi University,
       mimeo.

Brown, Drussila K., Alan V Deardorff and Robert Stern. 1992. “A NAFTA: Analytical Issues
      and a Computational Assessment,” World Economy, vol. 15. (1): 11-30

Cox, David and Richard Harris 1985. “A Quantitative Assessment of the Economic Impact on
      Canada of Sectoral Free Trade with the United States,” The Canadian Journal of
      Economics, vol.19 No. 3, pp 377-394.

Deichmann, Uwe, and Vernon Henderson 2004. “Urban and Regional Dynamics in Poland”,
      mimeo, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanez, Andrei Shleifer and Juan Carlos
      Botero. 2001. The Regulation of Labor”, mimeo, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fernandes, Ana. 2003. “Trade Policy, Trade Volumes, and Plant-level Productivity in Colombian
      Manufacturing Industries,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3064,
      Washington, DC: World Bank.

Foreign Trade Research Institute. (various issues). Foreign Investments in Poland. Warsaw.

Gaston, N. and D. Trefler. 1994. “Protection, trade, and wages: Evidence from U.S.
       manufacturing,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 47, pp. 575-93.

Goldberg, Penny and Nina Pavcnik 2004. “Trade, Wages and the Political Economy of Trade
      Protection: Evidence from the Colombian Trade Reforms,” forthcoming Journal of
      International Economics.

Harrison, A. 1994. “Productivity, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Reform: Theory and
       Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 36(1-2): 53-73.

Hay, DA. 2001. “The Post-1990 Brazilian Trade Liberalization and the Performance of Large
      Manufacturing Firms: Productivity, Market Share and Profits,” Economic Journal vol.
      111: 620-641.

Horstmann, Ignatius, and James Markusen 1986. “Up the Average Cost Curve: Inefficient Entry
      and the New Protectionism, “ Journal of International Economics, vol. 20 No. 3-4: 225-
      247.

Kim, E. 2000. “Trade Liberalization and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing
      Industries: Price Protection, Market Power and Scale Efficiency,” Journal of
      Development Economics, vol 62(1): 55-83.




                                                                                             18
Krishna, P and D Mitra. 2000. “Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and Productivity
       Growth: New Evidence from India,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 56(2): 447-
       462.

Moulton, Brent R. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
      Variables on Micro Units,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2): 334-338.

Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
       from Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 69: 245-76.

Pavcnik, Nina, Andreas Blom, Pinelopi Goldberg and Norbert Schady. 2004. “Trade
       Liberalization and Industry Wage Structure: Evidence from Brazil,” World Bank
       Economic Review, forthcoming.

Przybyla, Marcin and Jan Rutkowski 2004. “Poland: Regional Dimensions of Unemployment,”
       mimeo, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Roberts, Mark and Jim Tybout (eds.). 1997. Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro
       Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Structure. New York: Oxford University
       Press.

Topinska, Irena and Karol Kuhl. 2003. “Poverty in Poland. Profile, 2001 and Changes, 1994-
      2001. Warsaw University, mimeo.

WTO. 2000. Trade Policy Review. Poland 2000. Geneva.

World Economic Forum. 1996. Global Competitiveness Report. Geneva: World Economic
      Forum.




                                                                                               19
      Figure 1. Regional incidence of poverty in Poland in 2001




Source: Topinska and Kuhl (2003)




                                                                  20
                                                                                 The GCRIndex:
                                                                 the higher the index, the greater the flexibility




                                                         2.0
                                                               2.5
                                                                        3.0
                                                                                   3.5
                                                                                             4.0
                                                                                                       4.5
                                                                                                                 5.0
                                                                                                                       5.5


                                               Singapore


                                               Hong Kong


                                           United Kingdom


                                             NewZealand


                                                     Peru


                                                   Turkey


                                                  Russia


                                                Malaysia




     Source: World Economic Forum (1996)
                                           Czech Republic


                                                    Brazil


                                                  Taiwan


                                                   Egypt


                                                Colombia


                                                  Canada


                                                    Chile


                                                  Mexico


                                                  Poland


                                               Philippines


                                                   Japan


                                               Venezuela


                                                Argentina
                                                                                                                             Figure 2. Rigidity of Poland’s labor market in international comparison -Index I




                                                  France


                                                Germany




21
                                                             Total Index of Rules for Dismissal:




                                                     2
                                                         3
                                                              4
                                                                   5
                                                                        6
                                                                             7
                                                                                   8
                                                                                        9
                                                                                             10
                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                        12



                                         Belgium
                                      Hong Kong
                                        Australia
                                     New Zealand
                                        Malaysia




     Source: Djankov et al. (2001)
                                      Switzerland
                                        Denmark
                                           Japan
                                            U.S.
                                              UK
                                         Canada
                                          Ireland
                                        Romania
                                         Bulgaria
                                          Austria
                                             Italy
                                          Taiwan
                                       Argentina
                                         Hungary
                                            Chile
                                      Venezuela
                                         Norway
                                     Netherlands
                                          Poland
                                                                                                             Figure 3. Rigidity of Poland’s labor market in international comparison -Index II




                                        Colombia
                                           Brazil
                                          Mexico




22
                                                                                                                                                                                          reduction in import tariff
                                                             decline in import tariff
                                                                                                                                                                                (difference between the 1994 and 2001 tariff
                                                 (difference between the 1994 and 2001 tariff
                                                                                                                                                                                                 in % points)
                                                                   in % points)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                         Te
                                                                                                                                                                                             xt




                                                                   -5
                                                                               0
                                                                                   5
                                                                                       10
                                                                                            15
                                                                                                 20
                                                                Te                                                                                                                              ile
                                                                    xt
                                                                      ile                                                                                                                Le s
                                                                Le s                                                                                                                        at
                                                                   at                                                                                                                           he
                                                                      he                                                                                         C                                  r
                                          C                                r                                                                                      ok                        W
                                           ok                      W                                                                                                  e,          Pu           o  od
                                               e,         Pu          oo                                                                                                 re            l
                                                  re                      d                                                                                                fin p, p
                                                    fin lp,                                                                                                                    ed             ap
                                                        ed pa                                                                                                                        pe            er
                                                             pe per                                                                                                                       tro
                                                                 tro                                                                                                                          le
                                                                     le                                                                                                R
                                                R           C           u                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                         ub Che um
                                          O
                                                  ub           he m                                                                                                th       be              m
                                            th       b er          m                                                                                                 er          ra           ic
                                                                                                                                                                                     n            al
                                              er           an ical                                                                                                       no              d           s
                                                  no           d           s




     Source: World Bank’s WITS database
                                                                                                                                                                            n-             pl
                                                     n-           pl                                                                                                           m              as
                                                        m            as                                                                                                            et             tic
                                                           et           t ic                                                                                                           al
                                                              al                                                                                                                          lic
                                                                 lic                                                                                                 M         B
                                              M         B            pr                                                                                                ac asi
                                                                                                                                                                                              pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                  od
                                                ac asi                  od                                                                                                h            c
                                                   h           c                                                                                                             an me
                                                      an me                                                                                                                       d            t
                                                          d           t                                                                                                              eq als
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                simple avg




                                                             eq als                                                                                                        El             ui
                                                    El           ui                                                                                                           ec             p
                                                                    p




                                                                                                 simple avg
                                                       ec                                                                                                                          tri          ne
                                                           tr          ne                                                                                                                           c
                                                   Tr ical                 c                                                                                              Tr cal
                                                                                                                                                                              an            eq
                                                       an          e                                                                                                              sp             ui
                                                                                                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Trade Liberalization vis a vis the EU




                                                          sp qu
                                                              or         ip                                                                                                            or
                                                                                                                      Trade Liberalization vis a vis the World
                                                                                                                                                                                           te
                                                                  te
                                                                                                                                                                                   M          q  u
                                                          M qui                                                                                                        El             an ip
                                                El
                                                   ec         a            p                                                                                              ec
                                                                                                                                                                                           uf
                                                      tri nuf                                                                                                                tri
                                                         ci           n                                                                                                          ci
                                                            ty          e                                                                                                           ty nec
                                                               an c                                                                                                                      an
                                                                   d                                                                                                                        d
                                                                      ga                                                                                                                       ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                trade weighted avg




                                                                           s
                                                                                                 trade weighted avg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 4. Reduction in Poland’s import tariffs between 2001 and 1994




23
Figure 5. Share of unskilled labor and tariff reduction (1994-2001)

                                                                                            0.3
     shares of unskilled labor

                                                                                           0.25
                                                                                            0.2

                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                             0
                                 -25       -20         -15          -10          -5               0
                                       reduction in import tariff 1994-2001 (in percent)




                                                                                                      24
Table 1. Hard and medium poverty in Poland in 2001

                                            Poverty Headcount (% )
  Education of the hh head          Hard poverty      Medium poverty
Tertiary                                    0.57                 1.29
Secondary general                           3.75                 6.96
Secondary vocational                       12.16                19.01
Primary                                    17.72                26.76
TOTAL                                       9.60                15.17

Source: Topinska and Kuhl (2003).




                                                                        25
Table 2. Summary Statistics
                                          1994    1995     1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001
real hourly wage (in PLN)                  1.03   1.05     1.14    1.25    1.32    1.35    1.47     1.49
                                          [.56]    [.57]   [.64]   [.74]   [.72]   [.79]   [1.0]    [1.1]
age                                        55.9   56.6     57.2    58.1    58.7    58.9    59.5     39.2
                                          [9.6]    [9.6] [9.57] [9.5]      [9.3]   [9.2]   [8.9]   [10.6]
weekly hours worked                        41.6   41.9     41.9    41.9    41.6    41.1    40.5     39.4
                                          [7.8]    [7.6]   [7.4]   [7.3]   [7.3]   [6.9]   [8.2]    [9.3]


married                                   77%     77%      77%     78%     79%     80%     81%      74%
female                                    45%     46%      46%     45%     46%     46%     46%      47%


working in private sector                 24%     27%      30%     34%     37%     38%     41%      49%
current job is non-temporary              97%     97%      97%     97%     98%     97%     97%      88%

Highest level attained
(% by categories)
primary or less                           13.73 13.62 12.94 11.94          11.1    11.24 10.46     10.53
general secondary                          7.51   7.34     6.81    6.48    6.45    6.30    6.22     7.18
basic vocational                          35.62 35.30 35.37 35.96 35.66 34.94 34.92                35.15
2-yr-college or
secondary vocational                      30.93 31.41 31.68 32.37 32.67 32.83 32.07                32.28
University                                12.22 12.34 13.20 13.25 14.11 14.71 16.33                14.86

Size of City
(% by categories)
100,000 or more people                    33.28 32.03      31.4    30.16 29.16 29.04 27.72         28.73
less than 100,000 people                  35.78 37.19 38.66 38.96 38.11 38.41 40.14                38.54
village                                   30.94 30.78 29.95 30.88 32.73 32.56 32.14                32.72


Num of observations                      15,509 15,798 15,056 14,623 14,312 12,594 9,206           10,650



Notes:
[..] denotes standard deviations. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only.




                                                                                                              26
Table 3. Distribution of employment by industries, 1994-2001
                                 1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001

Agriculture, fishery             0.044   0.037   0.033   0.032   0.033   0.032   0.029   0.024
Mining                           0.047   0.044   0.039   0.036   0.036   0.032   0.025   0.021
Manufacturing of which
    Food, beverage, tobacco      0.053   0.054   0.055   0.053   0.052   0.054   0.051   0.052
                       Textile   0.041   0.046   0.042   0.042   0.042   0.040   0.039   0.037
                       Leather   0.008   0.008   0.007   0.008   0.008   0.006   0.006   0.006
                        Wood     0.019   0.017   0.017   0.020   0.018   0.018   0.018   0.025
              Paper products     0.009   0.010   0.010   0.010   0.011   0.010   0.010   0.012
                    Petroleum    0.004   0.004   0.003   0.003   0.003   0.004   0.002   0.003
                    Chemical     0.014   0.013   0.017   0.014   0.012   0.013   0.014   0.012
               Rubber/plastic    0.007   0.007   0.008   0.009   0.010   0.011   0.011   0.014
                Non-metallic     0.016   0.017   0.018   0.018   0.014   0.013   0.016   0.015
                        Metal    0.038   0.040   0.039   0.035   0.035   0.036   0.034   0.034
                   Machinery     0.027   0.028   0.024   0.025   0.022   0.023   0.023   0.017
         Electrical appliances   0.014   0.012   0.014   0.014   0.013   0.013   0.014   0.017
         Transport equipment     0.019   0.018   0.019   0.021   0.020   0.018   0.016   0.016
         Other manufacturing     0.018   0.015   0.017   0.017   0.017   0.015   0.014   0.020
Services of which
                     Utilities   0.025   0.028   0.029   0.027   0.025   0.023   0.027   0.026
                Construction     0.077   0.072   0.068   0.074   0.077   0.076   0.079   0.072
  Wholesale and retail trade     0.094   0.101   0.101   0.100   0.108   0.109   0.108   0.134
      Hotels and restaurants     0.012   0.013   0.013   0.013   0.012   0.012   0.012   0.020
               Transport, and
             communication       0.073   0.078   0.074   0.080   0.080   0.074   0.076   0.072
    Financial, real estate and
          business activities    0.045   0.051   0.057   0.052   0.055   0.062   0.058   0.064
      Public administration      0.066   0.066   0.072   0.073   0.072   0.068   0.074   0.070
Education, health and social
                       work      0.188   0.183   0.194   0.194   0.192   0.207   0.209   0.185
   Other community, social
       and personal service
                   activities    0.044   0.038   0.030   0.032   0.032   0.033   0.033   0.032


All sectors                      1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000




                                                                                                 27
Table 4. Share of unskilled labor (workers with primary or less schooling), by industries
1994-2001
                                 1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001

Agriculture, fishery             0.335   0.357   0.346   0.309   0.336   0.323   0.313   0.283
Mining                           0.140   0.141   0.121   0.105   0.114   0.094   0.113   0.104
Manufacturing of which
    Food, beverage, tobacco      0.191   0.182   0.194   0.169   0.159   0.154   0.130   0.158
                       Textile   0.166   0.138   0.147   0.143   0.129   0.129   0.161   0.108
                       Leather   0.217   0.200   0.190   0.179   0.129   0.135   0.180   0.167
                        Wood     0.218   0.204   0.223   0.174   0.156   0.230   0.211   0.199
              Paper products     0.156   0.154   0.142   0.149   0.116   0.096   0.228   0.191
                   Petroleum     0.183   0.197   0.137   0.128   0.146   0.125    ---    0.091
                    Chemical     0.120   0.162   0.191   0.159   0.124   0.120   0.113   0.100
               Rubber/plastic    0.169   0.168   0.258   0.234   0.134   0.183   0.073   0.118
                Non-metallic     0.265   0.237   0.199   0.230   0.209   0.199   0.185   0.172
                        Metal    0.162   0.152   0.150   0.132   0.120   0.132   0.096   0.101
                   Machinery     0.101   0.107   0.076   0.059   0.060   0.086   0.074   0.052
         Electrical appliances   0.135   0.127   0.108   0.081   0.090   0.125   0.114   0.103
         Transport equipment     0.133   0.122   0.102   0.098   0.105   0.092   0.083   0.094
         Other manufacturing     0.168   0.148   0.174   0.156   0.133   0.104   0.109   0.140
Services of which
                     Utilities   0.113   0.143   0.125   0.109   0.097   0.086   0.096   0.102
                Construction     0.163   0.171   0.153   0.167   0.151   0.153   0.153   0.149
 Wholesale and retail trade;     0.088   0.090   0.092   0.075   0.083   0.078   0.068   0.080
     Hotels and restaurants      0.147   0.212   0.158   0.119   0.066   0.097   0.125   0.109
              Transport, and
            communication        0.140   0.147   0.135   0.123   0.117   0.122   0.102   0.105
   Financial, real estate and
         business activities     0.086   0.064   0.079   0.075   0.067   0.070   0.048   0.067
     Public administration;      0.069   0.054   0.041   0.045   0.042   0.032   0.036   0.036
Education, health and social
                       work      0.106   0.108   0.105   0.100   0.091   0.091   0.079   0.075
   Other community, social
       and personal service
                   activities    0.123   0.139   0.134   0.118   0.116   0.132   0.165   0.173




                                                                                                 28
Table 5. Effects of trade protection on wages: A basic model, 1994-2001
         Dependent variable: log hourly real wage                       [1]                                   [2]


         Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis EU                           -.263**


         Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the world                                                         -.341***


         Age                                                         .0182***                             .0182***
         age squared                                               -.000192***                           -.000192***
         married dummy                                               .0674***                             .0675***
         female dummy                                                -.146***
         dummy: employed in private sector                            .00767                                .00755


         Occupation: professionals                                  -0.224***                             -0.224***
         Occupation: technicians                                    -0.252***                             -0.253***
         Occupation: clerks                                         -0.360***                             -0.360***
         Occupation: service workers                                -0.422***                             -0.422***
         Occupation: skilled agricultural workers                   -0.469***                             -0.469***
         Occupation: craft workers                                  -0.370***                             -0.370***
         Occupation: plant and machine operators                    -0.336***                             -0.336***
         Occupation: elementary occupations                         -0.473***                             -0.473***


         city size [50K – 1million population]                      -0.048***                             -0.048***
         city [20-50K population]                                   -0.052***                             -0.052***
         city [10-20K population]                                   -0.105***                             -0.105***
         city [5-10K population]                                    -0.073***                              -0.073**
         city [2-5K population]                                     -0.107***                             -0.106***
         city (<2K population]                                      -0.159***                             -0.160***
         village dummy                                              -0.095***                             -0.095***


         dummy: 2 year college                                      -0.165***                             -0.165***
         dummy: secondary technical                                 -0.253***                             -0.253***
         dummy: secondary general educ                              -0.261***                             -0.261***
         dummy: vocational education                                -0.308***                             -0.308***
         dummy: primary educated                                    -0.360***                             -0.360***
         dummy: less than primary                                   -0.440***                             -0.440***


         Voivoidship dummies                                            yes                                   yes
         Year dummies                                                   yes                                   yes
         Industry dummies                                               yes                                   yes


         No. of observations                                          27,531                                27,531
         R-squared                                                     .408                                  .408


 Notes: * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
 percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
 Omitted categories of dummies: city—population above one million, education—4- or 5-year college degree, occupation—managers.




                                                                                                                                             29
Table 6. Effects of trade protection on wages with additional trade-related measures
      Dependent variable:                            The Basic Model (specified in Table 5) plus additional control variables:
      log hourly real wage                                 [1]             [2]            [3]             [4]             [5]


      Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the              -0.315***       -0.271***       -0.267***                      -0.332***
      European Union                                      [.112]         [0.114]        [0.109]                        [0.0984]

      Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration       -0.0681         -0.103         -0.0897         -0.0741          -0.11
      within an industry)                               [0.0591]        [0.0794]        [0.0604]       [0.0524]         [0.047]
      Lagged imports                                                     0.0132        -0.00598
                                                                        [0.0169]        [0.015]
      Lagged exports                                                                   0.0562***
                                                                                        [0.0141]
      Contemporaneous imports                                                                          -0.00178       -0.000962
                                                                                                        [0.011]        [0.0113]
      Contemporaneous exports                                                                         0.0581***       0.0601***
                                                                                                        [0.014]        [0.0144]


      Year dummies                                         Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
      Industry dummies                                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      No. of observations                                24,213          24,213         24,213          24,598          24,598
      R-squared                                            .412           .413             .413           .41             .41




      Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World        -0.360***       -0.304***       -0.261***                      -0.333***
                                                        [0.0849]         [0.109]        [0.103]                        [0.0958]

      Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration       -0.0673        -0.0978         -0.0854         -0.0485         -0.101
      within an industry)                               [0.0553]        [0.0876]        [0.0605]       [0.0555]        [0.0567]
      Lagged imports                                                     0.0139         0.00364
                                                                        [0.0187]        [0.0151]
      Lagged exports                                                                   0.0515***
                                                                                        [0.015]
      Contemporaneous imports                                                                          0.00931         -0.0171
                                                                                                       [0.0241]        [0.0255]
      Contemporaneous exports                                                                         0.0682***       0.0643***
                                                                                                       [0.0166]        [0.0169]


      Year dummies                                         Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
      Industry dummies                                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      No. of observations                                24,213          24,213         24,213          24,598          24,598
      R-squared                                           .413            .413            .413            .41             .41


       Notes: The Table only presents selected variables of interest. All columns include the entire set of variables in the basic
       model specified in Table 5 with additional control variables specified in respective columns.
       * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
       percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
       [..] denotes robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                          30
Table 7. Effects of trade protection on wages with additional sector-specific variables
(labor shares, capital accumulation, and foreign direct investment)


       Dependent variable:                            The Basic Model (specified in Table 5) plus additional control variables:
       log hourly real wage                                                [1]             [2]             [3]




       Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the                               -0.233*       -0.604***       -0.666***
       European Union                                                    [0.127]         [0.165]        [0.126]

       Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0523         -0.0088         -0.38*
       within an industry)                                              [0.0495]         [0.108]        [0.207]
       Lagged capital accumulation                                       0.0275*                        0.00259
                                                                        [0.0145]                       [0.00917]
       Lagged foreign direct investment                                                 0.00726         -0.0212
                                                                                       [0.00818]        [0.0193]
       Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                   0.674***
                                                                                                        [0.227]


       Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
       Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
       No. of observations                                               24,598          12,697          10,580
       R-squared                                                           .41            .421            .412




                                                                        -0.294***      -0.534***        -0.55***
       Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World
                                                                         [0.103]         [0.13]         [0.107]

       Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0553         0.0121          -0.316
       within an industry)                                              [0.0466]         [0.102]        [0.212]
       Lagged capital accumulation                                       0.0233                         -0.00277
                                                                        [0.0144]                       [0.00946]
       Lagged foreign direct investment                                                -0.000206        -0.0272
                                                                                       [0.00895]        [0.0215]
       Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                   0.636***
                                                                                                         [0.23]


       Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
       Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
       No. of observations                                               24,598          12,697          10,580
       R-squared                                                           .41            .421            .412


       Notes: The Table only presents selected variables of interest. All columns include the entire set of variables in the basic
       model specified in Table 5 with additional control variables specified in respective columns.
       * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
       percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
       [..]denotes robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                          31
Table 8. Effects of trade protection on wages allowing for time-varying returns to schooling


        Dependent variable:                            The Basic Model (specified in Table 5) plus additional control variables:
        log hourly real wage                                                [1]             [2]             [3]




        Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the                              -0.247**       -0.619***       -0.682***
        European Union                                                    [0.124]         [0.161]        [0.122]

        Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0526        0.00357          -0.377
        within an industry)                                              [0.0489]         [0.108]        [0.204]
        Lagged capital accumulation                                      0.0282**                        -0.0231
                                                                         [0.0142]                        [0.0187]
        Lagged foreign direct investment                                                 0.00764         0.00263
                                                                                         [0.0081]       [0.00917]
        Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                   0.631***
                                                                                                         [0.226]


        Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
        Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
        No. of observations                                               24,598          12,697          10,580
        R-squared                                                           .407           .417            .408



        Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World                        -0.296***      -0.546***       -0.564***
                                                                          [0.103]         [0.126]        [0.104]

        Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0542          0.025          -0.311
        within an industry)                                              [0.0461]         [0.101]        [0.209]
        Lagged capital accumulation                                       0.0244*                        -0.0293
                                                                         [0.0142]                        [0.0209]
        Lagged foreign direct investment                                                0.0000125        -0.00287
                                                                                        [0.00886]       [0.00941]
        Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                    0.591**
                                                                                                         [0.229]


        Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
        Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
        No. of observations                                               24,598          12,697          10,580
        R-squared                                                           .407           .417            .408


        Notes: The Table only presents selected variables of interest. All columns include the entire set of variables in the basic
        model specified in Table 5 except that returns to schooling are now time-varying.
        * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
        percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
        [..]denotes robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                           32
Table 9. Sub-sample of unskilled workers: Effects of trade protection and various trade
measures on wages
      Dependent variable:                            The Basic Model (specified in Table 5) plus additional control variables:
      log hourly real wage                                 [1]            [2]             [3]             [4]            [5]


      Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the              -0.280***       -0.229**        -0.226**                       -0.296***
      European Union                                    [0.105]         [0.106]         [0.101]                       [0.0926]

      Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration      -0.0497         -0.0892         -0.0756        -0.0453         -0.0782
      within an industry)                               [0.0609]         [0.08]        [0.0597]        [0.0529]       [0.0482]
      Lagged imports                                                    0.0159         -0.00298
                                                                       [0.0161]        [0.0146]
      Lagged exports                                                                  0.0546***
                                                                                       [0.0145]
      Contemporaneous imports                                                                          0.00665         0.00676
                                                                                                       [0.0103]       [0.0108]
      Contemporaneous exports                                                                         0.0525***      0.0544***
                                                                                                       [0.0141]       [0.0143]


      Year dummies                                        Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      Industry dummies                                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      No. of observations                                23,177         22,819          22,819          23,177         23,177
      R-squared                                          0.349           0.351           0.351          0.349           0.349




      Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World        -0.317***       -0.248**        -0.207**                       -0.274***
                                                        [0.0811]        [0.103]        [0.0986]                       [0.0929]

      Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration      -0.0484         -0.0798         -0.0681        -0.0171         -0.0606
      within an industry)                               [0.0575]       [0.0888]        [0.0598]        [0.0522]       [0.0542]
      Lagged imports                                                    0.0182         0.00791
                                                                       [0.0177]        [0.0147]
      Lagged exports                                                                  0.0499***
                                                                                       [0.0155]
      Contemporaneous imports                                                                           0.0227        0.000564
                                                                                                       [0.0232]       [0.0247]
      Contemporaneous exports                                                                         0.0547***      0.0515***
                                                                                                       [0.0159]       [0.0162]


      Year dummies                                        Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      Industry dummies                                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      No. of observations                                23,177         22,819          22,819          23,177         23,177
      R-squared                                          0.349           0.351           0.351          0.349           0.349


      Notes: The Table only presents selected variables of interest. All columns include the entire set of variables in the basic
      model specified in Table 5 with additional control variables specified in respective columns.
      * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
      percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
      [..] denotes robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                         33
Table 10. Sub-sample of unskilled workers: Effects of trade protection and sector-
specific characteristics on wages


Dependent variable:                            The Basic Model (specified in Table 5) plus additional control variables:
log hourly real wage                                                [1]             [2]             [3]




Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the                               -0.194*       -0.523***       -0.589***
European Union                                                    [0.115]         [0.15]         [0.116]

Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0326         0.0227          -0.256
within an industry)                                              [0.0491]         [0.102]        [0.206]
Lagged capital accumulation                                      0.0296**                        -0.0253
                                                                 [0.0143]                        [0.0183]
Lagged foreign direct investment                                                 0.00595         0.00242
                                                                                 [0.0075]       [0.00915]
Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                     0.530*
                                                                                                 [0.267]


Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
No. of observations                                               23,177          12,039          10,023
R-squared                                                          0.349           0.365          0.354




                                                                 -0.244**       -0.463***       -0.489***
Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World
                                                                 [0.0946]         [0.119]        [0.0996]

Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                      -0.0349         0.0414          -0.198
within an industry)                                              [0.0466]        [0.0965]         [0.21]
Lagged capital accumulation                                       0.0259*                        -0.0306
                                                                 [0.0143]                        [0.0201]
Lagged foreign direct investment                                                -0.000568        -0.00239
                                                                                [0.00841]        [0.0094]
Lagged unskilled labor shares                                                                     0.495*
                                                                                                 [0.269]


Year dummies                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
Industry dummies                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
No. of observations                                               23,177          12,039          10,023
R-squared                                                          0.349           0.365          0.354


Notes: The Table only presents selected variables of interest. All columns include the entire set of variables in the basic
model specified in Table 5 with additional control variables specified in respective columns.
* denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
percent level. The sample is restricted to those between 15-75 year-old, employees only, in the manufacturing and electricity sectors.
[..]denotes robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                   34
Appendix I
Table A1. Distribution of male employment by industries and by broad regions, 1994-2001
                                                Districts along                                    Districts along
                                                                Interior/center Capital city (ie.,                 Northern coastal
                                  Poland         the western                                        the eastern
                                                                   districts      Warsaw)                              districts
1994                                                border                                             border
Agriculture,mining,fishery           31.39              28.87           33.05              4.6            44.15            20.49
services sector                      45.86              45.63           42.44            77.89            38.12            57.94
manufacturing                        22.75               25.5           24.51            17.51            17.73            21.57
of which
   food, beverage, tobacco                 17              10              20               13               23               18
                        textile             7               5              11                1                3                4
                       leather              2               2                2               1                3                2
                        wood               11              10              10                6               12               12
             paper products                 3               2                4              11                2                4
                    petroleum               2               3                1               0                1                1
                     chemical               5               7                4               8                4                3
              rubber/plastic                3               2                3               2                4                1
                  non-metallic              6               6                6               6                9                3
                        metal              16              21              15                9               10                8
                   machinery               11              14                9               9                9               11
        electrical appliances               5               5                5              12                3                4
       transport equipment                  8               5                4              10               12               19
       Other manufacturing                  7               7                6              11                6                7


                                                Districts along                                    Districts along
                                                                Interior/center Capital city (ie.,                 Northern coastal
                                  Poland         the western                                        the eastern
                                                                   districts      Warsaw)                              districts
2001                                                border                                             border
Agriculture,mining,fishery           24.92              20.61           27.28             4.02            37.52            13.31
services sector                      51.98              54.52           48.12            76.84            44.39            60.92
manufacturing                         23.1              24.87             24.6           19.14            18.09            25.77
of which
   food, beverage, tobacco                 19              13              22               13               27               20
                        textile             5               4                9               4                3                1
                       leather              2               1                2               0                2                1
                        wood               10              11                8               5               11               12
             paper products                 4               3                5               9                3                6
                    petroleum               1               2                1               1                1                1
                     chemical               5               6                4               6                3                5
              rubber/plastic                4               4                5               6                6                3
                  non-metallic              6               6                6               2                6                2
                        metal              16              23              14               15               11               12
                   machinery                9              12                8              12                9                7
        electrical appliances               5               5                4              12                3                4
       transport equipment                  7               6                4               9                9               19
       Other manufacturing                  7               4              10                7                6                7

Source: Labor Force Surveys




                                                                                                                                      35
Appendix II3
Association Agreement between the European
Communities and the Republic of Poland
Article 10 of the Europe Agreement signed in 1991 between Poland and the European
Community stipulated the schedule of liberalization with respect to manufacturing products (HS
Chapters 25-97). This schedule did not cover HS Chapters 1 –24, which encompass
agricultural products, processed foods, beverages and tobacco products. The provisions of
Article 10 were as follows:

       1. Customs duties on imports applicable in Poland to products originating in the Community
          listed in Annex IVa shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

       Annex IVa covered selected non-agricultural products from the following headings of the
       Harmonized System: 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 38, 40, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 68, 71,
       72, 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90, 97.

       2. Customs duties on imports applicable in Poland to products originating in the Community
          which are listed in Annex IVb shall be progressively reduced as specified in that Annex.

       Annex IVb covered selected tariff lines pertaining to motor vehicles (HS8703, 8704, 8706
       and 8707). It specified that customs duties on imports applicable in Poland to these products
       originating in the Community shall be eliminated according to the following schedule:
           - on 1 January 1994 they will be reduced to six-seventh of the basic duty,
           - on 1 January 1996 they will be reduced to five-seventh,
           - on 1 January 1998 they will be reduced to four-seventh,
           - on 1 January 1999 they will be reduced to three-seventh,
           - on 1 January 2000 they will be reduced to two-seventh,
           - on 1 January 2001 they will be reduced to one-seventh,
           - on 1 January 2002 they will be reduced to zero,

       It also specified a suspension of customs duties within the limit of an annual preferential
       tariff quota for a certain number of cars starting from 1 January 1993.

       3. Customs duties on imports applicable in Poland to products originating in the Community
          other than those listed in Annexes IVa and IVb shall be progressively reduced, and
          abolished by the end of the seventh year at the latest from the entry into force of this
          Agreement according to the following timetable:
          - three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be
             reduced to 80% of the basic duty,


3
    The authors would like to thank Federica Saliola for preparing the information for this appendix.


                                                                                                        36
       -   four years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be
           reduced to 60% of the basic duty,
       -   five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be
           reduced to 40% of the basic duty,
       -   six years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty shall be
           reduced to 20% of the basic duty,
       -   seven years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement the remaining duties
           shall be eliminated.

   Provisions of the Europe Agreement with respect to agricultural products (HS Chapters 1
   to 24) were coved in Chapter II which specified that

       -   Customs duties on imports applicable in Poland to products originating in the
           Community listed in the annex XI shall be reduced on the date of entry into force of
           the Agreement by 10 percentage points.

           Annex XI pertained to selected products from HS Chapters: 01 Live Animals, 04
           Dairy Produce, Birds'Eggs, Natural Honey, Edible Products of Animal Origin, not
           Elsewhere Specified or Included, 06 Live Trees and Other Plants, Bulbs, Roots and
           the Like, cut Flowers and Ornamental Foliage, 07 Edible Vegetables and Certain
           Roots and Tubers, 08 Edible Fruit and Nuts, Peel of Citrus Fruits or Melons, 10
           Cereals, 12 Oil Seeds and Oleaginous Fruits, Miscellaneous Grains, Seeds and Fruit,
           Industrial or Medicinal Plants, Straw and Fodder 15 Animal or Vegetable Fats and
           Oils and Their Cleavage Products, Prepared Edible Fats, Animal or Vegetable Waxes,
           18 Cocoa and Cocoa Preparations, 19 Preparations of Cereals, Flour, Starch or Milk,
           Pastrycooks'Products, 20 Preparations of Vegetables, Fruit, Nuts or Other Parts of
           Plants, 22 Beverages, Spirits and Vinegar, 23 Residues and Waste From the Food
           Industries, Prepared Animal Fodder

       -   The Community and Poland shall grant each other the concessions referred to in
           Annexes Xa (imports of bovine animal), Xb (some products of chapters 01, 02 - Meat
           and Edible Meat Offal, 04 ), Xc (some products of chapters 07, 08, 20) and XI on a
           harmonious and reciprocal basis, in accordance with the conditions laid down therein.
           Annex Xa specified that “In case the number of animals fixed in the framework of the
           balance sheet arrangements foreseen in Regulation (EEC) No 805/68 are lower than a
           reference quantity, a global tariff quota equal to the difference between that
           reference quantity and the number of animals fixed under the balance sheet
           arrangements will be opened to imports from Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia.”

       -   Trade in agricultural goods was to remain subject to quantitative restrictions, which
           according to Article 20 were to be gradually abolished.

Poland shall abolish at the latest by the end of the fifth year from the entry into force of the
Agreement the quantitative restrictions on imports originating in the Community listed in Annex
IX in accordance with the conditions established in that Annex. Annex IX covered: Beverages,
Spirits and Vinegar (HS Chapter 22).


                                                                                              37
Appendix III

Evidence of Trade Liberalization and Changes in
Firm Productivity
In order to shed some light on the channel through which trade liberalization may influence
industry premiums, we examine the impact of tariff reductions on the productivity of Polish
firms. This exercise is based on an unbalanced panel dataset of 5,090 firms operating in Poland
during the period 1996-2000. The information comes from a commercial database Amadeus,
compiled by Bureau van Dijk, which contains comprehensive information on companies
operating in thirty-five European countries, including Poland.4

The analysis proceeds in two stages. First, we estimate a production function separately for each
sector to get measures of the total factor productivity (TFP):5
                       ln Yit =α + β1 ln Lit + β2 ln Kit + β2 ln Mit + µt + εit
where Yit represents sales of firm i in year t, deflated by the sectoral deflator taken from the
Poland’s Statistical Yearbooks, Lit is the number of employees, Kit the value of fixed assets and
Mit the value of materials used. Kit and Mit are deflated by the GDP deflator. The equation also
contains year dummies.

Then we relate the annual changes in TFP to the changes in industry import tariffs:
                                     ∆ ln TFPijt = φ ∆ tariffjt + µj + uit
where TFPijt is the total factor productivity estimated in the first stage for firm i operating in
sector j in year t and tariffjt is the tariff on imports of industry j’s products in year t. In addition to
the 14 manufacturing sectors considered in the paper, we also experiment with including all
sectors and setting tariffs on services sectors to zero. Estimating the equation in first differences
allows us to eliminate unobserved time-invariant characteristics of industry j. Since some
industries may be experiencing faster TFP growth due to, for instance, faster technological
progress we also include industry fixed effects in the estimation. To take into account the fact
that while the variable of interest (tariffs) is industry-specific, a firm is the unit of observation,
we report robust standard errors corrected for clustering by industry. To make the analysis as
comparable as possible to the industry premium exercise, we employ exactly the same industry
classification and use the same tariff figures (with the exception of the sample encompassing also
services industries).

The estimation results, presented below, give support to our hypothesis that trade liberalization is
associated with higher productivity at the firm level. We find a negative and statistically
significant coefficient on the tariff variable both in the sample encompassing all sectors as well
as in the manufacturing subsample. The results hold for both trade liberalization vis-à-vis the

4
  Unfortunately, the version of Amadeus to which we have access does not include the 2001 figures and is missing
employment data from before 1996, which restricts our analysis to the 1996-2001 period.
5
  Due to a small number of observations we combine textiles and leather products into one sector when estimating
the production function. We also combine coke and petroleum manufacturing with chemicals.


                                                                                                               38
European Union as well as for tariffs vis-à-vis the world. The results are also robust to including
in the regression a lagged measure of industry concentration (Hefindahl index).


    Table A2. Total factor productivity and trade liberalization: estimation on first
    differences


  Dependent variable:                                       All sectors                             Manufacturing only
  Total factor productivity




  Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the              -2.073**         -1.7611*                       -2.0733*        -2.0987*
  European Union                                    [0.989]         [1.0075]                       [1.0026]        [0.9898]


  Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                       -1.1178                                        0.0908
  within an industry)                                               [0.7906]                                       [1.2733]


  Industry dummies                                    Yes                 Yes                        Yes             Yes




  Simple Average Tariff vis-à-vis the World       -1.9361**         -1.7026*                      -1.8098**       -1.7552**
                                                   [0.8329]         [0.8448]                       [0.8307]        [0.8065]

  Lagged Herfindahl Index (i.e., concentration                        -1.24                                        -0.2852
  within an industry)                                               [0.7724]                                       [1.1204]


  Industry dummies                                    Yes                 Yes                        Yes             Yes



         Notes: The number of observations is equal to 6,039 in columns (1) and (2) and 2,420 in columns (3) and (4). The observations
         pertain to the period 1996-2000.
         * denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5-percent level; and *** denotes significance at the 1-
         percent level.
         [..] denotes robust standard errors clustered by industry.




                                                                                                                                              39
