NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATIONS IN LATIN-AMERICA IN THE 1990s:
A REASSESSMENT
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 11145
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11145
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Liberalizations in Latin-America in the 1990s: A Reassessment
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 11145
February 2005
JEL No. F21, F23, F36, F43
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the experience of Latin-America [LATAM] with financial liberalization in the
1990s. The rush towards financial liberalizations in the early 1990s was associated with expectations
that external financing would alleviate the scarcity of saving in LATAM, thereby increasing
investment and growth. Yet, the data and several case studies suggest that the gains from external
financing are overrated. The bottleneck inhibiting economic growth is less the scarcity of saving, and
more the scarcity of good governance. A possible interpretation for these findings is that in countries
where private savings and investments were taxed in an arbitrary and unpredictable way, the
credibility of a new regime could not be assumed or imposed. Instead, credibility must be acquired
as an outcome of a learning process. Consequently, increasing the saving and investment rates tends
to be a time consuming process. This also suggests that greater political instability and polarization
would induce consumers to be more cautious in increasing their saving and investment rates
following a reform. Hence, reaching a sustained take-off in Latin-America is a harder task to
accomplish than in Asia.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics ; E2
1156 High St.
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

2
1.

Introduction and summary
Latin America in the 1990s retained its dubious notoriety as the experimental lab of

economic policies. The decade started with renewed optimism about the virtues of market
oriented liberalization. Old concerns about the sequencing of reforms were replaced with the
buoyant view that dismantling all the impediments to trade in goods and assets would lead
LATAM to quick prosperity, overcoming the lost decade of the 1980s. The resumption of large
inflows of capital in the early 1990s, the disinflation in Argentina under Menem, and the
growing trade integration of Mexico as part of NAFTA reinforced the optimism of the early
1990s. However, a series of crises starting with the collapse of the Mexican Peso in December
1994, continuing with the financial instability in Brazil in the mid 1990s, culminating with the
melt down of the Argentinean currency board, deflated the optimism about the virtues of
financial liberalizations in Latin America. The purpose of this paper is to reassess the experience
of Latin America with financial liberalization, putting it into broader perspective by comparing
the LATAM experience with that of other developing countries.

The main conclusions of the paper are:
•

The rush to reform in the early 1990s was propagated by the presumption that external
financing would alleviate the scarcity of saving in developing countries, inducing higher
investment and higher growth rates. The 1990s experience with financial liberalization
suggests that the gains from external financing are overrated. The data suggest that the
bottleneck inhibiting economic growth is less the scarcity of saving, and more the
scarcity of good governance. Indeed, in the 1990s, countries that relied less on external
finance, grew faster. This observation is consistent with several interpretations, yet the
precise channels explaining these findings need further investigation.

•

The wave of financial reforms led to deeper diversification, where greater inflows from
the OECD financed comparable outflows from developing countries, with little effect on
the availability of resources to finance tangible investment.

•

The experience of developing countries suggests that increasing the saving and
investment rates tends to be a time consuming process. Some of this inertia may be
consistent with habit formation.

"Habit formation", however, may be observationally

3
equivalent to adaptive learning in the presence of uncertainty – in countries where private
saving and investment were taxed in an arbitrary and unpredictable way, the credibility of
a new regime could not be assumed or imposed. Instead, credibility must be acquired as
an outcome of a time consuming learning process. If this interpretation holds, agents in
countries characterized by greater political instability would be more cautious in
increasing their saving and investment rates following a reform. The past high volatility
of policies in Latin-America would induce the private sector there to impose "stringent"
tests on reforming policy makers.
•

The literature on the optimal exchange rate regimes frequently attaches too much
importance to the choice of monetary policy. Beyond the short-run, monetary and fiscal
policies are intertwined via the intertemporal budget constraints. Indeed, one may argue
that a deficient fiscal system may lead to crises, independently of the exchange rate
regime. Placing too much faith on a fixed exchange rate or on a currency board as the
mechanism for fiscal discipline overlooks the fact that the cost of changing the exchange
rate regime (and more generally of monetary policy) is much lower than the cost of a
fundamental fiscal reform. In these circumstances, the choice of the exchange rate regime
will impact only on the timing of the ultimate crisis. Casting the problem in terms of the
“smart” choice of an exchange rate regime is potentially hazardous, as it obscures the
need to challenge the deeper fiscal deficiencies.

•

The view that globalization makes the sequencing of reforms irrelevant is not supported
by recent experience. Indeed, the experience suggests that putting the macro house in
good order is a precondition for successful financial reform. A cautious strategy starts
with liberalizing trade and stabilizing the economy before moving towards convertibility,
as was suggested by the 1980s literature.

Section 2 discusses the landscape of financial liberalizations in LATAM. Section 3 focuses
on possible lessons and reviews selectively the large literature propagated by the LATAM
experience. Section 4 closes with interpretative remarks.

4

2.

Financial liberalizations in the 1990’s: global perspectives on the Latin American

experience
The background for the financial liberalization of the 1990s had been the lost decade of
the 1980s -- stagnation of economic growth and the rise in inflation associated with the 1982-89
debt crisis. The political economy changes triggered by the crises put in place new managements
in the region. The Brady plan, the resumption of the inflow of capital to LATAM in the early
1990s, and the fresh start offered by the new managements induced the region to adopt sweeping
reforms. Argentina, Brazil and Mexico illustrate the trend: countries opted to follow exchange
rate based stabilization programs, coupled with deep trade and financial liberalizations, and
privatization of significant portions of the public sector. The presumption was that the renewed
external financing would augment domestic saving, increasing investment and the growth rate.2
The magnitude of the financial liberalization in LATAM can be grasped using the index of
capital mobility reported in Edwards (2004).3 Normalizing completely free capital mobility at
100, Edwards reports that the index of capital mobility in LATAM increased from about 40 in
the 1980s to about 75 in the 1990s. Throughout that period the index in Asia increased mildly
from about 40 in the 1980s to 60 prior to the 1997 crisis, dropping to 55 in the aftermath of the
crisis. The Middle East and North Africa experienced a much smaller increase throughout that
time, from about 40 to 50. According to this index, the financial liberalization in LATAM
exceeded substantially liberalization in other continents.

2

For example, Andrew Crockett, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, stated in a keynote

address in 13/2/98:
“For emerging markets, the consequence of these trends has been that they have rapidly become
integrated into international capital markets. This has had a number of advantages. Private debt
or portfolio inflows in response to economic liberalisation have expanded sizeably, from less
than $40 billion per year over the period 1983-1990, to an average of about $200 billion a year
in the last five years. These capital inflows have provided additional resources to supplement
domestic savings and support high levels of investment.”
3

This index combines the information from Quinn (2003) and Mody and Murshid (2002) with information from

country-specific sources. See Edwards (1995) for a detailed account of the liberalizations in the early 1990s.

5

2.1

Financial Liberalization and Investment Financing Sources in LATAM, 1990s
Figure 1 traces the growth of the GDP per capita of LATAM and other regions in the

1990s years. Overall, LATAM’s growth has been significantly below that of Asia, but better
than that of Africa. In order to understand the ultimate impact of the financial liberalization I
rely on a simple diagnostic tool, introduced in Aizenman, Pinto and Radziwill (2004) – the selffinancing ratio. Using the WDI data, we construct a self-finance measure, indicating the share of
tangible capital supported by past national saving. The ‘ideal’ self-financing would be obtained
by unbounded backward discounting, had we had all the past information:
∞

∞

i =1

i =1

fˆ = ∑ S t −i (1 − d ) i −1 / ∑ I t −i (1 − d ) i −1 , where d is the deprecation rate of tangible capital, I t ; S t
are the gross investment and national saving at time t, in constant PPP, respectively. A value of
one of the self-financing ratio would correspond to an economy where the entire stock of
domestic capital is self-financed. A self-financing ratio below one indicates some reliance on
foreign saving -- 1 − fˆt is the foreign-financing ratio, measuring the fraction of domestic capital
that was financed by foreign saving.4 In practice, the unbounded backward discounting is not
feasible due to scarcity of data. This limitation induces us to rely on approximated measures of
self-financing. As illustrated in Aizenman et. al. (2004), the approximated self-financing
measure deviates from the ideal financing measure by second order magnitude.
Figures 1-2 report the time patterns of the self-financing ratios, and the corresponding
growth rates, in three blocks of developing countries [Latin America, Asia and Africa].
Throughout the nineties, Asia exhibits high self-financing ratios and high growth rates (with the
exception of 1998). In contrast, Latin America and Africa display low self-financing ratios, and
relatively low growth rates. The growth performance of Latin America was more evenly
distributed throughout the nineties, exhibiting no obvious growth bonus of the drop in the selffinancing ratios. Interestingly, the drop in the self-financing ratios in Africa through much of the
1990s was not associated with a sustained growth bonus – the growth rate picked up in the early
1990s, collapsing in the second half. Unlike the experience of Africa, the growth drop of Asia in
4

An alternative strategy is to construct self-financing ratios using gross domestic saving instead of national saving

[the gap between the two is the net current transfers and income from abroad]. This does not affect the main results
inferred by relying on the self-financing ratio.

6
the aftermath of the 1997-8 crises has been associated with a remarkable increase of the selffinancing ratios, pushing it well above one, and with the resumption of robust growth.
Further insight explaining the diverse experience of countries is gained by econometric
analysis. Aizenman, Pinto and Radziwill (2004) examine the association between real per capita
GDP growth and the self-financing ratios in the 1990s. We find that higher self-financing ratios
(implying higher self-financing of a given investment) are associated with a significant increase
in growth rates, and this effect is convex. The econometric results show also that better
institutions are associated with less volatile self-financing ratios, and with a higher growth rate.5
In a cross-country GDP per capita growth regression, controlling for the level and volatility of
self-financing rations, and the quality of institutions, we found that the quality of institutions
variable “soaks up” the explanatory power from the volatility of self-financing ratios, rendering
it insignificant, but leaving intact the positive convex effect of self-financing ratios on real per
capita GDP growth.6 The results are not driven by any obvious regional patterns: Adding
regional dummies [Asia, Africa and Latin America] to the regression leads to results that are in
line with expectations. Africa is growing significantly slower, while all key variables retain
previous sign and significance. Notably the correlation between the change in de-facto financial
openness between 1980s and 1990s and the change in the self-financing ratio between 1991
(result of accumulation in decade of 1980s) and 2001 (accumulation in 1990s) is, for all practical
purposes, zero. Also, while the financial opening was substantial - the average and median
increases in financial openness were 65%, and 30%, respectively - changes in the self-financing
rates were insignificant.
Figure 3 traces the experience of selected Latin American countries. Figure 3.A focuses
on Brazil, a country that experienced a rapid decline in the self-financing ratio, starting from a
lower initial level. Characteristically, the country failed to benefit from any associated “growth
bonus”. This is a pattern common to the “average” Latin American country [see Figures 1 and 2].
5

The quality of institutions was calculated as the average of measures of law and order, corruption and bureaucracy

quality from the International Country Risk Guide (2004). The data on trade openness – measured by [exports +
imports]/GDP and financial openness--measured by [inflows + outflows of capital]/GDP--are from Frankel and Wei
(2004).
6

We also attempted to control for other variables that are used frequently in growth regressions [like the initial GDP

per capita, etc.], but these controls were insignificant.

7
Another typical case is Bolivia, depicted in Figure 3.D, a country that is characterized by
exceptionally low levels of self-financing, but also mediocre growth performance. Figures 3.B
and 3.C report the dramatic experience of Argentina and Mexico: both experienced serious
financial crises and associated “sudden stops” in external financing. Both experiences are
characterized by a reversal of declining self-financing ratios around the time of the crisis
episode. The financial opening of the 1990s in Argentina is associated with a sizable drop in the
self-financing ratio, from about 0.92 to 0.88. This drop ends with the sudden stop, which led to a
partial reversal of the earlier decline. As in other countries, the ability to finance a growing share
of the domestic capital by foreign saving is not associated with any “growth bonus.” In fact,
Mexico exhibits a crisis-triggered reversal in its declining self-financing ratio, with economic
growth that is on average stronger during the time the self-financing ratio increased. Such a
reversal was found to be common to other countries experiencing sudden stop, and it may reflect
both the precautionary and the forced increase in saving, as well as a drop in investment. In
some circumstances, this decline in investment may be a welcome development, as would be the
case in countries characterized by excessive investment prior to the crisis [see Krugman (2000)].
These results suggest that political economy factors and political risk diversification are
important in understanding the association between the self-financing ratios and growth.7
Figure 3.E provides the experience of the best performer in Latin America – Chile. Its
impressive average growth rate of the GDP per capita, exceeding 4%, was almost entirely selffinanced [Chile’s average self-financing throughout that period was = 0.95]. Chile’s experience
turned out to be common: countries characterized by higher self-financing ratios in the 1990s
experienced, on average, higher growth rates. Yet, there are several examples of countries that
experienced large increases in self-financing ratios with no detectable growth bonus. Figure 3.F
reports the experience of Ecuador -- the self-financing ratio increased substantially in the 1990s,
at a time when the growth rate was almost flat. Thus, there is no guarantee that a rising self-

7

For example, for countries characterized by economic and political uncertainty, the opening of financial markets

would lead domestic agents to put a greater share of their savings in offshore accounts, and in certain cases may lead
foreign consumers to purchase domestic assets, betting on the prospect of improvement in domestic conditions.
This may lead to large gross flows of capital, with little change in net flows [see Dooley (1988)].

8
financing ratio will produce faster growth.8 Economic growth depends on all the factors that
explain the magnitude and the quality of investment in all types of capital. For most developing
countries, the obstacles preventing higher growth are not the degree of financial integration, but
other more basic structural obstacles.

2.2

Possible interpretations and case studies
There are several possible channels that may rationalize the positive association between

self-financing and growth. For example, a take-off triggered by relaxing the state’s restrictions
on private investment and private saving would increase both S and I over time, with little impact
on the need to borrow externally, as apparently has been the case in China and India.9 Such
growth patterns are consistent with the habit-formation hypothesis [see Carroll et. al. (2000)].10
Another possibility is that agents in various countries react to different exposure to financial risk
differently. The desire to diversify these risks may lead to two-way capital flows, with little
change in net positions [see Dooley (1988)].
Further perspectives on these issues can be gained by focusing on the experience of
Chile, the only country in LATAM that experienced a sustainable take-off in the 1990s. Figure 4
traces the self-financing and growth experience of Chile, 1984-2002. Recalling that in the early
1980s Chile went through a massive financial crisis and depression, 1984-1992 may be viewed
as the recovery and take-off period, when growth accelerated rapidly. This period is also the
time that the self-financing ratio increased from a low of 0.75 in 1984, to 0.96 in 1992. This
8

For example, if a country has unsustainable public debt dynamics and cuts back fiscal spending (including public

investment), then this will tend to raise national savings relative to investment, raising the self-financing ratio at the
margin; but possibly with a growth slowdown because of the necessary reduction in aggregate demand.
9

This pattern is consistent with the notion that higher growth increases the saving rate overtime [see Edwards

(1996), who concludes that the rate of output growth has a significant, positive effect on saving].
10

The habit formation hypothesis states that people get utility from a comparison of their current level of

consumption to the level that they are “accustomed to,” the latter corresponds to the habitual level of consumption,
as defined by consumption history. Habits make consumers reluctant to change consumption drastically following
fundamental shocks, slowing the adjustment of consumption. Habit formation implies that the consumer is more
willing to postpone consumption in response to an increase in productivity, and thus make the saving response to a
surge in productivity stronger.

9
adjustment is consistent with the habit formation interpretation. The data also suggest that
greater confidence in the performance of the economy increases the willingness of domestic
agents to engage in deeper self-financing – it raises domestic saving at rates that surpass the
increase in domestic investment. This is in contrast to the performance of the Argentinean
economy – despite the stabilization of the early 1990s, the self-financing ratio there remained
around 0.9, dropping below 0.9 in the second half of the 1990s. Arguably, this suggests a test for
the effectiveness of stabilizations -- the degree to which it leads to higher self-financing. A
stabilization that fails in increasing the self-financing ratio frequently implies that it does not
pass the confidence test of the most exposed agents: the residents of the country undergoing the
policy change. Using this perspective, the Argentinean stabilization did not fail due to the
reluctance of foreign investors to invest there [which indeed was not the case], but due to the
regime’s inability to convince residents of Argentina regarding its staying power. A possible
interpretation of the collapse of Argentina’s currency board is that it is much easier to fix the
exchange rate than to deal with fundamental fiscal imbalances in a weak federal system.
Skeptical Argentinean residents preferred to hedge their bets by increasing their off-shore saving.
This diversification was conveniently financed by the inflow of capital following the reform,
leading to deeper diversification of risk, with little impact on the self-financing ratio. The next
section will discuss several alternative interpretations and lessons from the Argentinean
experience.
To gain further insight regarding this matter, it is illuminating to contrast the experience
of Korea with that of Chile. At first sight, Korea is viewed as an “Asian Tiger,” whose
performance is in sharp contrast to LATAM countries. Yet, closer scrutiny reveals that Korea's
saving patterns before the mid seventies resembled the experience of LATAM, and that Korea's
overall performance resembled that of a typical LATAM country prior to "taking off."
Furthermore, one can identify distinct policies and changes in the incentive structure in Korea
that preceded the taking-off.11 Chile represents a Latin American example of a country that,
following the adaptation of bold reforms, improved its overall growth, and has undergone a
transition that resembles the earlier stages of development in Korea. Comparing the two
countries, one finds that there is a remarkable similarity between the saving and growth patterns
of Chile and Korea around the take-off period. These observations are consistent with the notion
11

For a review and interpretation of these policies see Rodrik (1994), Noland (2004), and the references therein.

10
that the saving and growth gap between LATAM and “Asian Tigers” may be rooted in different
incentive structures and economic circumstances. Once Chile adopted the proper incentives and
policies, and once the private sector in Chile gained confidence regarding the durability of these
measures, Chile embarked on a growth and saving path that resembles that of an Asian tiger.
Yet, it is premature to speculate if Chile will reach the next stage in the experience of Korea,
where the take-off has been associated with export oriented growth, climbing the technology
ladder over time.
It is important to note the striking difference between the two countries in the degree of
stability. This is manifested in all macroeconomic measures, including the saving rate. The
persistence of the saving rate is much greater for Korea, while the volatility of the saving
"shocks" is much greater for Chile. The standard error of the 'unanticipated' saving shock in
Chile is more than twice that of Korea.12 Figure 6 reports the actual and predicted saving rate in
the two countries, illustrating the greater volatility of saving rates in Chile. These results are
consistent with the interpretation that a key difference between the Latin American and Asian
tigers experiences is the volatility of the overall economic environment [see Hausmann and
Gavin (1995)].
The experience of developing countries suggests that increasing saving rates would not
occur overnight, and it may be a time consuming process. In an important study Carroll and
Weil (1994) illustrated that the saving rates of East Asian countries (like Korea, Japan, Singapore
and Hong Kong) were much lower several decades ago, and their thriftiness is a more recent
phenomenon. They pointed out that the "statistical" causality may run from a higher growth rate
to a higher saving rate; and conjectured that the growth-saving causality may be explained in a
model where utility depends both on present and past consumption, i.e. habit formation [see also
Carroll et. al. (2000)]. "Habit formation", however, may be observationally equivalent to
adaptive learning in the presence of uncertainty – in countries where private savings were taxed
12

For the years 1965-1991, the AR(1) representation of the saving rates for the two countries are:

Chile:

Korea:

st = 6.13 + .67s t−1 ; R 2 = 0.39 ; σ = 5.06
;
(2.04)
(4.14)
st = 3.24 + .91st −1 ; R 2 = 0.908 ; σ = 2.48

(2.19)

(15.8)

.

11
in an arbitrary and unpredictable way, the credibility of a new regime could not be assumed or
imposed. Instead, credibility must be acquired as an outcome of a time consuming learning
process. In these circumstances, a higher growth rate may be viewed as a signal used in this
learning process.13
If this interpretation holds, agents in countries characterized by greater political
instability would be more cautious in increasing their saving and investment rates following a
reform. Hence, increasing saving and investment rates in Latin America may be much harder
than increasing these rates in Asia, explaining LATAM’s relatively low growth rate.14 The past
volatility of policies was much greater in Latin America, implying that the private sector there
would impose more "stringent" tests on the reforming policy maker. While this behavior may be
fully justified from the point of view of the private sector, it implies that financing the first stage
of a "take-off" is a more challenging task. This gives an advantage to strategies like
privatization, elimination of burdensome regulations and opening the economy to international
trade.15 In these circumstances the first stages of the "taking-off" would be the outcome of
improving incentives via reforms.
A comprehensive study of saving can be found in Edwards (1996), who identified several
important regularities.16 The evidence on the private saving reveals four results. First, similar to
Caroll and Weil (1994), the private saving rate increases with the rate of growth. Second, as
13

Frequently the effectiveness of a new administration and its commitment to growth oriented policies is unknown.

In these circumstances the private sector will update its prior regarding the competence of the administration and the
saving rate according to various signals (like the duration of a reform, inflation, public debt, etc.). As these signals
are positively correlated with the realized growth, growth "explains" saving.
14

Various studies pointed out that policy uncertainty and political instability reduce private investment and growth

[see Edwards (1992), Aizenman and Marion (1993) and Ramey and Ramey (1995)].
15

This point is further strengthened if the allocative efficiency of public investment is smaller than of private

investment. This would be the case if public investment leads to inefficient public projects as a means of
transferring income, reflecting rent seeking activities, political patronage, etc. In these circumstances the marginal
productivity of private investment would exceed that of public investment. Hence, a cross countries comparison of
aggregate saving is providing only partial information regarding the net resources available for investment.
Ultimately, both the size and the composition of private versus public saving and investment would determine
capital accumulation.
16

He focused on a cross-country study of 50 countries, for the period of 1983-92, disaggregating between private

and public saving.

12
predicted by Modigliani's life cycle hypothesis, a higher dependency ratio depresses saving.
Third, deeper financial systems tend to increase the private saving rate. Fourth, higher
government saving reduces private saving, but the offset coefficient is significantly less than one,
implying that the net effect of higher government saving is to increase aggregate saving.17
Finally, a deeper government financed social security system reduces private saving, in line with
Feldstein (1980). The evidence on public saving reveals that political instability reduces it,
while growth tends to increase it. Capital inflows tend to reduce public saving, but the offset
coefficient is less than one.
These results suggest that steps that would increase public saving, increase the funding of
social security (like the privatization in Chile), and deepen the capital market would increase the
overall saving rate. Reforms that improve incentives and increase the stability of the economy
would further increase the saving rate, as the resultant growth would increase thriftiness over
time.

3. Financial liberalization: lessons and policy debates
The financial liberalizations of the 1990s validated empirically the assertion ‘Good-bye
financial repression, hello financial crash.’ (Diaz-Alejandro (1985)). Yet, some economists

found tenuous evidence that financial liberalization tends to increase growth over time. Both
observations suggest an intertemporal trade-off. In the short-run, the fragility induced by
financial opening frequently leads to crises. Yet, if these crises would force the country to deal
with its structural deficiencies, financial opening may induce a higher growth rate in the longrun. For example, it remains hard to gauge if Korea would have been better off by refraining
from financial opening in the early nineties, or if Chile would have benefited by retaining
financial repression in the eighties-nineties.18 The answers to these questions depend crucially

17

This result was obtained by Corbo and Schmidt-Hebbel (1991) for a sample of thirteen countries. They also

found that increasing public saving through expenditure reduction is more effective than increasing taxation. This
finding has bearing on the Ricardian equivalence, which suggests that government saving fully offsets private
saving. The above results imply that the Ricardain hypothesis does not hold, as one may expect in distorted
economies characterized by political uncertainties.
18

Obviously, the financial crisis in 1997 adversely impacted Korea’s welfare. One may argue, however, that it

prevented a much deeper and longer calamity, akin to Japan’s recession in the 1990s. Arguably, had Korea

13
on the time horizon of the analysis, as well as on the evaluation of what is the relevant
counterfactual, both issues to which there are no satisfactory answers.19

3.1

Financial and trade opening – cost benefits and sequencing
A useful survey of financial liberalization is Williamson and Mahar (1998), who focused

on 34 countries that undertook financial liberalization between 1973-1996. Overall, they found a
mixed record of financial liberalization -- The gains are there, but the liberalization carries the
risk of leading to financial crisis. Financial liberalization has yielded greater financial depth, and
increased efficiency in the allocation of investment. Yet, it has not brought a boost in saving.
The drawback in the liberalization process is the danger that the liberalization will lead to a
financial crisis. For the majority of countries, capital account liberalization increases the
probability this occurs. The challenge is to design a liberalization program that does not bring a
financial crisis in its wake. The main recommendations emerging from their study are akin to
Hellman, Murdock and Stiglitz (2000) -- start with macroeconomic stabilization, improve bank
supervision, while delaying capital-account convertibility till the end of the process. In the
transition, "mild financial repression," in the form of a ceiling on deposit interest rates, may be
advantageous. This follows from the observation that exceedingly high interest rates encourage
risk taking by borrowers – moral hazard induced by self-selection. Banks in stress may wish to
‘gamble for resurrection’ by lending to such borrowers, at a cost to the taxpayer. Williamson
and Mahar conclude that maintaining high spreads may be needed in a transition until banks are

continued with financial repression, a Japanese type of a correction would have hit Korea later. Korea’s
development path resembles that of Japan -- its domestic banks accumulated over time large non-performing loans.
These loans were the heritage of the earlier development strategy, where large corporations had selective access to
preferential lines of credit. According to this argument, the crisis of 1997 prevented a larger buildup of these loans,
saving Korea from a much deeper correction. Obviously, it is hard to provide a sound test of this argument. Similar
ambiguities apply to Chile, which has been the best performing Latin American country in recent years, and is
credited with a sound banking system. Yet, Chile experienced a massive banking crisis in the eighties, following
earlier financial opening. Arguably, one may credit the superior recent performance of Chile to the painful earlier
reforms, reforms that were triggered by the crises of the early eighties.
19

A welfare evaluation of these issues may depend on the degree to which there are political economy trade-offs

between a large crisis versus a series of smaller crises – a large crisis may be needed to overcome entrenched
opposing interest groups, yet it may lead to larger welfare costs.

14
able to work off the legacy of bad debt inherited from the period of financial repression. In such
an environment, free entry of foreign banks may be a mixed blessing. The efficiency gains
should be balanced against the threat of 'gamble for resurrection' by older domestic banks losing
their franchise value. Imposing higher capital requirements increases the cost of a 'gamble for
resurrection' strategy. In these circumstances, deposit rate controls may complement capital
requirements.
The overall effect of financial opening on growth remains debatable. Levine (1997)
found a positive association, whereas Rodrik (1998) failed to detect any positive effects of
financial opening on investment, growth and inflation. While Levine’s interpretation attaches
the direction of causality from financial deepening to growth, the old dictum that correlations do
not indicate causality remains valid. Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000) evaluated the empirical
links between the level of financial intermediary development and economic growth, TFP
growth, physical capital accumulation, and private savings rates. The main findings are that
financial intermediaries exert a large, positive impact on total factor productivity growth, which
feeds through to overall GDP growth. Yet, the long-run links between financial intermediary
development and both physical capital growth and private savings rates are tenuous. Bekaert,
Harvey and Lundblad (2001) found that equity market liberalizations, on average, lead to a one
percent increase in annual real economic growth over a five-year period. The investment/GDP
ratio increases post liberalization, with the investment partially financed by foreign capital,
inducing worsened trade balances. The liberalization effect is enhanced by a large secondary
school enrollment, a small government sector and an Anglo-Saxon legal system.20
Rodrik’s earlier methodology has been revisited by Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz
(2001). While they found indications of a positive association between capital account
liberalization and growth, the effects vary with time, with how capital account liberalization is
measured, and with how the relationship is estimated. The evidence, that the effects of capital
account liberalization are stronger in high-income countries, is fragile. There is some evidence
that the positive growth effects of liberalization are stronger in countries with strong institutions.
Capital account liberalization appears to have positive effects on growth only in countries that
20

As is frequently the case with empirical studies relying on macro data, endogeneity and reverse causality remain a

valid concern in interpreting some of these results.

15
have already opened more generally, hence sequencing matters. But there are significant
prerequisites for opening, including a reduction of trade barriers and an ability to eliminate
macroeconomic imbalances. These conclusions are akin to Edwards (2001) who reported that,
after controlling for other variables (including aggregate investment), countries with a more open
capital account have outperformed countries that have restricted capital mobility. There is also
evidence that an open capital account affects growth positively only after a country has achieved
a certain degree of economic development. This provides support to the view that there is an
optimal sequencing for capital account liberalization.

3.2

On the gains from FDI
Our earlier discussion focused on the patterns of external financing in LATAM, relying

on a Macroeconomic perspective. Similar questions can be explored at a more disaggregated
level, focusing on more disaggregated patterns of external financing, especially FDI. The rush to
reform and the growing importance of manufacturing led to optimistic assessments of the gains
from FDI inflows. This is vividly reflected in the tendency of developing countries to subsidize
multinationals investment by means of tax breaks, land grants, etc. While the debate about the
gains from FDI is not over, the recent literature is consistent with the notion that gains from FDI
were overrated. Attempts to identify positive spillover from FDI to domestic productivity led to
mixed outcomes, and frequently the effects were found to be small or insignificant. For
example, Aitken, Harrison and Lipsey (1996) calculated wage spillovers from FDI in Mexico
and Venezuela. In Mexico, wages in domestically-owned plants appeared to be lower where
foreign ownership was high, but the coefficients were not statistically significant. In Venezuela,
there seemed to be a significant negative influence of foreign presence on wages in domesticallyowned plants. These results could reflect a reallocation of the better labor force to foreign plants,
or the acquisition of higher paying plants by foreigners. Aitken and Harrison (1999) found that
increases in foreign equity participation were correlated with increases in productivity for small
plants, but that increases in foreign ownership in an industry negatively affected productivity in
domestically-owned plants in the same industry. The positive effects within the foreign plants
exceeded the negative effects, but only slightly [see Lipsey (2002)] for a review of the literature].
Hanson (2001) pointed out that “While multinationals are attracted to high-productivity
countries, and to high-productivity industries within these countries, there is little evidence at the

16
plant level that FDI raises the productivity of domestic enterprises. Indeed, it appears that plants
in industries with a larger multinational presence enjoy lower rates of productivity growth…
Empirical research thus provides little support for the idea that promoting FDI is warranted on
welfare grounds.” Indeed, the experience of Brazil suggests that competition among states for
FDI may be welfare reducing. This is in contrast with the experience of Costa Rica, attracting
Intel and other multinational by its good infrastructure and stable business environment, without
providing special concessions to multinationals.

3.3

Fiscal, monetary and structural reforms
Crises are frequently the delayed manifestations of political economy factors. Reforms

that ignore these factors run the risk of inducing too optimistic an assessment of countries,
leading over time to a large exposure, and ultimately to greater vulnerability. The literature on
optimal exchange rate regimes frequently attaches too much importance to the choice of
monetary policy. Beyond the short-run, monetary and fiscal policies are intertwined via the
intertemporal budget constraints [see Aizenman, Kletzer and Pinto (2004)]. Indeed, one may
argue that a deficient fiscal system may lead to crises independently of the exchange rate regime.
In these circumstances, the choice of the exchange rate regime will impact only the timing of the
ultimate crisis. After all, sovereign risk and exchange rate risks have different causes. Casting
the problem in terms of the “smart” choice of an exchange rate regime is potentially hazardous,
as it obscures the need to challenge the deeper fiscal deficiencies [see Calvo and Mishkin (2003)
for related analysis].
These considerations are illustrated in contrasting the policies undertaken by Brazil and
Argentina in the last 15 years. During the eighties, both countries were characterized by similar
fiscal deficiencies, stemming from their organization as loose federal systems. The provincial
states and municipalities had significant bargaining power relative to the federal centers. In the
early nineties, both countries went through successful exchange rate based stabilizations. The
nominal anchor provided by pegging the exchange rate, supported rapid disinflation in both
countries. Argentina, however, put a much greater emphasis on the importance of a peg – it
adopted a rigid currency board. In contrast, Brazil put greater emphasis on dealing with its fiscal

17
imbalances, reducing thereby the relative power of the provincial states.21 In addition, Brazil
moved, over time, from a fixed exchange rate regime towards discretionary exchange rate
management, accommodating external adverse shocks with occasional depreciations. As recent
events have painfully illustrated, Brazil’s choice allowed it to steer away from a deep crisis,
whereas Argentina’s choice has led over time to increased vulnerability, and to the ultimate
recent crisis.
One possible justification for “bailing out” countries is the presence of multiple
equilibria. Exposure to multiple equilibria is a by-product of the maturity transformation
accomplished by financial intermediation, where short term deposits are used to finance longer
term real projects [see Diamond and Dybvig (1983) for a banking model, and Chang and Velasco
(1999) for an open economy model of bank and currency runs]. In these circumstances, the
presence of the lender of last resort is supposed to prevent the bad equilibrium. As Rogoff (1999)
discussed, a lender of last resort comes with a hefty cost to the taxpayer. Some may view the
fate of Argentina as an example of a country suffering from the adverse consequences of a
switch to a bad equilibrium. Supporters of this view point out that conventional measures
(current account, fiscal deficits, etc.) failed to flag Argentina as a highly vulnerable country in
the 1990’s. Indeed, Argentina’s fiscal measures were comparable to those of ‘respected’ OECD
countries. Can we infer from this that a lender of last resort would have prevented the
Argentinean crisis?
While it is hard to test this assertion, there are fundamental challenges facing the multiple
equilibria argument. Vulnerability to a crisis may depend on the flexibility of an economy to
adjust to changing circumstances. This includes the ability of the fiscal system and the labor
market to adjust to unforeseen events. More generally, country risk may be determined by the
interaction between shocks, and the quality of the institutions of conflict management [see
Rodrik (1999)]. In the context of Argentina, the multiple equilibria interpretation is challenged
by the view that Argentina is a quasi European style welfare state, standing on the shoulders of a
very thin tax base. This situation is further exacerbated by the provincial states’ bias towards
overspending. Hence, one may conclude that there are fundamental reasons to view Argentina as
21

While it’s premature to conclude that Brazil has accomplished all the adjustments called for under the Fiscal

Responsibility Act of 2001, it started the painful process of curbing the biases towards provincial overspending. See
Dillinger and Webb (1999) for further details about the reforms.

18
a risky destination for global capital, even if its fiscal deficits and current account deficits are
comparable to OECD countries.
The insistence of the Argentinean authorities on preserving the currency board despite the
growing strength of the dollar in the 1990s, and the occasional real depreciations of Brazil, may
be viewed as a manifestation of these risks -- viewing the currency board as the main safeguard
against inflation runs the hazard of providing a signal that deeper fiscal problems are still there.
Placing too much faith on the currency board as the mechanism for fiscal discipline overlooks
the fact that the cost of changing the exchange rate regime (and more generally of monetary
policy) is much lower than the cost of a fundamental fiscal reform. Hence, a country like
Argentina runs the risk of being viewed as fiscally unstable, independent of the realized path of
current account and fiscal deficits. In the long run, according to this view, the fiscal side will
determine the strength of the system. Short of resolving fiscal deficiencies, a country like
Argentina will find it hard to convince the market that it is a prudent destination for capital.
One may rephrase the above discussion in terms of the rules versus discretion literature,
where there are gains from delegating monetary policy to a conservative agent. As was
illustrated in Rogoff’s (1985) seminal work, the optimal commitment to the conservative course
depends on the stochastic structure. If the balance of shocks tilts over time towards adverse real
shocks, a less conservative course is preferable. The success of Brazil and the failure of
Argentina may be viewed as a vivid example of this principle. The success of the structural
reform would also require challenging the fiscal deficiencies that determine, in the long run, the
course of monetary policy. Hence, the relative success of Brazil is attributed to its success in
curbing the bias towards provincial overspending, and to the more appropriate use of
discretionary exchange rate and monetary policy.
One may argue that luck [or the absence of it] plays a key role in determining the
outcome of policies. Accordingly, the Argentina currency board would have passed the test of
time if the recent weakening of the dollar and the commodity boom had started in the mid 1990s.
While this assertion has its own logic, it points out the fallacy of the currency board strategy, and
confirms the insight of Rogoff’s (1985) – Argentina’s currency board policy gambled on the
success of Argentina’s macro stance on exogenous factors, without paying attention to exit
strategies needed to deal with the downside risk associated with adverse external developments.

19
3.4

Alternative perspectives: Original Sin, Debt Intolerance and Currency Mismatch
We close this section with a review of alternative perspectives about the challenges

facing LATAM and other developing countries. The view articulated in Section 2 argued that
the gains from external finance are overrated, and that in the 1990s countries that relied less
heavily on external borrowing performed, on average, better. This interpretation is consistent
with the earlier literature cautioning about developing countries tendency to over borrow,22 and
with the skeptical assessment of the growth and the welfare benefits attributed to financial
liberalizations.23
Alternative perspectives are offered by the Original Sin approach [see Eichengreen,
Hausmann, and Ugo (2003)]. This approach focuses on the structure of global portfolios and
international financial markets, arguing that the inability to borrow externally in domestic
currency inhibits the performance of developing countries, inducing large welfare costs, and
explaining the difficulty developing countries have in servicing debts. The authors point out that
the Original Sin approach differs from Currency Mismatches: an approach that explains exposure
to crises due to differences in the values of the foreign currency denominated assets and
liabilities on the balance sheets of the economy as a whole.24 By definition, Original Sin implies
a gross foreign debt denominated in foreign currency. But the country may or may not also incur
a currency mismatch, depending on how the authorities respond to the act of borrowing.
In contrast, the Debt Intolerance view [Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003)] argues
that institutional weaknesses of emerging-market economies lead to weak and unreliable
policies. Debt Intolerance is reflected in the EM’s inability to manage levels of external debt
that are manageable for OECD. Credit ratings fall more rapidly with debt in emerging markets
than in advanced countries, as if the former have less debt management capacity. Possible
interpretations of Debt Intolerance include institutional weaknesses of emerging-market
22

See McKinnon and Pill (1996) and Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999) on overborrowing due to moral hazard

and euphoric expectations, leading to crises. Overborrowing may also occur due to congestion externalities, where
atomistic agents do not internalize the full effects of marginal borrowing on future welfare [Aizenman (1989)].
Overborrowing due to free rider problems in economies short of international collateral, generated by imperfections
of the domestic capital market is the focus of Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001).
23

See Kohn and Marion (1991), Rodrik (1998), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2004).

20
economies which lead to weak and unreliable policies. Countries’ histories have bequeathed a
situation where they find it difficult to run strong policies.
The focus on external borrowing by the Original Sin school is motivated by the
observation that, in the absence of other distortions, world welfare would be enhanced if capital
flowed from capital-rich advanced countries to their more capital-poor emerging market
counterparts. Had Original Sin been the only distortion, than removing it would have been
welfare improving. Yet, in practice, developing counties are struggling with a large number of
distortions. Hence, the welfare effect of removing one distortion is ambiguous. Specifically, if
removing the Original Sin would increase the volume of other distorted activities, it may be
welfare reducing.
While the Original Sin, Debt Intolerance and Currency Mismatch views offer different
perspectives, in practice it is hard to design a “horse race” that will provide a clear ranking of the
importance of the various approaches. Short of conducting controlled experiments, available
empirical procedures have limited power in identifying the independent role of the various
alternatives. This difficulty is aggravated by the fact that Original Sin measures of most
developing countries are practically the same. This suggests a censoring problem. In addition,
theory predicts a non linear interaction between the various approaches. It may be hard to pick
up such non linearity in a log linear model, especially if one is not testing a tightly specified
model.
Alternative reasoning may focus on case study methodology. A possible clue to the
issues at hand is that there is very little variation in Original Sin measures across countries, yet
there is large variation in performance. This observation suggests that countries may take off
without solving Original Sin and without solving “institutional weaknesses.” Such a take-off
may be accomplished by relaxing the grip of the state on the private sector, encouraging, instead
of penalizing, entrepreneurship [as apparently has been the case of China, India, etc.]. Hence,
prolonged growth acceleration may happen without dealing with constraints imposed by the
Original Sin, or the constraints imposed by existing institutions.
Another example of the contrast between the various approaches is the comparison of the
economic records of Chile and Australia. Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Ugo (2003) argued that
24

See Cespedes, Chang and Velasco (2003) and Goldstein and Turner (2003) for discussion of the economic impact

of balance sheets effects and currency mismatches.

21
Chile’s performance resembled that of LATAM and not that of Australia due to Original Sin
considerations. Chile is a favorite example of a country with increasingly strong institutions and
policies. Standard institution strengthening measures have not impacted the capacity to borrow
abroad in an EM’s own currency, over policy-relevant horizons. The Original sin approach
views this inability as a key shortcoming explaining the problems facing emerging markets. An
alternative interpretation is provided by Caballero et. al. (2004), who contrasted country-trust
versus currency-trust. They argue that the lack of country-trust is a more fundamental and
serious problem behind sudden stops. They point out that Chile needs external insurance more
than Australia does, precisely because its ToT shocks are amplified by the resulting contraction
in the supply of external funds. So Original Sin is a greater problem for Chile than for Australia.
“But importantly, Original Sin is not the primitive problem behind the need for substantial
insurance; the problem is a lack of country-trust.” This is vividly illustrated by the observation
that Australia’s inflation has been 4% since federation [about 102 years ago], exceeding 20% in
only 1 year. In contrast, Chile’s inflation exceeded 20% in approximately half the years during
that period. Australia has a long history with no default by the Federal or State governments.
Australia’s trust was generated by experiencing several substantial negative external shocks
without defaulting, unlike most LATAM countries.25
The Caballero et. al. (2004) reading of the contrast between Chile and Australia is
consistent with the Debt Intolerance view. It is also consistent with the view that the key to debt
intolerance is deeper structural factors, including polarization, distribution of income, and
political instability. More generally, debt intolerance may be related to the ability of the social
contract to deal with shocks. History impacts the investors’ priors about these concerns. All the
above may explain the root sources of emerging markets vulnerability, as has been articulated in
past contributions.26

25

The latest WDI reveals that the Real GDP per capita growth rate of Chile was double that of Australia during

1986-2003 [0.04 versus 0.02]. This provides more evidence that, while Original Sin plays a role, it is not the major
obstacle to growth.
26

See Alesina and Tabellini (1989), Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992) and Rodrik (1999).

22
4.

Concluding remarks
We close the reassessment of the financial liberalizations in LATAM in the 1990s with

an overview of qualifications and open issues. The skeptical view regarding the beneficial role
of external financing in propagating long run growth does not imply that external financing does
not play a role in helping a take-off. Korea provides a good example where the large aid
following the Korea war supplemented domestic policies, helping in engineering the impressive
take-off.27 Yet, the degree to which the Korean example is relevant to other take-offs is
debatable. First, aid may be essential in dealing with the aftermath of a major war, like Korea in
the 1960s, or the Marshal plan following the 2nd World War; but it may matter less [or even
hinder development] in more normal circumstances. As the experience of China, Chile and India
in the 1990s illustrated, take-offs may occur without relying on external funding. More research
along the lines of Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004) is needed to provide further insight
about the issues at hand.
The skeptical view regarding external financing advanced in this paper does not imply
that policies inhibiting financial openings are beneficial. The strongest argument for financial
opening may be the pragmatic one. Like it or not, greater trade integration erodes the
effectiveness of restrictions on capital mobility. Indeed, de-facto financial openness (measured
by the sum of gross private capital inflows and outflows as percent of GDP) depends positively
on lagged trade openness, controlling for macroeconomic and political economy factors.28
Hence, for successful emerging markets that engage in trade integration, financial opening is not
a question of if, but of when and how -- a country that undergoes rapid commercial integration
will find it impractical to enforce rigid financial repression. This result is consistent with the
view that sequencing of reforms is important, and that the timing of financial reforms should
depend on trade openness factors, as well as on the soundness of the macro economic policies.

27

Interestingly, the role of foreign aid in Korean development fizzled by 1970. Korea’s saving and investment rates

followed the prediction of the habit formation approach: both gross national saving and investment more than tripled
from 1960s to the 1980s; the Korean self-financing ratio reached 1 in the mid 1980s [see Noland (2004) for an
insightful case study of Korean economic history].
28

Aizenman and Noy (2004) studied the endogenous determination of financial and trade openness. The data

suggest almost a symmetric two-way feedback between (lagged) financial and trade openness.

23
References
Aitken, B. J. and A. Harrison. (1999) “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment? Evidence from
Venezuela,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, June, pp. 605- 618.
________ ., Ann E. Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey (1996), “Wages and Foreign Ownership: A Comparative Study
of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 345-371.
Aizenman, J., B. Pinto and A. Radziwill. (2004) "Sources for Financing Domestic Capital - is Foreign Saving a
Viable Option for Developing Countries?" manuscript, 2004.
_______ I. Noy. (2004) "Endogenous Financial and Trade Openness: Efficiency and Political Economy
Considerations", manuscript.
_______ , N. Marion. (1993) "Policy uncertainty, persistence and growth," Review of International Economics 1,
145-163.
________ (1989) “Country Risk, Incomplete Information and Taxes on International borrowing,” The Economic
Journal, 99, March, pp. 147-161.
________, K. Kletzer and B. Pinto. (2004) "Sargent-Wallace Meets Krugman-Flood-Garber, or: Why Sovereign
Debt Swaps Don't Avert Macroeconomic Crises", forthcoming, the Economic Journal, 2004.
Alesina, A., and G. Tabellini. "External Debt, Capital Flight, and Political Risk." Journal of International
Economics, 27 (1989), 199-220.
Arteta C., B. Eichengreen and C. Wyplosz. (2001): “When Does Capital Account Liberalization Help More than It
Hurts?” NBER Working Paper No. 8414.
Beck, T., R. Levine R. and Y. N. Loayza (2000): “Finance and the Sources of Growth.” Journal of Financial
Economics 58(1-2): pp. 261-300.
Bekaert, G, C. Harvey and R. Lundblad. (2001): “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?”, NBER working
paper 6724, 1-63.
Caballero R. and A. Krishnamurthy. (2001): “International and domestic collateral constraints in a model of
emerging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December, 48 (3), pp. 513-548.
_____ , K. Cowan and J. Kearns. (2004) Fear of Sudden Stops: Lessons from Australia and Chile NBER Working
paper # 10519.
Calvo, G. and R. Mishkin. (2003), "The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market Countries."
NBER Working paper # 9808.
Caroll C. and D. N. Weil. 1994. "Saving and growth: a reinterpretation," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series, 40,
133-192.
___________ J. Overland and D. N. Weil, (2000), “Saving and Growth with Habit formation,” American Economic
Review, pp. 341-390.
Cespedes, L., R. Chang and A. Velasco, “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas.” IMF Staff Papers 50 (2003), 143-56
Corbo V. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. (1991) "Public Policies and Saving in Developing Countries", Journal of
Development Economics, 36: 89-115, July 1991.
Corsetti, G., P. Pesenti and N. Roubini. (1999): “Paper Tigers?”, European Economic Review (43) 7.

24
Cukierman, Alex, Edwards Sebastian and Tabellini. Guido “Seigniorage and Political Instability.” American
Economic Review, June 1992, 82(3), 537-555.
Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig. (1983): “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy,
91, 401-419.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1985): “Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Repression.” Journal of Development
Economics, 19, pp. 1-24.
Dillinger William and Steven B. Webb. (1999): “Fiscal Management in Federal Democracies: Argentina and
Brazil,” World Bank report, May.
Dooley, M. (1988) "Capital Flight: A Response to Differences in Financial Risks," IMF Staff Papers, September
1988.
Edwards, S. (2004) “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” manuscript, NBER.
________ (1996) "Why are Latin American Saving Rate so low, An International Comparative Analysis.” ?",
Journal of Development Economics, 51, 1, pp. 5-44.
________ (1995) Crisis and Reform in Latin America, A World Bank Book, Oxford.
_________ (1992) "Trade Orientation, Distortions and Growth in Developing Counties," Journal of Development
Economics, July, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Eichengreen B., R. Hausmann and P. Ugo. (2003) Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and Original Sin: Why
They Are Not the Same and Why it Matters, NBER Working paper # 10036,
Feldstein, M. 1980. "International differences in social security and saving," Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
12.
Frankel, J. and Wei S. (2004) “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy Lessons,” Chapter 8 in Managing
Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide, Aizenman J. and B. Pinto (eds.), forthcoming,
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Goldstein, M. and P. Turner (2003), “Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Market Economies: An
Alternative to the Original Sin Hypothesis,” manuscript, Institute of International Economics.
Gourinchas P. O. and Jeanne O. (2004) “The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration,” IMF
WP/04/74.
Hanson, G. "Should Countries Promote Foreign Direct Investment?", February 2001.
Hausmann R. and M. Gavin (1995), “Overcoming Volatility,” in Economic and Social Progress Report in Latin
America, Inter-American Development Bank.
________, L. Pritchett and D. Rodrik. (2004) “Growth Accelerations”. NBER Working paper # 10566.
Hellmann, T., Murdock, K., and Stiglitz, J.E. (2000): "Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking and Prudential
Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?" American Economic Review, 90 (1), 147-165.
Kohn, M. and N. Marion. (1992): “The Implications of Knowledge-Based Growth for the Optimality of Open
Capital Markets,” Canadian Journal of Economics; 25(4), November, pp. 865-83.
Krugman, P. (2000), “Fire sale FDI”, chapter 2 in Edwards, Sebastian, editor Capital Flows and the Emerging
Economies: Theory, Evidence, and Controversies., NBER conference volume, Chicago Press.

25
Lipsey, R. (2002) “Home and Host Country Effects of FDI” NBER Working Paper # 9293.
Levine R. (1997): “Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 45, June: 688-726.
McKinnon R. I.; and H. Pill. (1996): “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital Flows: The Overborrowing
Syndrome.” In Ito T. and A. O, Krueger, eds. Financial deregulation and integration in East Asia. NBEREast Asia Seminar on Economics, vol. 5. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, pp. 7-42.
Noland, M. (2004) “South Korea's Experience with International Capital Flows,” manuscript, NBER.
Quinn, D. P. (2003) “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 1890-1999: a Synoptic View,”
International Journal of Finance and Economics, 8(3): 189-204.
Ramey, G., Ramey, V., 1995. Cross-country evidence on the link between volatility and growth, American
Economic Review, 85 (5), 1138-1151.
Reinhart, C., K. Rogoff and M. Savastano (2003), “Debt Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1,
pp.1-74.
Rodrik, D. (1999) “Where Did All The Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and Growth Collapses”
Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4, December, pp. 358-412.
____ (1994) "Getting interventions right: how South Korea and Taiwan grew rich," NBER Working paper no.
4964.
_____ “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Peter Kenen (ed), Should the IMF Pursue Capital Account
Convertibility? Essays in International Finance no. 207, Princeton: Princeton University Press (May).
Rogoff, K. (1985): “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 100 (November), pp. 1169-1189.
________ (1999): “International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial Instability,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 13, no. 4 (Fall): 21- 42.
World Bank. 1993. The East Asian Miracle , Oxford University Press.

26

6

4

2

0

-2

-4
91

92

93

94

95

96

Latin Americ a

97

98

99

As ia

00

01

Afric a

Figure 1
Annual GDP per capita growth in 1990s, means across regions

1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
91

92

93

94

95

Latin America

96

97
Asia

98

99

00

01

Africa

Figure 2
Self-financing ratios in 1990s, means across regions

27
1.2

1.2

1.1

1.1

1.0

10

1.0

5

0.9

0.9

10
5

0

0
-5

-5

-10
-10

-15
91

92

93

94

95

96

Growth rate /left axis

97

98

99

00

01

91

92

93

94

95

96

Growth rate /left axis

Self-financing ratio /right axis

97

98

99

00

01

02

Self-financing ratio /right axis

3.A

3.B

Brazil

Argentina
1.2

1.2

1.1

1.1

1.0

10

1.0

5

10
0.9
5

0.8

0

0

0.7

-5

-5

0.9

-10

-10
91

92

93

94

95

Growth rate /left axis

96

97

98

99

00

91

01

92

93

94

95

96

Growth rate /left axis

Self-financing ratio /right axis

97

3.D

Mexico

Bolivia
1.00
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.80

91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 0
Growth rate/left axis

1

99

00

01

Self-financing ratio /right axis

3.C

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

98

1.2
1.1
1.0
10

0.9

5

0.8
0.7

0
-5
-10
91

92

93

94

95

Growth rate /left axis

96

97

98

99

00

01

Self-financing ratio /right axis

Self-financing ratio/right axis

3.F
3.E

Ecuador

Chile
Figure 3
Self-financing ratios and GDP per capital growth rates in selected LATAM countries,
1991-2001

28

12

1.0
0.9

Self-financing /
left axis

10

0.8
8
0.7
6

0.6
0.5

4

0.4

2

0.3
0

Growth rate / right axis

0.2

-2

0.1
0.0

-4
84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99

Self-financing ratio/left axis

0

1

2

Growth rate/rigth axis

Figure 4
Self-financing ratios and GDP per capital growth rates, Chile 1984-2002

Saving and growth rates

30

Chile’s S
25

Korea’s S
20

Korea’s GDP growth

15

10

5

Chile’s GDP growth
Year [Korea];

0

Year [Chile] -5

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

-10
Chile's s aving rate

Korea's s aving rate

Korea's GDP growth rate

Chile's GDP growth rate

Korea's S and GDP growth rates, 1971-1979; Chile's S and GDP growth rates, 1983-91
Figure 5

29

Korea's saving rate

Chile’s saving rate

Predicted Korea's saving rate

Predicted Chile’s saving rate

42
Korea's saving rate

30

38
34

Chile's saving rate

26

30

22

26
22

18

18

14
14

10

10
6

6
6

10 14 18 22

26 30 34 38

42

Korea's saving, -1

6

10

14
18
22
26
Chile’s saving, -1

30

Predicted and actual saving rates [AR(1) representation], Korea and Chile, 1965-1991

Figure 6

