NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENT
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 11155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11155
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005

Alejandro Justiniano and Ariel Han provided excellent research assistance. We thank John Cochrane, Mike
Devereux, Darell Duffie, Charles Engel, Gene Grossman, Philip Lane, Bartosz Mackowiak, Gian-Maria
Milesi-Ferretti, Maury Obstfeld, Anna Pavlova, Richard Portes, Chris Sims, Alan Stockman, Lars Svensson,
Mark Watson, Mike Woodford and numerous seminar participants for comments. This paper is part of a
research network on "The Analysis of International Capital Markets: Understanding Europe's Role in the
Global Economy", funded by the European Commission under the Research Training Network Program
(Contract No. HPRN.CT. 1999.00067). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

International Financial Adjustment
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 11155
February 2005
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
The paper proposes a unified framework to study the dynamics of net foreign assets and exchange
rate movements. We show that deteriorations in a country's net exports or net foreign asset position
have to be matched either by future net export growth (trade adjustment channel) or by future
increases in the returns of the net foreign asset portfolio (hitherto unexplored financial adjustment
channel). Using a newly constructed data set on US gross foreign positions, we find that stabilizing
valuation effects contribute as much as 31% of the external adjustment. Our theory also has asset
pricing implications. Deviations from trend of the ratio of net exports to net foreign assets predict
net foreign asset portfolio returns one quarter to two years ahead and net exports at longer horizons.
The exchange rate affects the trade balance and the valuation of net foreign assets. It is forecastable
in and out of sample at one quarter and beyond. A one standard deviation decrease of the ratio of net
exports to net foreign assets predicts an annualized 4% depreciation of the exchange rate over the
next quarter.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
UC Berkeley
693 Evans Hall, #3880
Economics Department
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu
Hélène Rey
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hrey@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Understanding the dynamic process of adjustment of a country’s external balance is one of the
most important questions for international economists. ‘To what extent should surplus countries
expand; to what extent should deÞcit countries contract?’ asked Mundell (1968). These questions
remain as important today as then. The modern theory focusing on those issues is the ‘intertemporal approach to the current account.’ It views the current account balance as the result of
forward-looking intertemporal saving decisions by households and investment decisions by Þrms.
As Obstfeld (2001)[p11] remarks, ‘it provides a conceptual framework appropriate for thinking
about the important and interrelated policy issues of external balance, external sustainability, and
equilibrium real exchange rates’.
This approach has yielded major insights into the current account patterns that followed the
two oil price shocks of the seventies and the large US Þscal deÞcits of the early eighties. Yet in
many instances, its key empirical predictions are rejected by the data. Our paper suggests that this
approach falls short of explaining the dynamics of the current account because it fails to incorporate
capital gains and losses on the net foreign asset position.1 The recent wave of Þnancial globalization
has come with a sharp increase in gross cross-holdings of foreign assets and liabilities. Such leveraged
country portfolios are aﬀected by ßuctuations in asset prices. The upsurge in cross-border holdings
has therefore opened the door to potentially large wealth transfers across countries, which alter
net foreign asset dynamics. These valuation eﬀects are absent not only from the theory but also
from oﬃcial statistics. The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and the Balance of
Payments report the current account at historical cost. Hence they give a very approximate and
potentially misleading reßection of the change of a country’s net foreign asset position.
These considerations are essential to discuss the sustainability of the unprecedently high US
current account deÞcits. The US foreign liability to GDP ratio has quadrupled since the beginning
of the 1980s to reach 96% of GDP ($10.5 trillion) in December 2003.2 Its foreign asset to GDP
ratio was then 71% ($7.9 trillion) and its net foreign asset to GDP ratio was -24% (-$2.7 trillion).
The intertemporal approach to the current account suggests that the US will need to run trade
1

Some papers have introduced time-varying interest rates (e.g. Bergin and Sheﬀrin (2000)) or risky assets (Lucas
(1982)). But most of these models either reproduce complete markets —which has many counterfactual implications
and reduces the current account to an accounting device— or assume away predictable returns and wealth eﬀects.
Kehoe and Perri (2002) is an interesting exception that introduces speciÞc forms of endogenous market incompleteness.
See also Kraay and Ventura (2000) and Ventura (2001) for models that allow investment in risky foreign assets with
interesting empirical predictions.
2
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

1

surpluses to reduce this imbalance. We show instead that part of the adjustment can take place
through a change in the returns on US assets held by foreigners relative to the return on foreign
assets held by the US. Importantly, this wealth transfer may occur via a depreciation of the dollar.
Almost all of US foreign liabilities are in dollars and approximately 70% of US foreign assets are
in foreign currencies. A back of the envelope calculation indicates that a 10% depreciation of the
dollar represents, ceteris paribus, a transfer of 5% of US GDP from the rest of the world to the
US. For comparison, the US trade deÞcit on goods and services was ‘only’ 4.4% of GDP in 2003.
With large gross asset and liability positions, a change in the dollar exchange rate can transfer
large amounts of wealth across countries.
Our approach emphasizes this international Þnancial adjustment mechanism. We start from a
country’s intertemporal budget constraint and show it has two implications. The Þrst is the link
between a current shortfall in net savings and future trade surpluses. If total returns on the net
foreign assets are expected to be constant, today’s current account deÞcits must be compensated
by future trade surpluses. This is the traditional ‘trade adjustment channel’. The second (new)
implication is at the center of our analysis. In the presence of stochastic asset returns which diﬀer
across asset classes, expected capital gains and losses on gross external positions signiÞcantly alter
the need to run future trade surpluses or deÞcits. These valuation eﬀects constitute a hitherto
unexplored ‘Þnancial adjustment channel’. An expected increase in the return on US equities
relative to the rest of the world, for example, tightens the external constraint of the United States
by raising the total value of the claims the foreigners have on the US.
Put simply, a fall in today’s net exports or in today’s net external asset position has to be
matched either by future net export growth or by future increases in the returns of the net foreign
asset portfolio. In the data, we Þnd that historically, 31% of the international adjustment of the
US is realized through valuation eﬀects on average.
Our model also has asset pricing implications. The budget constraint implies that today’s
current external imbalances must predict, either future export growth or future movements in
returns of the net foreign asset portfolio, or both. We show in section 4 that the ratio of net exports
to net foreign assets contains signiÞcant information about future returns on the US net foreign
portfolio from a quarter out and up to two years. A one standard deviation decrease of the ratio of
net exports to net foreign assets predicts an annualized excess return on foreign assets relative to
US assets of 19% over the next quarter. At long horizons, it also helps predict net export growth.
Hence at short to medium horizons, the brunt of the (predictable) adjustment goes through asset
2

returns, while at longer horizons it occurs via the trade balance. The valuation channel operates
in particular through expected exchange rate changes. The dynamics of the exchange rate plays
a major role in our set up since it has the dual role of changing the diﬀerential in rates of return
between assets and liabilities denominated in diﬀerent currencies and also of aﬀecting future net
exports. We Þnd in section 4 that today’s ratio of net exports to net foreign assets forecasts
exchange rate movements at short, medium and long horizons both in and out-of-sample. A one
standard deviation decrease of the ratio of net exports to net foreign assets predicts an annualized
4% depreciation of the exchange rate over the next quarter.
Our methodology builds on the seminal work of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and, more recently,
of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) on the implication of a closed economy consumption wealth ratio
for predicting future equity returns. Few papers have thought of the importance of valuation eﬀects
in the process of international adjustment. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001), (2002) have pointed
out that the correlation between the change in net foreign asset position at market value and the
current account is low or even negative. They also noted that rates of return on the net foreign
asset position and the trade balance tend to comove negatively, suggesting that wealth transfers
aﬀect net exports. Bergin and Sheﬀrin (2000) have enriched the intertemporal approach to the
current account by introducing a variable interest rate and a real exchange rate, which helps to
model the volatility of the change in the net foreign asset positions. Mercereau (2003) introduces a
stock market in a standard intertemporal approach set up and shows that the current account may
help predict future stock market performance. More recently Tille (2003) discusses the eﬀect of the
currency composition of US assets on the dynamics of its external debt, Corsetti and Konstantinou
(2004) provide an empirical analysis of the responses of US net foreign debt to permanent and
transitory shocks, while Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004) document exchange rate eﬀects on rates
of return of foreign assets and liabilities for a cross-section of countries. None of these papers,
however, provides a quantitative assessment of the importance of the Þnancial and trade channels
in the process of international adjustment nor explores the asset pricing implications of the theory.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we present the theoretical
framework that guides our empirical investigation of the mechanisms of international Þnancial
adjustment. We discuss the construction of our quarterly dataset of the US disaggregated gross
foreign asset and liability positions at market value in section 3. Empirical results are presented
in section 4. We Þrst quantify the importance of the valuation and trade channels in the process

3

of external adjustment. We then explore the asset pricing implications of our theory. Section 5
concludes.

2

International Þnancial adjustment.

This sections lays down the Þrst building block of an intertemporal approach to the Þnancial
account: an intertemporal budget constraint and a long run stability condition.
Consider the accumulation identity for net foreign assets between t and t + 1 :
N At+1 = Rt+1 (N At + N Xt )

(1)

N Xt represents net exports, deÞned as the diﬀerence between exports Xt and imports Mt , and net
foreign assets N At are deÞned as the diﬀerence between gross foreign assets At and gross foreign
liabilities Lt , measured in the domestic currency.3 Equation (1) states that the net foreign position
increases with net exports and with the total return on the net foreign asset portfolio Rt+1 .4
We work with net exports N Xt instead of the current account CAt . From a national income
point of view, the current account records net factor payments, i.e. net dividend payments and net
interest income, that are part of the total return Rt+1 . If these were the only sources of capital
income, then the current account –usually deÞned– would equal changes in net foreign assets. In
presence of capital gains and exchange rate ßuctuations, however, neither the Balance of Payment
nor National Income and Product Account deÞnitions of the current account coincide with the
change in net foreign assets evaluated at market value. The reason is that both accounting systems
omit unrealized capital gains coming from changes in asset prices or exchange rates. These valuation
eﬀects can be important when the net foreign portfolio is leveraged, and they are incorporated in
the return Rt+1 .
To explore further the implications of equation (1), we follow the methodology of Campbell and
Mankiw (1989) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) and log-linearize. The log-linearization requires
four assumptions (the details are provided in appendix A):
3

Accumulation equation (1) implies that net foreign assets are measured at the beginning of the period. This
timing assumption is innocuous. One could instead deÞne NA0t as the stock of net foreign assets at the end of period
t − 1, i.e. NAt = Rt NA0t . The accumulation equation becomes: NA0t+1 = Rt NA0t + NXt .
4
In practice, net foreign assets could also change because of unilateral transfers or because of transactions not
recorded in the trade balance or the Þnancial account (errors and omissions). Unilateral transfers are typically small,
while errors and omissions are omitted in the BEA’s International Investment Position. We abstract from these
additional terms. See Gourinchas and Rey (2005, in progress) for details.

4

Assumption 1: (a) The ratios At /Wt , Lt /Wt , Xt /Wt and Mt /Wt are stationary, where Wt
represents total household wealth. (b) the steady state values of the ratios, denoted µaw , µlw , µxw
and µmw respectively, satisfy µaw 6= µlw and µxw 6= µmw .
Assumption 2: The growth rate of household wealth Wt+1 /Wt is stationary with steady state
value γ.
Assumption 3: The return to the net foreign asset portfolio Rt is stationary with a steady
state value R that satisÞes γ < R.
Assumption 1 is not particularly restrictive. The Þrst part of the assumption is veriÞed in
any model where exports, imports, external assets, liabilities and household wealth grow at the
same rate along a balanced growth path. This will be the case in a wide variety of models, as
long as assets and liabilities are not perfect substitutes. For instance, in a Merton-type portfolio
allocation model, the portfolio shares At /Wt and Lt /Wt are stationary. Part (b) of Assumption 1
guarantees that some ratios are well deÞned. We do not view it as restrictive: it will be veriÞed
in most general open economy model except under very speciÞc assumptions restricting the net
foreign asset position and the trade balance to be zero in steady state.5
Assumption 2 is also an implication of the existence of a well-deÞned balanced growth path.
It will obtain if both the consumption/wealth ratio and the rate of return to total wealth are
stationary (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) for details).
The assumption that the long-term growth rate of the economy is lower than the equilibrium
rate of return on the net foreign asset portfolio (Assumption 3) is a common equilibrium condition
in many growth models. In our context, it has an intuitive interpretation: manipulating equation
(1), one can check that if Assumption 3 holds, the steady state ratio of net exports to net foreign
assets is stationary with an unconditional mean N X/NA that satisÞes
N X/N A = ρ − 1 < 0

(2)

where ρ = γ/R < 1. In other words, countries with steady state creditor positions (N A > 0)
should run trade deÞcits (N X < 0); countries with steady state debtor positions (N A < 0) should
run trade surpluses (N X > 0).
5

See, e.g., Corsetti and Pesenti (2001).

5

Equipped with Assumptions 1-3, we log-linearize the law of motion of net assets to obtain:
∆nat+1 = rt+1 +

µ

¶
1
− 1 (nxt + nat )
ρ

(3)

where ∆ denotes the diﬀerence operator: ∆zt+1 ≡ zt+1 − zt .
nxt = |µx | xt − |µm | mt is a linear combination of log exports and imports that we call, with
some abuse of language, ‘net exports’. The weights µx and µm have the same sign and reßect the
relative importance of exports and imports in the trade balance in steady state. They are deÞned
as:
µx =

µxw
; µ = µx − 1
µxw − µmw m

(4)

Similarly, nat = |µa | at − |µl | lt is a linear combination of log-gross assets and gross liabilities
that we call, also with some abuse of language, ‘net foreign assets’. The weights µa and µl have
the same sign and are deÞned analogously to µx and µm :
µa =

µaw
; µ = µa − 1
µaw − µlw l

(5)

Part (b) of Assumption 1 guarantees that these weights are well-deÞned. Under the assumption
that the steady state returns on gross assets and liabilities are the same, rt+1 can be written as:6
a
l
rt+1 ≈ |µa | rt+1
− |µl | rt+1

(6)

a
(return on assets) and decreases
The net foreign asset portfolio return rt+1 increases with rt+1
l
(return on liabilities). Equation (3) carries the same interpretation as equation (1): a
with rt+1

country can improve its net foreign asset position (∆nat+1 > 0) either through a trade surplus
(nxt > 0) or a high portfolio return (rt+1 > 0).
We deÞne the linear combination of net exports and net assets nxat as nxt + nat = |µx | xt −
|µm | mt + |µa | at − |µl | lt . By construction, it increases with exports and assets and decreases with
imports and liabilities. With some further abuse of language, the variable nxat can be interpreted
as the deviation from trend of the ratio of net exports to net foreign assets. It is a theoretically
grounded measure of external imbalances.
Our last assumption is a no-ponzi condition that guarantees that nxa does not grow faster than
the growth-adjusted interest rate:
6

See Campbell (1996). The approximation also includes an unimportant constant.

6

Assumption 4: nxat satisÞes the no-ponzi condition
lim ρj nxat+j = 0 a.s.

j−→∞

Under Assumption 4, the budget constraint (3) can be solved forward and rearranged as follows:
nxat = −

+∞
X

ρj [rt+j + ∆nxt+j ]

(7)

j=1

Equation (7) is simply a restatement of the intertemporal budget constraint. It must hold
ex-post as well as ex-ante along every sample path. Accordingly, it must also hold in expectations:

nxat = −

+∞
X

ρj Et [rt+j + ∆nxt+j ]

(8)

j=1

This equation plays a central role in our approach. We will use it to assess quantitatively the
relative importance of the valuation and trade channels in the process of international adjustment.
It shows that movements in the trade balance and the net foreign asset position must forecast either
future portfolio returns, or future net export growth, or both.
Consider again the case of the US with both a large trade deÞcit and negative net foreign assets,
implying a very negative nxat . Suppose Þrst that returns on US net foreign assets are expected to
be constant: Et rt+j = r. In that case, equation (8) posits that any adjustment must come through
future improvements in US net exports (Et ∆nxt+j > 0). This is the standard implication of the
intertemporal approach to the current account.7 We call this channel the trade adjustment channel.
We emphasize instead that the adjustment may also come from predictable net foreign portfolio
returns Et rt+j > 0.8 We call this channel the Þnancial adjustment channel. Importantly such
predictable returns can occur via a depreciation of the dollar. While such depreciation certainly
also helps to improve future net exports, the important point is that it operates through an entirely
7

See Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001) for an analysis along these lines. It is of course possible that some of today’s
adjustment comes from an unexpected change in asset prices or exports. These unexpected changes would be reßected
simultaneously in the left and right hand side of equation (8). Our empirical part does not focus on such surprises.
8
The empirical asset pricing literature has produced a number of Þnancial and macro variables with forecasting
power for stock returns and excess stock returns in the U.S. and abroad: the dividend-price and price-earning ratios
(Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988)), the detrended T-bill rate (Hodrick (1992)), the term spread
–the diﬀerence between the 10-year and one-year T-bill yields– and the default spread –the diﬀerence between
the BAA and AAA corporate bond rates (Fama and French (1989)), the aggregate book-market ratio (Vuolteenaho
(2000)), the investment/capital ratio (Cochrane (1991)) and more recently, the aggregate consumption/wealth ratio
(Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)). To our knowledge, our approach is the Þrst to produce a predictor of the return on
domestic assets relative to foreign assets.

7

diﬀerent channel: a predictable wealth transfer from foreigners to US residents. The role of the
exchange rate can be illustrated by considering the case where gross liabilities are denominated in
domestic currency while gross assets are in foreign currencies. We can then rewrite rt+1 as:
¡ a
¢
l
rt+1 = |µa | r̃t+1
+ ∆et+1 − |µl | r̃t+1
− π t+1

(9)

a
l represent the gross nominal returns in local currency, ∆e
and r̃t+1
where r̃t+1
t+1 the rate of depre-

ciation of the domestic currency and π t+1 the realized rate of domestic inßation between periods t
and t + 1. Holding local currency returns constant, a currency depreciation increases the return on
gross assets (held in foreign currency), an eﬀect that is magniÞed by the degree of leverage of the
net foreign asset portfolio when |µa | > 1.
It is important to emphasize that equation (8) is an identity. It holds in expectations, but
also along every sample path. Accordingly, one cannot hope to ‘test’ it.9 Yet it presents several
advantages that guide our empirical strategy. First, this identity contains useful information: a
combination of exports, imports, gross assets and liabilities can move only if it forecasts either
future returns on net foreign assets or future net export growth. The remainder of the paper
evaluates empirically the relative importance of these two factors in the dynamics of adjustment
and investigates at what horizons they operate.
Second, our modeling relies only on the intertemporal budget constraint and a long run stability
condition, hence it is consistent with most models. We see this as a strength of our approach, since
it nests any model that incorporates an intertemporal budget constraint. More speciÞc theoretical
mechanisms can be introduced and tested as restrictions within our set up. They will have to be
compatible with our empirical Þndings regarding the quantitative importance of the two mechanisms
of adjustment and the horizons at which they operate. Thus our Þndings provide useful information
to guide more speciÞc theories.

3

US net foreign assets, net exports and exchange rates.

We apply our theoretical framework to the external adjustment problem of the United States.
Our methodology requires constructing net and gross foreign asset positions at market value over
relatively long time series and computing capital gains and returns on global country portfolios.
9
Technically, only equation (1) is an identity. Equation (8) holds up to the loglinearization approximations if (a)
Assumptions 1-4 hold and (b) expectations are formed rationally.

8

In this section, we describe brießy the construction of our data set. A complete description of the
data is presented in Gourinchas and Rey (2005, in progress).

3.1

Positions.

Data on the net and gross foreign asset positions of the US are available from two sources: the US
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Federal Reserve Flows of Funds Accounts for the rest
of the world (FFA).10 Following oﬃcial classiÞcations, we split US net foreign portfolio into four
categories: Debt (corporate and government bonds), Equity, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and
Other. The ‘other’ category includes mostly bank loans and trade credits. It also contains gold
reserves.11 Our strategy consists in re-constructing market value estimates of the gross external
assets and liabilities of the US that conform to the BEA deÞnitions by using FFA ßow and position
data and valuation adjustments.
Denote by Xt0 the end of period t position for some asset X. We use the following updating
equation:
0
+ F Xt + DXt
Xt0 = Xt−1

where F Xt denotes the ßows corresponding to asset X that enter the balance of payments, and
DXt denotes a discrepancy reßecting a market valuation adjustment or (less often) a change of
coverage in the series between periods t − 1 and t.
0
where rtx represents the
Using existing sources, we construct an estimate of DXt as rtx Xt−1

estimated dollar capital gain on asset X between time t − 1 and time t. This requires that we
specify market returns rtx for each sub-category of the Þnancial account.

3.2

Capital gains, total returns and exchange rates.

We construct capital gains on the subcategories of the Þnancial account as follows. For equity
and FDI, we use the broadest stock market indices available in each country. For long term debt,
we construct quarterly holding returns and subtract the current yield, distributed as income, to
compute the net return. We assume no capital gain adjustment for short-term debt and for ‘other’
assets and liabilities, since these are mostly trade credit or illiquid bank loans.12
We construct total returns for each class of Þnancial assets as follows. For equity and FDI, we
10

See Hooker and Wilson (1989) for a detailed comparison of the FFA and BEA data.
We include international gold ßows in our analysis, since during Bretton Woods (the only period where they
were quantitatively non-negligible) they were by design perfect substitutes to dollar ßows and central to the process
of international adjustment.
12
Due to data availability, we assume away any spread between corporate and government debt.
11

9

use quarterly total returns on the broadest stock market indices available in each country. The total
return on debt is a weighted average of the total quarterly return on 10-year government bonds and
the three-month interest rate on government bills, with weights reßecting the maturity structure
of debt assets and liabilities. The total return on ‘other’ assets and liabilities is computed using
three-month interest rates. All returns are adjusted for US inßation by subtracting the quarterly
change in the Personal Consumer Expenditure deßator.
In all cases, we use end of period exchange rates to convert local currency capital gains and
total returns into dollars. Gourinchas and Rey (2005, in progress) gives a precise description of the
currency weights and maturity structure (for debt) and of the country weights (for equity and FDI
assets) that we use in our calculations.
It is diﬃcult to construct precise estimates of the Þnancially-weighted nominal eﬀective exchange
rate, needed in particular to compute net portfolio returns in equation (9). There is little available
evidence on the currency and country composition of total foreign assets. In practice, the benchmark
Treasury Survey (2000) reports country and currency composition for long-term holdings of foreign
securities in benchmark years. Because few data are available before 1994, the weights are likely
to be substantially oﬀ-base at the beginning of our sample. Instead, we construct a multilateral
Þnancial exchange rate using time-varying FDI historical position country weights. This exchange
rate proxies the true Þnancially weighted exchange rate that aﬀects the dollar return on gross
foreign assets.13 We also make the realistic assumption that most foreign asset positions are not
hedged for currency risk (see Hau and Rey (2005, forthcoming)).
Our constructed series of the net foreign asset position for the US is shown in Figure 1, relative
to household net worth. We see a strong deterioration of the US net foreign asset position after
1982. The US switched from being a net creditor to being a net debtor around 1988 and its net
foreign asset position has kept on deteriorating ever since.
[Figure 1 about here]
13
We checked the robustness of our results by using alternate deÞnitions of the multilateral exchange rate, based
on Þxed equity or debt weights. The results are qualitatively unchanged. We note also that the correlation between
the rate of depreciation of our multilateral exchange rate and the rate of depreciation of the Federal Reserve ‘major
currencies’ trade weighted multilateral nominal rate is high at 0.86. This is perhaps not surprising. To the extent
that the geographical determinants of trade ßows also inßuence Þnancial ßows, as argued for instance by Portes and
Rey (2005), the trade-weighted exchange rate may be a better approximation of the true implicit Þnancial exchange
rate than et , which reßects only FDI weights at historical value.

10

4

Empirical results.

Section 3 showed that under some stationarity assumptions, nxa, a linear combination of (log)
exports (xt ), imports (mt ), gross foreign assets (at ) and liabilities (lt ) is a theoretically well-deÞned
measure of external imbalances. Our empirical implementation proceeds in three steps. First we
test for unit roots in (log) exports, imports, assets and liabilities. Augmented Dickey Fuller tests
overwhelmingly support the presence of unit roots in each of the series.14
Second, we check the empirical validity of our stationarity assumptions. Assumption 1 implies
that xmt ≡ xt −mt ; alt ≡ at −lt ; xat ≡ xt −at are stationary. In fact, this implication is all we need
for the loglinearization (see Appendix A). Hence, this is what we check in the data.15 Exports,
imports, assets and liabilities are likely to be measured with error. Accordingly, we estimate
xmt = xt − β m mt , alt = at − β l lt and xat = xt − β a at where the β i s are unobservable coeﬃcients.
Fortunately, cointegration techniques provide an eﬃcient method to estimate the β i s that is robust
to regressor endogeneity. This implies that we should Þnd three cointegrating relations among xt ,
mt , at and lt .
We test for the number of cointegrating relations among these four variables using full information likelihood methods (see Johansen (1988), (1991)). As is well-known, the results regarding the
number of cointegration vectors are sensitive to the lag length in the VAR. The sequential modiÞed
likelihood ratio and the Akaike information criteria suggest using a large number of lags (above
twenty-eight). Indeed, for smaller number of lags, the test gives unstable results. When twentyeight lags and above are included, results stabilize. The maximum eigenvalue statistic, presented in
the Þrst block of Table 1, tests the null hypothesis of r linearly independent cointegrating vectors
against r + 1 cointegration vectors. The trace statistic, reported in the second block of Table 1,
tests the null hypothesis of r linearly independent cointegrating vectors against k cointegrating
relations, where k is the number of endogenous variables. Both tests indicate the presence of three
cointegrating vectors at the 5% conÞdence level. Thus assumptions underlying equation (8) are
satisÞed.16
The third step is to estimate our three cointegrating vectors. We use Stock and Watson’s (1993)
dynamic least square technique, since it generates optimal estimates of the cointegrating coeﬃcients
14

Results are not reported here due to space constraints and are available upon request.
We introduced Wt in section 2 only to write the stationarity assumptions in a way that could easily be mapped
into familiar theoretical models.
16
Note that assumptions 1-3 also ensure that rt+j and ∆nxt+j are stationary. It is not the case, however, contrary
to a frequent claim in the literature, that stationarity of rt+j and ∆nxt+j guarantees stationarity of the left hand
side of equation (8), even when ρ < 1. See Cochrane (1992) for a counterexample.
15

11

in a multivariate setting, and it performs well relative to other asymptotically eﬃcient estimators
in Þnite samples. SpeciÞcally, we estimate the following equations by OLS:
xt = αm + β m mt +

k
X

bm,i ∆mt−i + Cmt

(10)

i=−k

at = αl + β l lt +

k
X

bl,i ∆lt−i + Clt

i=−k

xt = αa + β a at +

k
X

ba,i ∆at−i + Cat

i=−k

The OLS estimates β̂ m , β̂ a and β̂ l provide consistent estimates of the cointegrating coeﬃcients
β m , β a and β l . The leads and lags of the Þrst diﬀerences of the right hand side variables eliminate
the eﬀect of regressor endogeneity on the distribution of the OLS estimator.17
We estimate the regressions in equation (10) using quarterly data from the Þrst quarter of 1952
to the Þrst quarter of 2004 with four leads and lags. The estimates of the cointegrating parameters
are very similar when the number of leads and lags is increased. We choose to limit the number of
leads and lags to four in order to keep as many points as possible for the out-of-sample exercises
presented in section 4.6.18 We obtain the following point estimates, with robust standard errors in
parenthesis:
xt =

0.98
(0.06)

at =

3.28
(0.05)

+ 0.83 mt
(0.01)
+ 0.65 lt
(0.01)

xt = −0.36 + 0.72 at
(0.19)

(0.02)

Appendix A shows that nxa can be constructed directly from xm, al and xa, as nxat =
|µm | xmt + |µl | alt + xat . In practice, we normalize nxa so that the weight on exports is unity. This
is a natural normalization: it implies that nxa is expressed ‘in the same units’ as exports, so nxa
measures approximately the percentage increase in exports necessary to restore external balance
(i.e. compensate for the deviation from trend of the net exports to net foreign asset ratio).
17

See Stock and Watson (1993) for details.
For most lags, the estimates of the cointegrating vectors using Johansen’s FIML method are very close to the
DOLS estimates. This is reassuring and indicates that there is no rotation of the cointegrating space as the number
of lags varies. These additional results are available from the authors upon request.
18

12

Our normalized nxat is:
¯
¯
¯ ¯
¯ µm ¯
¯ µl ¯
¯
¯
¯ ¯ alt + 1 xat
xm
−
nxat = ¯
t
¯
¯µ ¯
µx
|µx |
x

The sample weights µi are constructed as follows. We calculate µiw as the average ratio of variable
i to household Þnancial wealth over the entire sample.19 We then use equations (4) and (5) to
construct µx , µm , µa and µl . The estimated weights are µx = −10.1, and µa = 8.2.20 As expected,
this indicates a substantial degree of leverage: small movements in asset returns can have a large
impact on the net foreign asset position. From equation (2), this implies a steady state discount
factor ρ = 0.95.
Given these weights, the implied deviation from trend is:
nxat = xt − 0.91mt + 0.79at − 0.47lt
We observe that the coeﬃcients satisfy the sign restrictions discussed above: nxat increases with
exports and gross assets and decreases with imports and gross liabilities.
For comparison, we construct nxa using the average shares over the sample. We obtain nxat =
xt − 1.10mt + 0.81at − 0.72lt . These coeﬃcients are quite close to the estimated ones, with a higher
loading on imports and gross foreign liabilities. Since the data on positions is likely to be measured
with error, we use the Dynamic OLS estimates as our preferred estimate. The resulting nxa is
reported on Figure 2.
Several features are noteworthy. First, we observe a pattern of growing cyclical imbalances,
starting in 1976-79, then 1983-89 and 2001 to the present. Second, the imbalance of the second
half of the 1980s was in fact more pronounced than that of 2001-2004, due to the positive impact
of the depreciation of the dollar since 2002 on US gross foreign assets. According to the Þgure,
the external imbalance represented about 27.6% of exports in 1985:4. By contrast, the external
imbalance represented ‘only’ 18.8% of exports in 2003:1 and has since shrunk by more than half to
7.1% as of 2004:1.21
We construct the Þnancial returns on the net foreign asset portfolio as follows. First, we use
19

Household wealth is measured as Household Net Worth from the Flow of Funds.
The sample weights are µxw = 0.55%, µmw = 0.60%, µaw = 9.21% and µlw = 8.10%.
21
This is so, despite the fact that both net exports and the net foreign asset position of the US have worsened
since the mid-80s, because the simultaneous increase in gross assets and gross liabilities since then gives more room
for stabilizing valuation eﬀects. Formally, this is captured by the fact that the coeﬃcient on gross assets in nxa is
larger than the one on gross liabilities.
20

13

the deÞnition of rt = |µa | rta − |µl | rtl . rta and rtl are weighted averages of the returns on the four
diﬀerent subcategories of the Þnancial account: equity, foreign direct investment, debt and ‘other’.
For instance, we write the total return on gross assets rta as:
rta = wea rtae + wfa rtaf + wda rtad + woa rtao
where rtai denotes the real (dollar) total return on asset category i (equity, FDI, debt or other) and
wia denotes the average weight of asset category i in gross assets. A similar equation holds for the
total return on gross liabilities rtl (with corresponding returns rtli on asset category i). We use the
historical weights to construct wia and wil .
Table 2 reports some summary statistics on nxat , as well as diﬀerent asset returns and the
rate of depreciation of our multilateral exchange rate. All the returns are total quarterly returns,
including capital gains and losses.22 Table 2 indicates that nxa and the return on the portfolio on
net foreign assets are quite volatile. The volatility of export and import growth (4.28 and 3.81)
is much smaller than the volatility of the net portfolio return (14.90). The return on gross assets
is slightly larger than the return on gross liabilities (about 4 basis points for quarterly returns).
Given the leverage of the net foreign asset portfolio, this translates into a sizable real overall return
for net foreign assets, of 1.22% over a quarter.
Looking at the subcomponents, we Þnd that domestic and foreign dollar equity and foreign
direct investment average returns rtle , rtae rtlf and rtaf exceed average bond returns rtad and rtld , in
turn larger than returns on short term assets rtao and rtlo . As is well-known, the volatilities satisfy the
same ranking. The exchange rate exhibits a smaller volatility than equity returns, comparable to
the volatility of bond returns. Finally, most returns, exports and imports growth and the exchange
rate exhibit little autocorrelation. By contrast, nxa exhibits substantial serial correlation (0.92).

[Tables 1-2 about here]

4.1

The Þnancial and trade channels of external adjustment

Our variable nxat is a theoretically well-deÞned measure of external imbalances. By decomposing
it into a return and a net export component and observing their variation over time, we can gain
clear insights regarding the relative importance of the trade and Þnancial adjustment channels.
22
For a description of dividend and interest income and the role of the US as a banker of the world see Gourinchas
and Rey (2005, in progress).

14

Equation (8) imposes the following restriction:
nxat = −

+∞
X
j=1

j

ρ Et rt+j −

≡ nxart + nxa∆nx
t

+∞
X

ρj Et ∆nxt+j

(11)

j=1

nxart is the component of nxat that forecasts future returns, while nxa∆nx
is the component that
t
forecasts future net exports growth. We follow Campbell and Shiller (1988) and construct emusing a VAR formulation. SpeciÞcally consider the VAR(p)
pirical estimates of nxart and nxa∆nx
t
representation for the vector (rt , ∆nxt , nxat )0 . Appropriately stacked, this VAR has a Þrst order
companion representation: z̄t+1 = A z̄t + ²t+1 . Equation (11) implies that we can construct nxart
and nxa∆nx
as:
t
nxart = −ρe0r A (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
nxa∆nx
= −ρe0∆nx A (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
t
where e0r (resp. e0∆nx ) is a dummy vector that ‘selects’ rt (resp. ∆nxt ).23 We represent the time
in Þgure 2.24
paths of nxart and nxa∆nx
t
Several features are noteworthy. First, nxart and nxa∆nx
are highly positively correlated: the
t
valuation and trade eﬀects are mutually reinforcing, underlining the stabilizing role of capital gains
in the external adjustment of the US.25 Given our normalization of nxa, valuation eﬀects represent
the equivalent of a 8.6% contemporaneous increase in exports in 1985:4 (out of 27.6%) and 5.8%
in 2003:1 (out of 18.8%).
Finally, the testable restriction e0nxa I + (e0r + e0∆nx − e0nxa ) ρA = 0 should be satisÞed. To check
whether this last equality holds, we use a Wald test and Þnd a χ2 equal to 0.325. With three
restrictions, the p-value is 0.955, so we cannot reject the intertemporal equation.26 This, and the
is very close to nxat (see Figure 2) show the excellent
fact that nxat (predict) = nxart + nxa∆nx
t
quality of our approximation.
Following the same methodology, Figure 3 further decomposes nxart into a gross asset and gross
rl
liability return components (nxara
t and nxat ). The Þgure illustrates that Þnancial adjustment
23

See Appendix B for a derivation.
We use p = 1, according to standard lag selection criteria.
25
This feature may be speciÞc to the US. In the case of emerging markets, valuation and trade eﬀects would likely
be negatively related since gross liabilities are dollarized.
26
The predicted coeﬃcients for e0nxa = [1, 0, 0] are [0.87, −0.009, −0.04] .
24

15

comes mostly from excess returns on gross assets; the contribution of expected returns on gross
liabilities is negligible.

[Figures 2-3 about here]
We are also interested in the long run or low frequency properties of nxa. Following Cochrane
(1992), we use equation (8) to decompose the variance of nxa into components reßecting news
about future portfolio returns and news about future net export growth. Given that nxart and
are correlated, there will not be a unique decomposition of the variance of nxa into the
nxa∆nx
t
variance of nxar and the variance of nxa∆nx . An informative way of decomposing the variance is
to split the covariance term, giving half to nxar and half to nxa∆nx as follows:
¢
¡
cov (nxar , nxa) cov nxa∆nx , nxa
cov (nxa, nxa)
=
+
1 =
var (nxa)
var (nxa)
var (nxa)
= β r + β ∆nx

(12)

This decomposition is equivalent to looking at the coeﬃcients from regressing independently
nxar and nxa∆nx on nxa. The resulting coeﬃcients, β r and β ∆nx represent the share of the unconditional variance of nxa explained by future returns or future net export growth.27 Table 3 reports
the decomposition for values of ρ between 0.94 and 0.96.
For our benchmark value ρ = 0.95, we get a breakdown of 56% (net exports) and 31% (portfolio
returns) accounting for 87% of the variance in nxa.28 The results are sensitive to the assumed
discount factor. Lower (higher) values of ρ increase (decrease) the contribution of portfolio returns.29
For ρ = 0.94, we Þnd that portfolio returns account for 32% of the total variance while for ρ = 0.96
their contribution decreases to 29%. The general ßavor of our results is not altered by those
robustness checks.
These Þndings have important implications. First, Þnancial adjustment accounts for about
31% of total external adjustment, even at long horizons, while 56% comes from movements in
future net exports. Thus, our Þndings indicate that valuation eﬀects do not replace the need for an
27
This is not an orthogonal decomposition, so terms less than 0 or greater than 1 are possible. Empirically, the
sum of β r and β ∆nx can diﬀer from 1 if the approximation nxat = nxart + nxa∆nx
is not satisÞed. As we argued
t
above, the quality of the approximation is very good.
28
As explained in (4), our benchmark ρ is imputed from the data. It is obtained from sample weights µxw , µmw ,
µaw , µlw and equation (2).
29
Whenever we perform comparative statics on the discount rate ρ we insure that equation (2) holds by adjusting
µa . The corresponding values are presented in line 6 of Table 3.

16

ultimate adjustment in net exports via expenditure switching or expenditure reducing mechanisms,
a point developed in detail in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2004). What our estimates indicate, however,
is that valuation eﬀects profoundly transform the nature of the external adjustment process. By
absorbing about 31% of the external imbalances, valuation eﬀects substantially relax the external
budget constraint of the US. As Þnancial globalization -and the scope for wealth transfers— increase,
one implication is that the US will be able to run larger and more substantial external imbalances,
provided foreigners are willing to accumulate further holdings of (depreciating) dollar-denominated
US liabilities. This seems to be borne out in the data, where the ßuctuations in nxa have taken
increasingly larger amplitude over the last thirty years.
Using the same methodology, lines 3 and 4 of Table 3 further decompose the variance of nxar
into the contributions of returns on gross assets and liabilities. For the standard speciÞcation,
we obtain a breakdown of 29% (nxara ) and 2% (nxarl ) making up the 31% total contribution of
the returns to external adjustment. These Þndings conÞrm Figure 3: gross asset returns account
for the bulk of the variance, while returns on gross liabilities, which are all in dollars, are largely
unresponsive.

[Table 3 about here]

4.2

Predictability of returns, exchange rate and net exports

In this section, we investigate the predictive power of the deviation from trend of the ratio of net
exports to net foreign assets. Equation (8) indicates that nxat should help predict either future
returns on the net foreign asset portfolio rt+j , or future net export growth ∆nxt+j , or both.
Figure 4 plots the quarterly return on the net foreign asset portfolio rt -a positive number on the
graph means that assets owned by US residents outperform US assets held by foreigners- together
with the (opposite of) the lagged deviation from trend nxa (both variables are standardized). The
Þgure shows that nxa captures the broad pattern of returns on the US net foreign position. For
instance, starting in 1983, nxat predicted a relatively high return on the net foreign asset portfolio
of the US. The excess return on US external assets became large and positive in 1984 and remained
so until 1987. More recently, nxa has predicted high returns on US net external assets since 2001.
Net portfolio returns stayed low until the end of 2002, then increased sharply.

[Figures 4-5 about here]

17

It is no coincidence that these two episodes were marked by large movements in the dollar.
Figure 5 reports the quarterly rate of depreciation of the dollar ∆et (a positive value means a
dollar depreciation) together with (the opposite of ) nxat−1 over the post Bretton-Woods period.
Again, the variables are standardized. The Þgure reveals a substantial degree of correlation between
nxa and the subsequent rate of depreciation of the currency. In the mid-1980s and again in the late
1990s, nxa indicated that a depreciation of the dollar was necessary to restore long term solvency.
The dollar subsequently depreciated.

4.3

Forecasting quarterly returns: the role of valuation eﬀects

This section explores in more details the ability of nxa to forecast future net foreign asset portfolio
returns and exchange rates at the quarterly horizon. Tables 4-7 report a series of results using the
lagged deviations nxat−1 as a predictive variable. Each line of the tables reports a regression of
the form:
yt = α + β nxat−1 + γ zt−1 + Ct
where yt denotes a quarterly return between t − 1 and t while zt denotes additional controls shown
elsewhere in the literature to contain predictive power for asset returns or exchange rates.
Looking Þrst at Panel A of Table 4, we see that nxa has signiÞcant forecasting power for the
net portfolio return rt one quarter ahead (line 1). The R̄2 of the regression is 0.10 and the negative
and signiÞcant coeﬃcient indicates that a positive deviation from trend predicts a decline in net
portfolio return that is qualitatively consistent with equation (8). We observe also that there is
essentially no forecasting power from either lagged values of the net portfolio return, or lagged
domestic and foreign dividend-price ratios (lines 2-3). We note that xmt−1 , the deviation from
trend of net exports, does have some predictive power on its own (line 4). It does not however
enter the regression if we use the theoretically correct variable nxat−1 (lines 5-6).
We emphasize that the predictive power of the regression is economically large: the coeﬃcient
of 0.41, coupled with a standard deviation of nxa of 11.72% indicates that a one-standard deviation
increase in nxa predicts a decline in the net portfolio return of about 481 basis points over the next
quarter, equivalent to about 19.22 percent at an annual rate.
Panel B of Table 4 reports the results of similar regressions for the excess equity total return,
deÞned as the quarterly dollar total return on foreign equity rtae (a subcomponent of US assets)
minus the quarterly total return on US equity rtle (a subcomponent of US liabilities). Since rta is
very correlated with rtae and rtl is very correlated with rtle , it is natural to investigate the predictive
18

ability of our variables on this measure of relative stock market performance.30 To the extent
that the weights µa and µl are imperfectly measured, the degree of leverage of the net foreign asset
portfolio could also be mismeasured, which could inßuence our results on total net portfolio returns.
We are able to conÞrm our results with this more partial but also arguably less noisy measure of net
foreign asset portfolio returns. There is signiÞcant one-quarter ahead predictability of the excess
return of foreign stocks over domestic stocks. The R̄2 of the regression is equal to 0.06 (line 1) and
the sign of the statistically signiÞcant coeﬃcient is negative, as expected. The domestic and foreign
dividend-price ratios are not signiÞcant on their own (line 3), but the domestic dividend-price ratio
becomes signiÞcant once associated with nxat−1 (line 6). The R̄2 of this regression is an impressive
0.16. It is important to emphasize that we are predicting one-quarter ahead relative stock market
performance!
The predictive impact of nxat−1 on rtae − rtle is smaller than on rt , yet it is still highly economically signiÞcant. With a coeﬃcient of -0.12, a one-standard deviation increase in nxa predicts a
decline in excess returns of 141 basis points, or 5.63 percent annualized. These results accord well
with the intuition behind equation (8) and show that changes in return on domestic relative to
foreign assets are a powerful mechanism for international Þnancial adjustment.

[Tables 4-7 about here]

We now turn to the components of the total portfolio return rt . Recall that we can write rt =
|µa | rta − |µl | rtl . Does our variable nxa predict the return on gross liabilities or gross assets? In
Panel C of Table 5, we investigate the predictive ability of nxat−1 for rtl , the return on US gross
liabilities. Panel D investigates the predictability of US total equity return rtle . It is immediate
that the predictive ability of nxa for both variables is inexistent: the coeﬃcients on nxat−1 are
never signiÞcant and the R̄2 is essentially zero. By contrast, we conÞrm the results of Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001) and Þnd that the deviation from trend of the ratio of nondurable consumption
to total wealth cayt−1 contains predictive power for US stock returns (and US liabilities).
Panels E and F of the same Table look at the predictive power for the total return on gross
assets rta and the foreign total equity return in dollars respectively. Both panels indicate that there
is signiÞcant predictive power at one quarter, even though it is weaker than for the net foreign
30

The correlations are 0.93 and 0.95 respectively.

19

asset portfolio return. The R̄2 is small, around 0.03 (line 1 and line 6) but is robust to the addition
of the foreign dividend price ratio.31 An increase in nxat−1 predicts a decline in future dollar
returns on foreign assets, in line with the intuition behind equation (8). Comparing panels A, C
and E indicates that the correlation structure between returns on gross assets and liabilities plays
an important role for understanding the adjustment of net foreign asset returns rt .

4.4

Exchange rate predictability a quarter ahead

The results from Table 5 raise an obvious and tantalizing question: could it be that the predictability
in the dollar return on gross assets arises from predictability in the exchange rate? After all, the
return on gross foreign assets can be written as rta = r̃ta + ∆et − π t where et represents (the log of) a
Þnancially-weighted US nominal eﬀective exchange rate and r̃ta represents the return on gross assets
in some compound foreign currency. Panel G of Table 6 presents estimates using our FDI-weighted
eﬀective exchange rate while Panel H reports the results using the Federal Reserve trade-weighted
multilateral exchange rate for major currencies. The sample covers the post Bretton Woods period,
from 1973:1 to 2004:1.
We observe Þrst that nxat−1 contains strong predictive power for both exchange rate series
(line 1 of Panels G and H). The coeﬃcient is negative (-0.08 and -0.09 respectively) and signiÞcant,
implying that a current negative deviation from the trend of net exports to net assets predicts a
subsequent depreciation of the dollar against major currencies that increases the returns on gross
assets and helps restore long-term solvency. The R̄2 are high (0.08 and 0.11 respectively). The
eﬀects are also economically large: a one-standard deviation decrease in nxa predicts a 3.75% to
4.23% (annualized) increase in the expected rate of depreciation of the multilateral exchange rate
over the subsequent quarter.
Our results are robust to the inclusion of the three-month interest rate diﬀerential it−1 − i∗t−1
where we construct i∗t using 1997 weights from the benchmark US Treasury survey. Line 3 tests the
Uncovered Interest Parity condition. As is abundantly documented in the literature (see Gourinchas
and Tornell (2004) for recent estimates), the coeﬃcient on the forward premium it − i∗t is often
insigniÞcant or negative. We Þnd a similar result (line 3 and 6): if anything, an increase in US
interest rates is associated with a future expected appreciation of the dollar.32 As before, we also
31

Unfortunately there is no available measure of the foreign consumption wealth ratio.
Our results imply that the risk premium (deÞned as the diﬀerence between the three-month forward rate and the
depreciation rate) is explained by our cointegrating residual.
32

20

Þnd that the predictive power of xmt−1 on the exchange rate does not survive the inclusion in the
regression of our variable nxat−1 .
Finally, Table 7 tests the quarter-ahead predictive power of nxat−1 for bilateral nominal rates of
depreciation of the dollar against the Sterling, the Japanese yen, the Canadian dollar the German
DMark (Euro after 1999) and the Swiss Franc. We Þnd a modest predictive power for all currencies
except the Canadian dollar, with R̄2 ranging from 0.03 to 0.10. The largest signiÞcant eﬀect is on
the DM/Euro and the weakest on the British pound.
Overall, these results are striking. Traditional models of exchange rate determination fare
particularly badly at the quarterly-yearly frequencies. Our approach, which emphasizes a more
complex set of fundamental variables, Þnds predictability at these horizons. Our cointegrating
residual variable enters with the predicted sign and is strongly signiÞcant: a large ratio of net
exports to net foreign assets predicts a subsequent appreciation of the dollar, which generates a
capital loss on foreign assets.33

4.5

Long horizon forecasts: the importance of net export growth and of the
exchange rate

A natural question is whether the predictive power of the deviations of the ratio of net exports to
net foreign assets from trend increases with the forecasting horizon. According to equation (8),
nxa could forecast any combination of rt and ∆nxt at long horizons.
We investigate this question by regressing k−horizon returns yt,k ≡

³P
k−1
i=0

´
yt+i /k between

t−1 and t+k−1 on nxat−1 . Table 8 reports the results for forecasting horizons ranging between one
and twenty-four quarters. When the forecasting horizon exceeds 1, the quarterly sampling frequency
induces (k − 1)th order serial correlation in the error term. Accordingly, we report Newey-West
robust standard errors with a Bartlett window of k − 1 quarters.
For each horizon we report two regressions. The Þrst one uses as before nxat−1 as the regressor.
2

Its explanatory power is summarized by R (1). In the second one, we used xmt−1 , alt−1 and xat−1
independently as regressors (their linear combination constitutes nxat−1 ), to allow for the fact that
33

There is one potential caveat to our results: tests of the predictability of returns may be invalid when the
predicting variable exhibits substantial serial correlation. The pretesting procedure of Campbell and Yogo (2003)
indicates no problem in our case for any of the forecasting regressions of this section except for the net returns. In
all cases, the correlation between the innovation in nxa and the residual from the predictability regression is smaller
than 0.125 in absolute value, indicating little size distortion (i.e. a 5% nominal t-test has a true size of 7.5% at most).
For net returns, the coeﬃcient is 0.167, suggesting a potentially larger size distortion. But performing Campbell and
Yogo (2003)’s test leads us to reject the hypothesis of no predictability at the 5% level. Therefore all our predictability
regressions are robust.

21

the steady state weights of exports, imports, assets and liabilities may be measured with errors.
2

We report only one summary statistic for this second regression, R (2).
Table 8 indicates that the in-sample predictability increases up to an impressive 0.27 (0.35
with three regressors) for net foreign portfolio returns at a four-quarter horizon, then declines to
0.02 or 0.04 at twenty four quarters. A similar pattern is observed for total excess equity return.
These results suggest that the Þnancial adjustment channel operates at short to medium horizons,
between one quarter and two years. It then declines signiÞcantly and disappears in the long run.
As shown in section (4.1), its overall contribution to external adjustment amounts to roughly 31%.

[Table 8 about here]

The picture is very diﬀerent when we look at net export growth. We Þnd that nxat−1 predicts
a substantial fraction of future net export growth in the long run: the R̄2 is 0.36 at 24 quarters,
and 0.77 with three regressors! This result is consistent with a long run adjustment via the trade
balance. A large positive deviation of net exports relative to net foreign assets predicts low future
net export growth, which restores equilibrium. The classic channel of trade adjustment is therefore
also at work, especially at longer horizons (8 quarters and more).
Looking at exchange rates, we Þnd a similarly strong long run predictive power on the rate of
depreciation of the dollar. The R̄2 increases up to 0.36 (0.61 with three regressors) at 12 quarters.
There is signiÞcant predictive power at short, medium and long horizons.34
Taken together, these Þndings indicate that two dynamics are at play. At horizons smaller than
two years, the dynamics of the portfolio returns seem to dominate, and exchange rate adjustments
create valuation eﬀects that have an immediate impact on external imbalances. At horizons larger
than two years, there is little predictability of asset returns. But there is still substantial exchange
rate predictability, which goes hand in hand with a corrective adjustment in future net exports.35
34

Again, the persistence of nxa in the predictive regressions is not an issue. Performing the pre-test of Campbell
and Yogo (2003), we Þnd that there is no problem for the exchange rate nor for the total excess equity returns. In
the case of net exports and net returns there is some size distorsion. When we perform Campbell and Yogo (2003)’s
test however we can reject the hypothesis of no predictability at the 5% level. Once again, this implies that our
predictability regressions are robust.
35
Other factors can also inßuence the nominal exchange rate at longer horizons. For instance, Mark (1995) demonstrates that the Þt of the monetary model improves dramatically beyond 8 quarters. We do not include these
determinants in our analysis.

22

Hence, because the exchange rate plays key roles both in the Þnancial adjustment channel and in
the trade adjustment channel it is predictable at short, medium and long horizons. The sign of
the exchange rate eﬀect is similar at all horizons since an exchange rate depreciation increases the
value of foreign assets held by the US and aﬀects net exports positively. The eventual adjustment of
net exports is consistent with the predictions arising from expenditure switching models. Because
these adjustments take place over a longer horizon, their inßuence on the short term dynamics is
rather limited.
Figure 6 reports the FDI-weighted nominal eﬀective depreciation rate from 1 to 12 quarters
ahead against its Þtted values with nxa and independently with our three regressors. First, we
observe that the improvement in Þt is striking as the horizon increases. Second, we emphasize that
our predicted variable does well at picking the general tendencies in future rates of depreciation as
well as the turning points, even one to four quarters ahead.

[Figure 6]

4.6

Out-of-sample forecast

We perform out-of-sample forecasts by estimating our model using rolling regressions and comparing
its performance to simple forecasting models.36 This enables us in particular to revisit the classic
Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983) result. These authors showed that none of the existing exchange rate
models could outperform the random walk at short to medium horizons in out-of-sample forecasts,
even when the realized values of the fundamental variables were used in the predictions. More than
twenty years later, this very strong result still stands.37
We start by splitting our sample in two. We refer to the Þrst half, from 1952:1 to 1978:1, as the
‘in-sample’. We then construct out-of-sample forecasts in three steps. First, we estimate our three
cointegration vectors over the ‘in-sample’.38 This guarantees that our constructed nxa does not
incorporate any future information. Second, still over the ‘in-sample’, we estimate the forecasting
relationship between future returns and lagged nxa. Finally, we use this estimated relation to form
36
Interestingly, some recent work by Kilian and Inoue (2002) notes that because out-of-sample tests lose power due
to the sample splitting, they may fail to detect predictability where in-sample test would Þnd it. According to these
authors, both in-sample and out-of-sample tests are valid, provided that correct critical values are used.
37
See Chinn, Cheung and Garcia (forthcoming). At very short horizons however (between one and twenty trading
days), Evans and Lyons (2005) show that a model of exchange rate based on disaggregated order ßow outperforms
the random walk.
38
We also construct the sample weights |µi | using data from the ‘in-sample’ only and the restriction that the
discount factor be constant and equal to its steady state value, as in section 4. We use our benchmark value of
ρ = 0.95 in those calculations.

23

a forecast of the Þrst non-overlapping return or depreciation rate entirely outside the estimation
sample. We then roll over the sample by one observation and repeat the process. This provides
us with up to 104 out-of-sample observations.39 We emphasize that, since we are estimating the
cointegration vectors and the weights using only data available at the time of prediction, we cannot
fall victim to any look-ahead bias.40
This exercise is very stringent because, due to sampling uncertainty, the parameters of the
cointegrating equations cannot be as precisely estimated on the shorter sample as if we were to use
the whole sample each time. Horse races of our variables against a general AR(1) and the random
walk model are presented in Tables 9 and 10 respectively.
4.6.1

Horse race against an AR(1)

We assess the predictive power of our cointegrating residuals by comparing the mean-squared
forecasting error of two nested models. We use a regression that includes just lagged returns (resp.
depreciation rate) as a predictive variable (restricted model) and compare it with a regression that
includes both the lagged return and nxat−1 (unrestricted model) at various horizons. We compute
the ratio of the mean-squared errors of the unrestricted model to the restricted model M SEu /M SEr
and test whether it is signiÞcantly smaller than one using the modiÞed Harvey, Leybourne, and
Newbold test statistic (Clark and McCracken (2001));41 the null hypothesis is that of equality of
the M SE for the restricted and the unrestricted model. The alternative is that M SEr > M SEu .
Panels A and B of Table 9 report results for the total return on the net asset portfolio rt,k =
³P
´
k−1
ae
le
ae
le
i=0 rt+i /k as well as for the excess equity return rt,k − rt,k where rt,k and rt,k are deÞned

analogously. We Þnd that nxat−1 improves the out-of-sample forecastability of net foreign returns

and excess equity return at all horizons from one to sixteen quarters.42 The improvement in Þt
is signiÞcant. We repeat the exercise augmenting the model with dividend price ratios, known to
predict equity returns in conjunction with the lagged variable. In all cases the results are similar
and support the importance of our cointegration variable for out-of-sample forecasts.
Panel C of Table 9 reports our results for the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate. Most tests
39

See Appendix C for details.
Furthermore, for this exercise we use non-seasonnally adjusted exports and imports data. We understand from
conversation with BEA staﬀers that the BEA’s seasonal adjustment procedure makes use of some future data.
41
This statistic is correct only for one-step ahead forecasts. We perform rolling regressions and use accordingly
the critical values presented in Table 4 of Clark and McCracken (2000). The results are similar if we use recursive
estimates instead.
42
We cannot investigate the out-of-sample predictability for longer horizons because we do not have enough observations.
40

24

of exchange rate out-of-sample predictability estimate the forecasting equations over the ßoating
period only. In contrast, we estimate our forecasting equations since 1952 and construct out-ofsample forecasts from 1978 onward. This gives us more observations to re-estimate the cointegration
relation each period to construct nxa, which represents our best estimate of external imbalances,
both in the Bretton Woods and in the ßoating period. Since our out-of-sample forecasts start in
1978, well into the ßoating period, the goodness of our Þt cannot be ascribed to the fact that we
forecast the constant exchange rates of the Bretton Woods era!43 The improvement in Þt when
using our cointegrating variables is important at all horizons, even at the short end. Augmenting
the equation with interest rate diﬀerentials does not aﬀect our results.

[Table 9 about here]
4.6.2

Random Walk versus Cointegrating Vector: Meese-Rogoﬀ revisited

Since the classic paper of Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983), the random walk has often been considered
the appropriate benchmark to gauge the forecasting ability of exchange rate models. We follow the
tradition and perform nested comparison exercises. We compare the mean-squared errors (M SE)
of a model featuring only our cointegrating residual nxa and a constant to the M SE of a driftless
random walk. We construct the forecasts involving our cointegrating vector as above. We reestimate the cointegrating vectors and weights each time we add one observation to our sample and
thus use only data available up to the date of forecast.
To assess the statistical signiÞcance of our results we use the M SE-adjusted statistic described
in Clark and West (2004) and developed to perform an exercise similar to ours. This statistic is
appropriate to compare the mean squared prediction errors of two nested models estimated over
rolling samples. It adjusts for the diﬀerence in mean-squared prediction errors stemming purely
from spurious small sample Þt. The test compares the M SE from the random walk (M SEr ) to the
M SE for the unrestricted model (M SEu ), where the latter is adjusted for a noise term that pushes
it upwards in small sample (M SEu − adj). The diﬀerence between the two M SE is asymptotically
normally distributed. We use a Newey-West estimator for the variance of the diﬀerence in M SE
in order to take into account the serial correlation induced by overlapping observations when the
forecast horizon exceeds one quarter.
43

In any case, we also performed the out of sample analysis over the ßoating period only. The estimating requirements for nxa impose that we start the out-of -sample period in 1994:1, leaving only 40 observations out of sample.
The results, however, were mostly unchanged and are available from the authors.

25

As discussed in the previous section, we perform the out-of-sample analysis over the entire
sample. Results are similar if we restrict the estimation to the ßoating period, provided we allow
for enough observations in-sample. Table 10 presents the results. A ∆M SE-Adjusted statistic
larger than one indicates that our model outperforms the random walk in predicting exchange
rate depreciations. For the FDI-weighted exchange rate, our model outperforms signiÞcantly the
random walk at all horizons, including one quarter ahead.44 The p−values are always very small.
Results for the trade-weighted exchange rate are very similar. The table also reports the ratio of
the (unadjusted) M SE. This ratio is smaller than one at all horizons and for both exchange rates.
The curse of the random walk seems therefore to be broken for the dollar exchange rate.

[Table 10 about here]

5

Conclusion

This paper presents a general framework to analyze international adjustment. We model jointly
the dynamic process of net exports, foreign asset holdings and the return on the portfolio of net
foreign assets. For the intertemporal budget constraint to hold, today’s current external imbalances
must predict either future export growth or future movements in returns of the net foreign asset
portfolio, or both.
Using a newly constructed quarterly dataset on US foreign gross asset and liability positions
at market value, we construct a theoretically grounded measure of external imbalances. That
measure challenges the conventional wisdom concerning the extent of the US external imbalances.
For example the 2001-04 imbalance is less pronounced than that of the second half of the 1980s
(see Figure 2), due to the positive impact of the depreciation of the dollar in 2002-2004 on US gross
foreign assets and increased cross border holdings.
Historically, we Þnd a substantial part of external imbalances (roughly thirty percent) are
eliminated via changes in asset returns. These valuation eﬀects occur at short to medium horizons
while adjustments of the trade balance come into play at longer horizons (mostly after two years).
The exchange rate has an important dual role in our analysis. In the short run, a dollar
depreciation raises the value of foreign assets held by the US relative to the liabilities, hence
44
Changes in the cut-oﬀ point to do not seem to make any diﬀerence for these results, provided the number of
observations used to perform the estimation is suﬃcient.

26

contributing to the process of international adjustment via the Þnancial channel. In the longer
run, a depreciated dollar favors trade surpluses, hence contributing to the adjustment via the
trade channel. The counterpart of the eﬀect of exchange rate movements as an adjustment tool is
that observing today’s ratio of net exports to net assets contain signiÞcant information on future
exchange rate changes. We are able to predict in sample 11% of the variance of the exchange rate
one quarter ahead, 44% a year ahead and 61% three years ahead. Our model has also signiÞcant
out-of-sample forecasting power, so that we are able to beat the random walk at all horizons between
one to twelve quarters. In our out-of-sample exercises, we eliminated any possibility of look-ahead
bias by using exclusively data of the Þrst part of the sample for all the estimation phase.
Our approach implies a very diﬀerent channel through which exchange rates aﬀect the dynamic
process of external adjustment. In traditional frameworks, Þscal and monetary policies are seen
as aﬀecting relative prices on the goods markets (competitive devaluations are an example) or as
aﬀecting saving and investment decisions. In our model, Þscal and monetary policies should also be
thought of as mechanisms aﬀecting the relative price of assets and liabilities, in particular through
interest rate and exchange rate changes. This means that monetary and Þscal policies may aﬀect
the economy diﬀerently than in the standard New Open Economy Macro models à la Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ. While early contributions to the intertemporal approach did study intertemporal eﬀects
(on real interest rates) of terms of trade or exchange rate movements (see Razin and Svensson
(1983)), we emphasize a diﬀerent mechanism through asset revaluations.45
We used accounting identities and a minimal set of assumptions to derive our results. Any
intertemporal general equilibrium model can therefore be nested in our framework. The challenge
consists in constructing models with fully-ßedged optimizing behavior compatible with the patterns
we have uncovered in the data. A natural question arises as to why the rest of the world would
Þnance the US current account deÞcit and hold US assets, knowing that those assets will underperform. In the absence of such model, one should be cautious about any policy seeking to exploit
the valuation channel since to operate, it requires that foreigners be willing to accumulate further
holdings of (depreciating) dollar denominated assets.
Several economic mechanisms could a priori be consistent with our empirical results. First
and foremost, the portfolio balance theory, which emphasizes market incompleteness and imperfect
substitutability of assets, seems well-suited to formalize our Þndings. In a world where home bias
45
See Tille (2004) for a recent new open economy model allowing for valuation eﬀects. His model, however does
not pin down the path of foreign assets and liabilities.

27

in asset holdings is prevalent, shocks may have very asymmetric impacts on asset demands, leading
to large relative price adjustments on asset markets. Suppose for example that the world demand
for US goods falls, thereby increasing the current account deÞcit of the United States. The wealth
of the US goes down relative to its trading partners. But since the rest of the world invests mostly
at home, the dollar has to fall to clear asset markets. Hence a negative shock to the current account
leads to an exchange rate depreciation at short horizons. Standard portfolio rebalancing requires
a subsequent expected depreciation to restore long run equilibrium.46 This depreciation increases
the return of the net foreign asset portfolio of the US and thereby contributes to close the gap
due to the shortfall in net exports.47 Another interesting avenue to explore are models generating
time-varying risk premia such as Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Finally, a Þner study of the
role of foreign oﬃcial sectors in Þnancing the US current account deÞcits, particularly when global
imbalances are high, is also certainly warranted.

46
47

See Kouri (1982) and Henderson and Rogoﬀ (1982).
Obstfeld (2004) provides an illuminating discussion of those theoretical mechanisms.

28

References
Bergin, Paul and Steven Sheﬀrin, “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Present Value
Models of the Current Account,” Economic Journal, 2000, 110, 535—58.
Campbell, John, “Understanding Risk and Return,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104,
298—345.
and John Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate
Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1999, 107 (2), 205—51.
and Robert Shiller, “Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1987, 95, 1062—88.
and
, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount
Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1988, 1, 195—227.
Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, “Eﬃcient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,”
NBER Working Papers 10026, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2003.
and N. Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the
Time Series Evidence,” in Oliver Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., N.B.E.R.
Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge: MIT Press 1989, pp. 185—215.
Chinn, Menzie, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Antonio Garcia, “Empirical Exchange Rate
Models of the 1990’s: Are Any Fit to Survive?,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
forthcoming.
Clark, Todd and Kenneth West, “Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction Errors to
Test the Martingale Diﬀerence Hypothesis,” 2004. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.
and Michael McCracken, “Not-for-publication appendix to Tests of equal forecast
accuracy and encompassing for nested models,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, 2000.
and
, “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encompassing for Nested Models,” Journal
of Econometrics, 2001, 105, 85110.
Cochrane, John, “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link Between Stock Returns and
Economic Fluctuations,” Journal of Finance, 1991, 46, 207=34.
, “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of Financial Studies, 1992, 5
(2), 243—80.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Panagiotis Konstantinou, “The Dynamics of US Net Foreign
Liabilities: an Empirical Characterization,” mimeo, European University Institute, 2004.
and Paolo Pesenti, “Welfare And Macroeconomic Interdependence,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2), 421—445.
Evans, Martin and Richard Lyons, “Meese-Rogoﬀ Redux: Micro-based Exchange Rate
forecasting,” NBER Working Papers 11042, National Bureau of Economic Research, 11042
2005.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 1988, 22, 3—27.
and
, “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 1989, 25, 23—49.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Aaron Tornell, “Exchange Rate Dynamics, Learning and
Misperception,” Journal of International Economics, December 2004.
and Helene Rey, “US External Adjustment: The exorbitant privilege?,” Mimeo, Princeton
and Berkeley 2005, in progress.
Harvey, David, Stephen Leybourne, and Paul Newbold, “Tests for Forecast

29

Encompassing,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1998, 16, 254—59.
Hau, Harald and Helene Rey, “Exchange Rate, Equity Prices and Capital Flows,” Review of
Financial Studies, 2005, forthcoming.
Henderson, Dale and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Negative Net Foreign Asset Positions and Stability
in a World Portfolio Balance Model,” Journal of International Economics, 1982, 13, 85—104.
Hodrick, Robert, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 1992, 5, 357—86.
Hooker, Sarah A. and John F. Wilson, “A Reconciliation of Flow of Funds and Commerce
Department Statistics on U.S. International Transactions and Foreign Investment Position,”
July 1989. unpublished, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Johansen, Soren, “Statistical Analysis of Cointegrating Vectors,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 1988, 12, 231—254.
, “Estimation and Hypothesis Testing of Cointegration Vectors in Gaussian Vector
Autoregressive Models,” Econometrica, 1991, 56, 1551—1580.
Kehoe, Patrick J. and Fabrizio Perri, “International Business Cycles with Endogenous
Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, May 2002, 70 (3), 907—928.
Kilian, Lutz and Atsushi Inoue, “On the Selection of Forecasting Models,” May 2002.
unpulished, European Central Bank.
Kouri, Pentti, “Balance of Payment and the Foreign Exchange Market: A Dynamic Partial
Equilibrium Model,” in Jagdeep Bhandari and Bluford Putnam, eds., Economic
Interdependance and Flexible Exchange Rates, MIT Press, 1982, pp. 116—156.
Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura, “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2000, 115 (4), 1137—66.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations:
Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of
International Economics, December 2001, 55, 263—94.
and
, “External Wealth, the Trade Balance and the Real Exchange Rate,” European
Economic Review, June 2002.
and
, “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,” mimeo, International Monetary
Fund 2004.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Ex- Pected
Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (3), 815—49.
Lucas, Robert, “Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1982, 10, 335—359.
Mark, Nelson, “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long Horizon Predictability,”
American Economic Review, March 1995, 85, 201—218.
Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
Do they Fit Out-of-sample?,” Journal of International Economics, 1983, 14, 3—24.
Mercereau, Benoit, “How to Test (and not to Test) a Present Value Model in the Presence of
Persistence,” mimeo, Yale Economics Department, November 2001.
, “The Role of Stock Markets in Current Account Dynamics: a Time Series Approach,” Topics
in Macroeconomics, 2003, 3 (1). Article 6.
Mundell, Robert A., International Economics, New York: Macmillan Company, 1968.
Obstfeld, Maurice, “External Adjustment,” NBER Working Papers 10843, National Bureau of
Economic Research, October 2004.
and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position Revisited,” NBER
Working Papers 10869, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2004.
Obstfeld, Maury, “International Macroeconomics: Beyond the Mundell-Fleming Model,” IMF
30

Staﬀ Papers, 2001, 47 (special issue), 1—39.
and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Perspectives on OECD Economic Integration: Implications for U.S.
Current Account Adjustment,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed., Global Economic
Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, 2001.
Portes, Richard and Helene Rey, “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,”
Journal of International Economics, 2005. forthcoming.
Razin, Assaf and Lars Svensson, “The Terms of Trade and the Current Account: The
Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Eﬀect,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1983, 91 (1),
97—125.
Stock, James H. and Mark Watson, “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in Higher
Order Integrated Systems,” Econometrica, 1993, 61 (4), 783—820.
Tille, Cedric, “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt,” Current Issues
in Economics and Finance, 2003, 9 (1), 1—7.
, “Financial Integration and the Wealth Eﬀect of Exchange Rate Fluctuations.,” mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2004.
U.S. Holdings of Foreign Long-Term Securities, 2000. Department of the Treasury.
Division of International Finance, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
www.ustreas.gov/fpis/.
Ventura, Jaume, “A Portfolio View of the U.S. Current Account DeÞcit,” in “Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity” 2001, pp. 241—53.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, “Understanding the Aggregate Book-Market Ratio and its Implications
to Current Equity-Premium Expectations,” mimeo, Harvard University 2000.

31

Appendix A
Loglinearization
The law of asset accumulation is given by:
N At+1 = Rt+1 (N At + N Xt )
Divide through by household total wealth (including human wealth) denoted by Wt+1 :
µ
¶
N At+1 Wt+1
N At NXt
= Rt+1
+
Wt+1 Wt
Wt
Wt

(A.1)

(A.2)

From assumptions 1 and 2, At /Wt , Lt /Wt , Xt /Wt , Mt /Wt and Wt+1 /Wt are stationary.48
Denote by µyz the steady state value of the ratio Yt /Zt for some variables Yt and Zt , and deÞne
yt = ln(Yt ). We deÞne yzt such that Yt /Zt = µyz exp (yzt ) . A Þrst-order Taylor expansion of the
right hand side of (A.2) gives:
(µaw − µlw ) γ

a
l
− µl rt+1
+
(1 + µa rt+1

+

µaw − µlw
[µ awt − µl lwt ]
µaw − µlw + µxw − µmw a

µxw − µmw
[µ xwt − µm mwt ])
µaw − µlw + µxw − µmw x

where µa = µaw / (µaw − µlw ) , µl = µa − 1, µx = µxw / (µxw − µmw ), µm = µx − 1 and we used the
steady state condition (µaw − µlw ) γ = R (µaw − µlw + µxw − µmw ) .
The left hand side of (A.2) is approximately equal to:
(µaw (1 + awt+1 ) − µlw (1 + lwt+1 )) γ (1 + ∆wt+1 )
¡ ¢
Equating, rearranging and substituting yzt = yt − zt − ln µyz , and ∆wt+1 = wt+1 − wt − ln γ, we
obtain (omitting irrelevant constants):
¶
µ
1
a
l
[(µx xt − µm mt ) − (µa at − µl lt )]
(µa at+1 − µl lt+1 ) − (µa at − µl lt ) = µa rt+1 − µl rt+1 + 1 −
ρ
where ρ = γ/R.
a
l , we
− |µl | rt+1
If we deÞne nat = |µa | at − |µl | lt , nxt = |µx | xt − |µm | mt , and rt+1 = |µa | rt+1
49
obtain:
¶
µ
1
− 1 [nxt + nat ]
∆nat+1 = rt+1 +
(A.3)
ρ
nxt has the interpretation of the log-linearized trade balance, while nat has the interpretation of the
log-linearized net foreign asset position. We observe that wt and wt+1 drop out of the linearization.
Subtracting and adding nxt+1 − nxt to the left hand side of equation (A.3):
1
nxat+1 = rt+1 + ∆nxt+1 + nxat
ρ
where nxat = nxt + nat . This is a diﬀerence equation in nxat . Under assumption 4, this diﬀerence
equation can be solved forward since ρ < 1 :
48
49

Note that all the stationary ratios around which we loglinearize are always positive.
Recall that µa and µx have opposite signs.

32

nxat = −

+∞
X

ρj [rt+j + ∆nxt+j ]

(A.4)

j=1

which is equation (7).
Finally, using the restriction µx − µm = µa − µl = 1, nxa can be decomposed as follows:50
nxa = |µx | xt − |µm | mt + |µa | at − |µl | lt
= |µm | xmt + |µl | alt + xat

Appendix B
VAR decomposition
Consider a VAR(p) representation for the vector zt = (rt , ∆nxt , nxat )0 . This VAR has the
following representation:
zt = A (L) zt−1 + Ct
Appropriately stacked, this VAR has a Þrst order companion representation:
z̄t+1 = Ā z̄t + ²̄t+1

(B.1)

¡
¢0
0
and ²̄t = (C0t , 0)0 . DeÞne the indicator vectors e∆nx , er and enxa that
where z̄t = zt0 , ..., zt−p+1
‘pick’ the corresponding elements of z̄t (i.e. e0r z̄t = rt for instance). Equation (8) implies the
following restriction on the VAR representation:
nxat = −

+∞
X

ρj Ēt (rt+j + ∆nxt+j )

j=1

+∞
¡ 0
¢X
0
= − er + e∆nx
ρj Ēt z̄t+j

e0nxa z̄t

(B.2)

j=1

where Ēt denotes expectations according to the information contained in the VAR representation
(B.1).51 According to equation (B.1), the conditional expectations of z̄t+j satisfy: Ēt z̄t+j = Aj z̄t .
Substituting into equation (B.2) we obtain:
e0nxa z̄t

+∞
¡ 0
¢X
0
= − er + e∆nx
ρj Aj z̄t
j=1

¡
¢
= − e0r + e0∆nx ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
=

nxart

(B.3)

+ nxa∆nx
t

where nxart = −e0r ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t and nxa∆nx
= −e0∆nx ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t . Moreover, since (B.3)
t
needs to hold for all values of z̄t , it implies the following restriction on the companion matrix A :
¡
¢
(B.4)
e0nxa = − e0r + e0∆nx ρA (I − ρA)−1
50

When µa < 0 and µx > 0. The symmetric case is immediate.
We do not impose that economic agents form expectations according to Ēt . We only require that the information
contained in (B.1) is a subset of the information available to economic agents. See Campbell and Shiller (1988) for a
discussion.
51

33

(B.4) constitutes a present value test (see Campbell and Shiller (1987)). Post-multiplying by
(I − ρA) , this is equivalent to:
¢
¡
e0nxa I + e0r + e0∆nx − e0nxa ρA = 0

Campbell and Shiller (1987) show that this test is numerically identical to the one-step ahead test
Ēt (Qt+1 ) = 0 where Qt+1 = nxat+1 − nxat /ρ − (rt+1 + ∆nxt+1 ) . Mercereau (2001) argues that
the one-step-ahead test is preferable when some of the variables are persistent, as is the case here
with nxa.
Table 3 also presents the results of a decomposition
¡ into a gross return, ¢gross liability, export
and import components using a Þve variable VAR zt = rta , rtl , ∆xt , ∆mt , nxat . Following the same
methodology, we deÞne
= − |µa | e0ra ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
nxara
t
nxarl
= |µl | e0rl ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
t

nxa∆x
= − |µx | e0∆x ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
t

nxa∆m
= |µm | e0∆m ρA (I − ρA)−1 z̄t
t

Appendix C
Out-of-Sample estimates
We construct the out-of-sample forecasts for a given horizon k by running:
yt,k = αk + β k nxat + γ k Xt + εt,k

(C.1)

where yt,k represents the k−quarter ahead return (resp. depreciation rate) between period t
and t + k, Xt represents other variables that are known to predict yt,k , including lagged returns
yt−k,k . We use the
available¢until date to to run equation (C.1). The last observation
¡ information
to
d to −k , Xto −k .Our notations indicate that nxa
used is therefore yt0 −k,k , nxa
d ttoo −k is the value at date
to −k of the cointegrating residual estimated using data available up to date to . Once the coeﬃcients
α̂k (to ) , β̂ k (to ) and γ̂ k (to ) have been estimated, we use them to predict the Þrst k-horizon forecast:
d ttoo + γ̂ k Xto
ŷt0 ,k = α̂k + β̂ k nxa

(C.2)

We then add one period to our sample. We include information of date to in our estimating
equation and produce a forecast for ŷt0 +1,k . The whole procedure is repeated again in to + 1, ...
until we reach observation T, where T is the total number of observations in our sample. We set
to = 1978 : 1 to split the sample in half with 105 observations in sample and 104 observations out
of sample.

34

L-Max
Lags in VAR Model:

28
48.10
30.45
17.50
0.46

Trace
Lags in VAR Model:

28
96.50
48.40
17.95
0.46

Test Statistic
29
30
72.58
74.79
40.75
37.71
20.71
19.61
0.06
0.83
Test Statistic
29
30
134.09 132.95
61.52
58.15
20.76
20.44
0.06
0.83

95% CV
38
255.74
80.11
28.81
0.77

27.58
21.13
14.26
3.84

38
365.42
109.68
29.57
0.77

47.86
29.80
15.49
3.84

H0 = r
r=
0
1
2
3
H0 = r
r=
0
1
2
3

Table 1: Johansen Cointegration Tests with linear trend in the data. All variables are in logs.
Exports and imports are corrected for seasonal eﬀects. A constant is included in the cointegrating
relation.

∆xt
0.82
4.28
-0.08
rtae
1.87
7.19
0.15

Mean (%)
Standard deviation (%)
Autocorrelation
Mean (%)
Standard deviation (%)
Autocorrelation

∆mt
1.11
3.81
0.04
rtle
1.86
8.02
0.09

∆at
1.11
3.05
0.06
rtad
0.72
2.94
0.16

Summary Statistics
∆lt rt
rta
1.86 1.22
0.95
2.82 14.90 3.00
0.13 0.15
0.11
af
ld
rt
rt
rtlf
0.56 1.67
1.86
3.17 7.69
8.02
0.13 0.08
0.09

rtl
0.91
2.91
0.17
rtao
0.48
0.76
0.19

∆et
-0.03
3.55
0.05
rtlo
0.39
0.53
0.73

nxat
0
11.72
0.92

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics. Sample period is 1952:1-2004:1, except for ∆e, 1973:1-2004:1

#
1
2
3
4
5
6

percent
β ∆nx
βr
of which:
βa
βl
Total
(lines 1+2)
µa

Discount factor ρ
0.96
0.95
0.94
64.91 56.13 45.77
28.97 30.87 31.59
28.79
0.28
93.88

28.94
2.02
87.00

27.51
4.17
77.36

6.77

8.24

10.16

Table 3: Unconditional Variance Decomposition for nxa for various discount rates. Sample: 1952:1
to 2004:1. The sum of coeﬃcients β a + β l is not exactly equal to β r due to numerical rounding in
the VAR estimation.

35

#

1
2
3
4
5
6

nxat−1 lag
dpt−1 dp∗t−1 xmt−1 R̄2
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
Panel A: Real Total Net Foreign Portfolio Return rt
-0.41
0.10
(0.08)
0.15
0.02
(0.08)
-0.37
0.90
0.00
(2.43) (2.02)
-0.42
0.07
(0.10)
-0.32
-0.17
0.10
(0.11)
(0.13)
-0.58
0.06
-3.18
1.28
0.01
0.15
(0.21)
(0.08) (2.06) (1.75) (0.29)

nxat−1

lag

dpt−1

dp∗t−1

xmt−1

Panel B: Real Equity Return diﬀerential rtae − rtle
-0.12
0.06
(0.03)
0.06
0.00
(0.07)
-0.70
0.39
0.00
(0.74) (0.67)
-0.17
0.08
(0.04)
-0.05
-0.13
0.08
(0.04)
(0.05)
-0.15
-0.04
-1.76 0.89
-0.10
0.16
(0.07)
(0.09) (0.69) (0.68) (0.09)

Table 4: Forecasting Quarterly Net Portfolio Returns. Sample: 1952:1 to 2004:1. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis.

#

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9
10

nxat−1 lag
dpt−1 cayt−1 R̄2
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
Panel C: Real Total Return on Gross Liabilities
0.00
0.00
(0.02)
0.17
0.03
(0.07)
0.37
0.01
(0.23)
0.78
0.10
(0.18)
0.01
0.18
0.20
0.72
0.13
(0.02)
(0.06) (0.23) (0.17)
Panel D: Real US Total Equity Return
0.02
0.00
(0.05)
0.09
0.00
(0.06)
1.11
0.02
(0.59)
2.03
0.09
(0.45)
0.05
0.10
0.66
1.90
0.10
(0.05)
(0.06) (0.57) (0.43)

nxat−1 lag
dp∗t−1
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
Panel E: Real Total Return
-0.04
(0.02)
0.11
(0.09)
0.08
(0.24)
-0.05
0.07
-0.02
(0.03)
(0.10) (0.24)

R̄2
on Gross Assets
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.02

Panel F: Real Total Return on Foreign Equity
-0.11
0.03
(0.05)
0.15
0.02
(0.08)
0.53
0.00
(0.59)
-0.13
0.12
0.28
0.05
(0.06)
(0.09) (0.56)

Table 5: Forecasting Quarterly Returns on Gross Assets and Liabilities. Sample: 1952:1 to 2004:1.
Robust standard errors in parenthesis.

36

R̄2

#

1
2
3
4
5
6

nxat−1 lag
it−1 − i∗t−1 xmt−1 R̄2
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
(s.e.)
Panel G: FDI-weighted depreciation rate
-0.08
0.08
(0.02)
0.05
0.00
(0.07)
-0.09
0.00
(0.32)
-0.09
0.06
(0.03)
-0.06
-0.03
0.07
(0.02)
(0.04)
-0.07
0.12
0.78
-0.03
0.07
(0.02)
(0.16) (0.68)
(0.04)

nxat−1

lag

it−1 − i∗t−1

xmt−1

R̄2

Panel H: Trade weighted depreciation rate
-0.09
0.11
(0.02)
0.13
0.01
(0.08)
-1.03
0.05
(0.36)
-0.11
0.10
(0.04)
-0.06
-0.06
0.11
(0.02)
(0.04)
-0.08
-0.45 -2.26
-0.04
0.17
0.04
(0.15) (0.57)
(0.03)

Table 6: Forecasting Quarterly Rates of Depreciation. Sample: 1973:1 to 2004:1. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis.

Currency
UK pound
Canadian dollar
Swiss franc
Japanese yen
Deutschmark (Euro)

nxat−1
(s.e.)
-0.07
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.16
(0.04)
-0.12
(0.04)
-0.16
(0.04)

R̄2
0.03
0.01
0.08
0.06
0.10

Table 7: Forecasting Bilateral Quarterly Rates of Depreciation. Sample: 1973:1 to 2004:1. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis.

37

Forecast Horizon (quarters)
3
4
8
12
16
Real Total Net Portfolio Return rt,k
-0.41 -0.40 -0.41 -0.39 -0.27 -0.18 -0.12
(0.08) (0.06) (0.05) (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
[0.10] [0.17] [0.24] [0.27] [0.24] [0.15] [0.10]
[0.12] [0.22] [0.31] [0.35] [0.32] [0.22] [0.14]
ae
le
Real Total Excess Equity Return rt,k
− rt,k
-0.12 -0.12 -0.11 -0.11 -0.06 -0.03 -0.01
(0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01)
[0.06] [0.10] [0.14] [0.15] [0.09] [0.03] [0.00]
[0.09] [0.17] [0.23] [0.26] [0.20] [0.11] [0.07]
Net Export growth ∆nxt,k
-0.07 -0.07 -0.06 -0.06 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05
(0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
[0.04] [0.07] [0.09] [0.11] [0.18] [0.27] [0.33]
[0.03] [0.07] [0.10] [0.15] [0.35] [0.56] [0.66]
FDI-weighted eﬀective nominal rate of depreciation ∆et,k
-0.08 -0.08 -0.08 -0.07 -0.07 -0.05 -0.04
(0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
[0.08] [0.14] [0.24] [0.28] [0.35] [0.36] [0.32]
[0.11] [0.22] [0.37] [0.44] [0.57] [0.61] [0.61]
1

nxa
R̄2 (1)
R̄2 (2)
nxa
R̄2 (1)
R̄2 (2)
nxa
R̄2 (1)
R̄2 (2)
nxa
R̄2 (1)
R̄2 (2)

2

24
-0.04
(0.02)
[0.02]
[0.04]
0.02
(0.01)
[0.02]
[0.13]
-0.03
(0.01)
[0.36]
[0.77]
-0.02
(0.01)
[0.14]
[0.35]

Table 8: Long Horizon Regressions, Portfolio Returns on lagged nxa or xm, al and xa: 1952:1
to 2004:1 (1973:1 to 2004:1 for exchange rate). Newey-West robust standard errors in parenthesis
with k − 1 Bartlett window. Adjusted R2 in brackets.

ENC-NEW
Horizon: (quarters)
1
2
Panel A: Real Total Net Portfolio Return rt,k
nxa vs AR(1)
10.30∗∗
0.923 0.829
d
d∗
nxa vs AR(1), p and p∗ 17.15∗∗
0.919 0.907
ae − r le
Panel B: Real Total Excess Equity Return rt,k
t,k
nxa vs AR(1)
21.94∗∗
0.859 0.732
∗
nxa vs AR(1), dp and dp∗ 24.74∗∗
0.922 0.882
Panel C: FDI-weighted depreciation rate ∆et,k
nxa vs AR(1)
8.65∗∗
0.943 0.907
∗
∗∗
9.03
0.944 0.898
nxa vs AR(1), it − it

M SEu /M SEr
3
4
8

12

16

0.713
0.828

0.600
0.693

0.536
0.656

0.596
0.737

0.799
0.801

0.589
0.745

0.455
0.597

0.392
0.413

0.480
0.590

0.747
0.852

0.870
0.852

0.796
0.793

0.776
0.772

0.839
0.826

0.869
0.868

Table 9: Out of Sample Tests for Equity Returns.
M SEu is the mean-squared forecasting error for an unrestricted model that includes the lagged dependent
variable and lagged nxa (model 1); lagged d/p, d∗ /p∗ and lagged nxa (model 2). M SEr is the mean-squared
error for the restricted models which include the same variables as above but do not include lagged nxa. d/p
(resp. d∗ /p∗ ) is the US (resp. rest of the world) dividend price ratio. Each model is Þrst estimated using
the sample 1952:1 1978:1. ENC-NEW is the modiÞed Harvey et al. (1998) statistic, as proposed by Clark
and McCracken (2001). Under the null, the restricted model encompasses the unrestricted one. Sample:
1952:1-2004:1. ∗ (resp. ∗∗ ) signiÞcant at the Þve (resp. one) percent level.

38

Horizon: (quarters)

1
2
3
4
FDI-weighted depreciation rate
M SEu /M SEr
0.956
0.929
0.861
0.822
1.98
1.72
1.90
1.96
∆M SE-adjusted (M SEr − M SEu -adj)
(0.77) (0.64) (0.62) (0.60)
[0.005] [0.004] [0.001] [0.001]
Trade-weighted depreciation rate
M SEu /M SEr
0.927
0.894
0.823
0.768
∆M SE-adjusted (M SEr − M SEu -adj)
3.09
2.97
2.90
2.83
(1.04) (0.99) (0.96) (0.93)
[0.002] [0.001] [0.001] [0.001]

8

12

16

0.809
1.57
(0.44)
[<0.001]

0.881
1.01
(0.34)
[0.001]

0.932
0.62
(0.30)
[0.018]

0.722
1.97
(0.66)
[0.001]

0.902
0.84
(0.38)
[0.013]

0.95
0.44
(0.27)
[0.047]

Table 10: Out of Sample Tests for Exchange Rate Depreciation against the Martingale Hypothesis
∆M SP E − adjusted is the Clark-West (2004) test-statistic based on the diﬀerence between the out of
sample MSE of the driftless random-walk model and the out-of-sample MSE of a model that regresses the
rate of depreciation ∆et against nxat−1 . Rolling regressions are used with a sample size of 105. t-statistic
in parenthesis. p-value of the one-sided test using critical values from a standard normal distribution in
brackets. Under the null, the random-walk encompasses the unrestricted model. Sample: 1952:1-2004:1.
Cut-oﬀ: 1978:1.

6%

0.13%

4%

0.07%

2%

0.01%

0%

-0.05%

-2%

-0.11%

-4%

-0.17%

-6%

-0.23%

-8%

-0.29%

-10%
1952

-0.35%
1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

Net Foreign Assets

1987

1992

1997

2002

Net Exports

Figure 1: Net Foreign Assets (left scale) and Net Exports (right scale) (% of Household Wealth),
U.S., 1952:1-2004:1. Source: Flow of Funds and BEA.

39

.4
.3
.2
.1
.0
-.1
-.2
-.3
55

60

65

70

75

80

nxa
nxa(return)

85

90

95

00

nxa(exports)
nxa(predict)

Figure 2: Decomposition of nxa into a return [nxa(return)] and a net exports [nxa(exports)]
components.

.08
.04
.00
-.04
-.08
-.12
55

60

65

70

nxa(r)

75

80

85

nxa(ra)

90

95

00

nxa(rl)

Figure 3: Decomposition of nxa (r) into a gross asset return [nxa(ra)] and a gross liability return
[nxa(rl)].

40

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
55

60

65

70

75

80

lagged nxa (opposite)

85

90

95

00

NFA return

Figure 4: Net foreign portfolio return rt (-) and (opposite of) lagged deviation nxat−1 (o)

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
1975

1980

1985

1990

lagged nxa (opposite)

1995

2000

depreciation rate

Figure 5: Multilateral rate of depreciation ∆et (-) and (opposite of) lagged deviation nxat−1 (o)

41

.12

.06

.08

.04

.04

.02

.00

.00

-.04

-.02

-.08

-.04
-.06

-.12
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1975

1980

1-quarter ahead

1985

1990

1995

2000

4-quarter ahead

.04

.04

.03

.03

.02

actual
fitted sep. reg.
fitted

.02

.01

.01

.00
.00

-.01

-.01

-.02

-.02

-.03
-.04

-.03
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1975

8-quarter ahead

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

12-quarter ahead

Figure 6: One to 12-quarter ahead depreciation rates. Actual and Fitted using nxa (Þtted) or
xm, al and xa (Þtted sep. reg.).

42

