                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              UNDERSTANDING RULES OF ORIGIN

                                               Kala Krishna

                                          Working Paper 11150
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11150


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Kala Krishna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Rules of Origin
Kala Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 11149
February 2005
JEL No. F13, F15

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper surveys recent work on the economic effects, both theoretical and empirical, of Rules of

Origin (RoO) in a Free Trade Area (FTA).

Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu
1         Introduction

The proliferation of Free Trade Areas (F T As) in the last decade has begun

to generate interest in one of its most important components: rules of origin

or RoO for short. These specify the conditions under which a good becomes

eligible for zero tariﬀs in an F T A. While it is tempting to think of F T As

as liberalizing, they are often not. The main reason is that RoO are in

themselves hidden protection: they create what look like tariﬀs on imported

intermediate inputs and aﬀect the price of domestically made inputs as well.

These RoO are negotiated industry by industry and there is enormous scope

for well organized industries to essentially insulate themselves from the eﬀects

of the F T A by devising suitable RoO. In this manner, RoO may even make

F T As feasible in the presence of organized interest groups. Grossman and

Helpman (1995) for example argue that being able to exclude certain sectors

(which is what appropriately constructed RoO will do) can make a F T A

viable.1

        This paper surveys the existing theoretical literature with a view to ex-

plaining in a non technical manner what RoO do and why they are critical

in determining the eﬀects of F T As. This is an area that has been neglected

in economics2 until quite recently, witness the absence of RoO in most books
    1
     A recent paper that develops this idea is Duttagupta and Panagariya (2001) who
argue that RoO can improve the political viability of F T As. They do so in a menu
auction framework a la Grossman and Helpman (1995), (2001).
   2
     Though not neglected in law, see for example Vermulst (1992).




                                          1
dealing with integration even as late as the book by de Melo and Panagariya

(1993). Consequently, much of the work being surveyed here is quite recent.

   Many analysts have tended to view NAF T A and other F T A arrange-

ments as being similar to customs unions. Indeed, in some respects they

are. However, RoO, which are part of both F T As and customs union agree-

ments, play very diﬀerent roles under these two arrangements. In a customs

union, members have a common external tariﬀ so that there are no rents to

be obtained from trans-shipment. Therefore, when a RoO is agreed upon,

its purpose is simply to determine the extent of preferential treatment for

fellow members. For example, the European Community has rules governing

treatment of imports of semiconductors. In February 1989 the EU changed

its practice of conferring origin based on the place of assembly. It began con-

ferring origin based on the place of diﬀusion. Thus, if diﬀusion is undertaken

within the Community, then origin is granted and importation to another

EC country is duty-free. If, however, diﬀusion is undertaken abroad, then

the chip is treated as having been produced outside the community, and the

(common) external tariﬀ applies. This change would promote investment in

the EU by Japanese and U.S. firms who might otherwise have only assembly

operations in the EU and would grant origin to EC producers who assembled

their products abroad.

   In an F T A, members maintain their own external tariﬀs. Hence, tar-

iﬀs may diﬀer between member countries. In this setting, RoO assume a



                                      2
function additional to that under customs unions: RoO prevent the import

of any particular commodity from entering through the country (which gets

the tariﬀ revenue) with the lowest duty on the item in question and being

re-exported to other countries in the F T A. Without RoO, a F T A could be

highly liberalizing as the lowest tariﬀ would apply to each category of im-

ports.3 Note that such re-exports need not be a good thing. If transport costs

are significant, such deflection also has real costs since trans-shipping wastes

resources. RoO might prevent or reduce such waste, thereby raising welfare.4

For example, if the trans-shipping costs are slightly below the tariﬀ diﬀeren-

tial, welfare reducing deflection occurs in the absence of RoO since consumer

prices are essentially unchanged, resources are used in trans-shipment, while

tariﬀ revenue falls. Rules of origin would prevent this.

       Such deflection could lead to a tariﬀ war as countries attempt to attract

such trade. In the absence of transport costs, the country in the F T A with

the lowest tariﬀ on a product will be the conduit for all imports into the

F T A and will reap all tariﬀ revenues. This makes it in the interest of all

other countries to reduce their own tariﬀs in order to attract imports to their

ports! Only when the lowest tariﬀ is zero is this not an issue, suggesting that

in equilibrium, all external tariﬀs would be competed down to zero5 ! It is
   3
     The liklihood of such trade deflection for final goods was pointed out in Shibata (1967).
   4
     In addition, standard second best arguments also apply: with many tariﬀs, reducing
one need not raise welfare.
   5
     Richardson (1995) points out that this can happen even when there are ROO which
domestic production automatically meets. As a result, domestic production is exported
to the partner country and domestic consumption is imported.



                                              3
interesting to note that this seems to have actually happened in America after

the colonies obtained independence from the British. During the Articles of

Confederation period (1777-1789) the thirteen original states in America set

their external tariﬀs independently though internal trade was essentially free.

They were also Britain’s largest export market. Despite this, they could not

extract rents through tariﬀs or use the threat of tariﬀs to promote their

own external objectives. Since British merchants landed their goods in the

ports of the states oﬀering the most favorable terms, despite independence,

these states undercut one another in setting their duties resulting in very

open markets. This is pointed out in McGillivray and Green (2001) and was

originally mentioned in Viner (1950).

      RoO can also provide an incentive for regional producers to buy interme-

diate goods from regional sources, even if their prices are higher than those

of the identical import from outside the F T A, in order to make their product

“originate" in the F T A and qualify for preferential treatment. This, in eﬀect,

protects F T A suppliers.6 As a result, an F T A can profoundly aﬀect trade

patterns and the investment flows needed to sustain them. Lloyd (1993)

makes the case that using a tariﬀ on value added outsde the F T A would be

more eﬃcient than using RoO.
  6
    Krueger (1993) points out the protective eﬀect of RoO on domestic intermediates.
Lloyd (1993) sketches out, and Rodriguez (2001) develops more formally, a model with
multistage protection in the presence of such RoO. Also see Rosellon (2000), which was
part of his Ph.D in 1994, and Falvey and Reed (1998).




                                          4
   Just because RoO may be protectionist does not prove that they are!

However, RoO often account for large chunks of draft agreements (RoO took

up 200 pages of the NAF T A agreement) and can be very contentious, sug-

gesting that they might be strategically used. Recent work by Estevadeordal

(2000) casts some light on this matter. He constructs a model with two

endogenous variables: the severity of the RoO and the length of the phase

in period. Both were key factors over which negotiations were conducted.

Assume that the severity of RoO is determined by exogenous factors like the

diﬀerence in the (MF N) tariﬀs between the countries as well as the extent

of intra F T A trade, but does not depend on the length of the phase in. Also,

that the length of time in the phase in period depends on the negotiated

RoO, as well as other exogenous factors. Estevadeordal (2000) estimates

such a model and argues that RoO are being used to prevent trade deflection

as the sectors which have large diﬀerences in tariﬀs between the partners are

the ones where RoO are strongest. Moreover, that protection and the extent

of RoO are positively correlated. Sectors with long phase in periods are also

the sectors with high predicted RoO suggesting that the same forces drive

both. The work of Cadot et. al (2002) also suggests that RoO are negating

the eﬀects of tariﬀ reductions due to an FTA. They use the severity of the

RoO index (as constructed in Estevadeordal (2000)) and a measure of tariﬀ

preferences in NAFTA as explanatory variables to explain Mexican exports

to the U.S.. They show that the former reduced Mexican exports, while the



                                      5
latter raised them, so that the net eﬀect was close to zero.

       In addition, it is worth pointing out that RoO are often quite expensive

to document. As a result, even if a product satisfies origin, an importer may

prefer to pay the tariﬀ rather than bother with the documentation needed.

Some idea of how extensive this is might be gleaned from the prevalence of

outward processing trade (OPT) between the EU and the Central and East-

ern European countries7 . The latter have duty free access to the EU but

instead of proving origin is met, EU firms use the OPT provision instead

suggesting that the cost of proving origin exceeds the duty paid using the

OPT provision. For example, as documented in Breton and Manchin (2002),

when Albanian exports of clothing to the EU are considered, OPT provisions

were used over 90% of the time. However, Turkey, which is part of the cus-

toms union (hence it does not have any ROO to meet) used these provisions

only .5% of the time8 . Herin (1986) also shows that the cost of proving origin

seems to have led over a quarter of EFTA exports to pay the MFN tariﬀ.

       I will argue that much of what we have learnt from the literature can be

summarized in three laws which are worth remembering when dealing with

RoO.

       Law 1: RoO can insulate an industry from the consequences of an F T A
   7
     OPT encourages processing overseas by EU firms as the duty that would have been
paid on the exported inputs to be processed abroad is deducted from the duty owed on
the imported product.
   8
     It may also be that OPT trade allows a greater fraction of potential rent to be captured
by the EU importer, an open question on the empirical side.




                                             6
and it can provide hidden protection for intermediate inputs used by it. It

may well be that the ability to insulate an industry makes F T As easier to

pass than Customs Unions. Agents who stand to lose from an F T A can

undo its eﬀects without, for the most part, even being seen as doing so! For

example, in the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Area (F T A), the production of aged

cheese from fresh milk does not confer origin.9 This in eﬀect prevents free

trade of cheese in the F T A.

      Law 2: The precise form of the RoO matters. Lawyers and trade nego-

tiators have clearly understood this for a long time. This is evident in the

importance placed on the details of the RoO negotiated. For example, a lot

of importance was placed on the treatment of interest costs by Honda when

content requirements were being defined for the F T A between the U.S. and

Canada.

      Law 3: The time period matters. Responses to RoO take time. Short

run partial equilibrium eﬀects can diﬀer greatly from long run, general equi-

librium ones. For example, in the short run the response to RoO may be

primarily in terms of trade flows while in the long run it may take the form

of investment flows. Hence, it is vital to specify the time frame for analysis

and to incorporate the major linkages across sectors and options available to

firms.

      Law 4: You can have too much of a good thing. Having more restrictive
  9
      See Palmeter 1993 footnote 4 for details.




                                              7
RoO may result in higher not lower imports! This point is quite subtle and

provides a warning to policy makers and potential users that RoO may well

backfire!

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 looks at how RoO are defined.

Section 3 examines how they aﬀect the sourcing of inputs and hence the level

of costs. Section 4 surveys what the literature has to say about their eﬀects

using a partial equilibrium setting. The additional complications that arise

from allowing some input prices to be endogenous are outlined as well. Sec-

tion 5 discusses extensions to general equilibrium, while Section 6 concludes.


2     Background

RoO can be defined in a variety of diﬀerent ways. From a legal point of view,

there appear to be four criteria used singly and in combination with each

other10 . These are (a) requirements in terms of domestic content: content

can be defined in terms of value added or in physical terms.11 In addition,

the required share of value added can be defined in terms of cost or price.

    (b) Requirements in terms of a change in tariﬀ heading: RoO set in terms

of a change in tariﬀ heading are specified in terms of tariﬀ categories. To

satisfy origin requirements a product must change its tariﬀ heading in a spec-
  10
     For example, the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relationship (CER) relies
on a 50% value added standard in conjunction with the requirement that the last process
performed in manufacture be in the territory of the exporting member state.
  11
     One example of physical content requirements is that in the cigarette industry in
Australia. Cigarette manufacturers must meet a domestic content requirement on tobacco
leaf use, defined by weight.


                                          8
ified way. By making the changes needed more or less extensive, the origin

requirement can be made more or less restrictive. In addition, exceptions

can be explicitly made. For example, under NAF T A, transformation from

any other chapter (2 digit classification level) of the harmonized system, to

tomato catsup, chapter 21, confers origin, except transformation from tomato

paste which falls in chapter 20! Since the U.S. is a larger market for catsup

than Mexico, while Mexico has a natural advantage in growing tomatoes, and

hence making paste, this seems like a clear attempt to keep the production

of catsup in the U.S..

   (c) Requirements in terms of specified processes that must be performed

within the F T A or CU: In the case of American imports of apparel under

NAF T A, the rule is one of “triple transformation.” Only if each step of

the transformation from raw material to finished garment has been under-

taken within the F T A will preferential treatment be given. American textile

producers, of course, benefit from this rule.

   (d) Requirements that the product has been “substantially transformed”.

This is usually hard to pin down as it is loosely defined. In the United States

the term “substantial transformation” has come to mean the determination

of origin based on common law, reasoning from case to case. It then results

in commodity-specific RoO which fall into one of the earlier three categories.




                                      9
3     RoO and Costs

From an analytical viewpoint the basic eﬀect of RoO is to raise the produc-

tion costs of the product which meets the binding RoO. In the discussion that

follows I draw from Krishna and Krueger (1995). RoO specify constraints

that must be met in order to obtain origin. If these constraints are binding

then the choice of inputs used in production diﬀers from the unconstrained

ones and hence costs are higher if the RoO are met. Since more restric-

tive RoO constrain choices more than do less restrictive one, an increase in

restrictiveness raises the minimized level of costs.

    This is illustrated in Figure 1 which illustrates a physical content require-

ment that has to be met to obtain origin.       F T A inputs (L) and imported

inputs (K) are used to make the good in question under constant returns to

scale. The unit iso-quant is depicted by the curve in Figure 1. At existing

prices for L and K, firms choose the input mix at the point labeled Z using

L and K so that their ratio equals α0 . The lowest unit costs attainable are

represented by the height of the line AB. A binding RoO would remove Z

from the feasible set. If, for example, the RoO required L/K to be at least

α > α0 , then only points below the ray from the origin with slope 1/α and

above the iso-quant would be feasible. As a result, unit costs are minimized

by choosing the input mix at X. Unit costs if the RoO are met are given by

the height of the line DE. Note that the RoO distort the input mix in favor

of the F T A made input L for any given level of output so that at any given


                                       10
         Figure 1: Physical Content ROO and Costs



                                              L
K                                             K
                                                  = α0


                               ¡
                              ¡
                             ¡
                            ¡
    D                      ¡
      @                  ¡
       @                ¡
    A
        @              ¡
      @  @           ¡
       @  @         ¡
        @  @       ¡
         @   @    ¡
          @   @  ¡                            L
                                                  = α > α0
           @   @¡                             K

             @ ¡@
              ¡
            Z @  @            ³³
             ¡ @  @        ³³³
           ¡    @  @ X ³³³
          ¡         ³³
                 @³³@
         ¡       ³
                ³ @  @
        ¡    ³³³   @   @
           ³
       ¡³³³         @   @
      ¡³
      ³              @   @@
    0                         B     E         L




                           11
output level, the demand for L is higher.

       It is easy to see that as the RoO become more restrictive, that is, as α

rises and the ray from the origin swing down, unit costs rise. Suppressing

input prices in the notation for the time being, let unit costs when the RoO

is met be R(α). Note that R(α) is increasing in α for α > α0 .


4        The Eﬀects of RoO: Partial Equilibrium

The literature has by and large assumed perfect competition. The partial

equilibrium setting provides three results. First, that in the long run, RoO

cause large changes in investment flows due to an F T A. In the absence of

RoO, there would be large changes in trade flows, not investment flows.

Second, in the long run, RoO may raise or lower welfare relative to pre F T A

levels depending on their restrictiveness. If RoO are weak, they are likely

to raise them12 , while if they are stringent, they will reduce them. Third,

that in short run, where capacity constraints exist, the form of the RoO

is especially important. It is easiest to explain these three results with a

particular example based on Krishna and Krueger (1995).

       Suppose that the F T A is made up of country A and B. Both countries

import the final good in question from the rest of the world and take the world

price of P ∗ as given. B also produces it domestically so that the domestic

price in B equals the domestic unit cost of production, which equals the world
  12
   I say likely since in a world with multiple distortions or tariﬀs, a reduction in some of
them may not raise welfare as indicated by the theorem of the second best.


                                            12
price as we assume that the tariﬀ in B is zero. Country A has a positive

tariﬀ on the good, and for simplicity assume A has no domestic production.

All tariﬀs are constant across suppliers13 , though members of an F T A get

preferential treatment.

       An F T A member firm interested in selling its products in the partner

country has the choice of meeting the RoO and having zero tariﬀs levied on

it, but having higher costs of production (as well as further documentation

costs that the RoO has been met14 ) and not meeting it and paying the tariﬀ.

It chooses the option that has a higher payoﬀ. Now since B imports the good

and has the lower tariﬀ, firms in A will not want to sell to B but firms in B

would be interested in selling to A. Thus the price in B is the world price, and

must be no weakly lower than the price in A. Let P A and P B (= P ∗ = C B )

denote domestic prices in A and B.

       A firm in B exporting to A could meet the RoO and obtain P A − RB (α),

or ignore it and get P A − C B (1 + tA ) where C B and RB (α) denote the

unrestricted and restricted unit costs in B 15 . Hence, if RB (α) < C B (1 + tA ),

it is worthwhile for it to accept the restriction and otherwise it is not. The

price in A is therefore the minimum of RB (α) and C B (1 + tA ). Recall that
  13
      This makes sense given that most countries extend most favored nation treatment to
all their trading partners.
   14
      Providing appropriate documentation to demonstrate origin can be very costly. Herin
(1986) reports costs to Finnish firms of satisfying EC ROOs for entry of Finnish exports
costs firms satisfying ROOs from 1.4 to 5.7 percent of the value of shipment (Herin, pg.
7). Such costs are reported to have resulted in a quarter of eligible EFTA exports to the
EU paying the applied MFN duty rather than providing the needed documentation.
   15
      Assume that tariﬀs are levied on price which equals domestic cost.



                                           13
restricted costs increase in α and equal unrestricted costs for low enough

levels of α. If RoO are not restrictive, i.e. α is below α0 , in Figure 2 (which

depicts both demand in A and costs as a function of α) then RoO are not

binding and RB (α) = C B . In this case the creation of an F T A will result in

the eﬀective lowering of tariﬀs in A on the final good to those in B. If RoO

are restrictive but not too much so, i.e., α is between α0 and α2 , then costs

of supplying A exceed world costs but are below the cost of imports from

outside the F T A. Thus the price in A rises with RA (α) but is still below

the pre F T A price. Once RoO are restrictive enough, i.e. α exceeds α2 ,

then costs of supplying A from B exceed the cost of imports from outside

the F T A.

   These results are in sharp contrast to those which would prevail in the

absence of any RoO. In the absence of transport costs and under the same

assumptions as made above, all an F T A without RoO would do would be to

reduce tariﬀs on the final good as all imports to A would come in through

B to avail of the lower tariﬀ there. Welfare would have to rise in A due

to the F T A, as the gain in consumer surplus would outweigh the loss in

tariﬀ revenue. However, production in B need not be aﬀected. With RoO

production in B rises to the point where B supplies all A’s imports and this

requires large capital inflows into the sector. This the logic of the first result.

   Note that A’s welfare with RoO is non monotonic in α. Welfare is the

sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus and tariﬀ revenue. Since there



                                        14
                    Figure 2: Demand, Price and Cost in an FTA



     P rice


                A
                @
                 @
                  @
                   @
                    @
                     @
                          @
                           @
                E           @ F            RB (α)
C B (1 + tA )                @
                               @
                                  @
                                   @
                                    @
                D               G    @C
       CB                             @
                                        @
                                         @
                                          @
                                            @
                                               @
                                               @
          0          α = α0         α = α2            B     Quantity


is competition and constant returns to scale, price equals cost and there are

no profits in the long run. Welfare in A must thus increase above its pre

F T A level if α ≤ α0 . This occurs as price falls so that consumer surplus

rises. Although tariﬀ revenue falls, as is usual, the consumer surplus gain

(EDFC) exceeds the tariﬀ revenue loss (EFDG) as depicted in Figure 2. In

the region where the RoO bind, but it remains worthwhile accepting them,

that is α1 < α ≤ α2 , an increase in α raises the price in A as the price equals

RA (α). As α approaches α2 , all consumer surplus gains vanish and since there


                                       15
are no tariﬀ revenues either, welfare must be lower that prior to the F T A.

In other words, the RoO get more restrictive, the higher production costs

eat away the consumer surplus gain of an F T A. At some point this makes

an F T A worse than no F T A. Finally, when RoO are so restrictive that they

are ignored, i.e., α exceeds α2 , the F T A has no eﬀect on the price in A and

the pre F T A welfare prevails. This is the logic of the second result above.

   All the above is valid for the long run. However, in the short run there

are likely to be capacity constraints since it takes time for capacity to be

built. Think of these capacity constraints as taking a very strict form so that

costs are constant RB (α) until the capacity constraint where they become

infinite. Thus, supply facing B when RoO are set at α consists of three

distinct segments. Supply is zero when price is below RB (α). At a price of

RB (α) a horizontal segment exists up to B’s capacity. For price above RB (α),

supply equals capacity so that there is a vertical section. As world prices are

given, if the price weakly exceeds P ∗ (1 + tA ), supply is infinite. As a result,

the price is given by the minimum of RB (α) and P ∗ (1 + tA ) only if capacity

in B exceeds the demand at RB (α). Otherwise, there are quasi rents and the

price in A exceeds production costs.

   In the short run, as opposed to the long run, all imports to A do not

come from B. In the short run, output, which equals exports to A from B,

expands to capacity at which point marginal costs rise choking oﬀ supply.

Assuming there is no change in the world price and given than B cannot meet



                                       16
all of A’s demand, the price in A will be unchanged. All that will happen

is a reallocation of A’s imports from the rest of the world to B, causing a

reduction in A’s welfare arising from the loss in tariﬀ revenues. In the long

run, of course, assuming no changes in world prices and the price of inputs

in B, investment will flow into B, leading to the long run eﬀects outlined

above.

4.1      Why Details Matter

Why should the details of how RoO are defined matter to agents? Given the

eﬀort devoted to thrashing out such details it is clear that these details are

seen as being critical. The reason is simple. Even though definitions may

sound alike they need not be. Some definitions may be easier to meet than

others and lobbying for the most favorable definition is to be expected. For

example, suppose that costs have three components: capital costs, denoted

by B, F T A inputs costs denoted by A, and imported inputs costs denoted

by D. Total costs are C, and C = A + B + D. Suppose that RoO specify

the minimum share that F T A inputs must account for. Suppose that this is

defined as a cost share. Now note that excluding capital costs from all costs

makes any given RoO harder to meet. If capital costs are included, the share

of F T A costs is given by (A + B)/C. If they are excluded, they are given

by A/(C − B). Removing B from the numerator and denominator reduces

the numerator by a greater percentage than the denominator reducing their

ratio. As a result, any required share of domestic input used is harder to

                                     17
satisfy if capital costs are excluded.16 The basic intuition is that including

capital costs (or any other costs for that matter) raises the numerator by a

greater percentage than the denominator, thus raising their ratio, since the

numerator is by definition smaller than the denominator. This might help

explain why the treatment of interest costs was a bone of contention between

the U.S. and Canada and Honda in defining content requirements.17

       Another example where details matter comes from defining shares in

terms of price versus cost. In Krishna and Krueger (1995) it is argued that

defining content in terms of cost or price makes no diﬀerence in the long run,

basically because price equals cost in the long run. Nor would it make a

diﬀerence in the long run whether a minimum share, α, of domestic inputs

have to be used or whether imported inputs are restricted to the equivalent

maximum share, 1 − α. However, both of these matter in the short run due

to the existence of quasi rents.

       For example, consider a rule of origin defined in terms of the minimum

share of domestic inputs relative to price rather than cost. Since price exceeds

cost and an increase in the denominator makes the constraint harder to meet,

the price based scheme has a higher cost of production than the equivalent
  16
    The argument is not quite tight since the choice of inputs will diﬀer in the two cases.
  17
    Some work does not look at the restricitiveness of RoO. For example, Krishna and
Panagariya (2001) assume that final goods produced in the FTA using the minimum
cost input mix automatically meet the RoO. Hence, all the production of the lower tariﬀ
country is shipped to the higher tariﬀ one. Consumer prices diﬀer but producer prices do
not so that production eﬃciency is mintained. They show that, analogous to the famous
Kem Wan result, there exists a Pareto improving F T A in this setting when lump sum
transfers are permitted.



                                            18
cost based one. With this definition, for any required share, α, firms in B

prefer the cost based form to the price based form.

   Alternatively, consider a RoO defined in terms of the maximum share of

foreign inputs relative to price rather than cost. Since price exceeds cost and

an increase in the denominator makes the constraint easier to meet, the price

based scheme has a lower cost of production than the equivalent cost based

one! Thus, for any required share, α, firms in B prefer the price based form

to the cost based form.

4.2    Going Part Way: Allowing Input Price Changes

There are at least two kinds of price changes that need to be allowed for:

Changes in the word prices of goods and changes in the prices of intermediate

goods in the F T A. Incorporating the former involves dropping the small

country assumption while incorporating the latter involves allowing for at

least some general equilibrium eﬀects to occur. Falvey and Reed (2000)

argue that RoO have a role complementary to that of tariﬀs as RoO aﬀect

input demand. Thus, a large country could aﬀect the terms of trade in both

final and intermediate goods by using RoO as well as tariﬀs on the final good.

   Ju and Krishna (1998) and (2002a) show that allowing the price of F T A

inputs to be endogenously determined results in a number of interesting

insights. The discussion which follows can be found in more detail in their

work. The driving force behind their results is a non monotonicity that

arises naturally in such settings and which seems to have been previously

                                      19
overlooked.

      An intuitive explanation of what lies at the heart of their results follows.

Suppose that there are two inputs, capital and intermediates. Suppose, more-

over, that domestic and imported are perfect substitutes and that there are

a given number of firms who have fixed capital but who can change their

use of intermediates. The RoO forces firms in the F T A who comply to use

more of the domestic intermediate that they may wish to in order to obtain

origin and hence qualify for zero tariﬀs. If the RoO is not too restrictive

then all firms will wish to comply18 and a more restrictive RoO will shift out

domestic intermediate demand making its price rise. However, there comes

a point where this price has risen to the point where firms are indiﬀerent

between complying and not.19 Some firms then choose to comply and others

and this number changes with the level of restrictiveness to change the price

of domestic intermediates so as to keep firms indiﬀerent. In this regime, in-

creases in restrictiveness have exactly opposite eﬀect on the price of domestic

intermediates!

      This reversal in the comparative statics results drives their model and

yields their unusual comparative statics results. They show that as the RoO

becomes more restricitive, the price of intermediates and the import of final

goods rises then falls while the import of intermediates first falls and then

rises. All three have a common turning point, the point where the regime
 18
      This is termed the homogeneous regime.
 19
      Ju and Krishna (2002) term this the heterogenous regime.


                                           20
switches from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous one.

    Much of the concern regarding preferential trading arrangements has been

with the implications of such arrangements on market access. The work of Ju

and Krishna shows that eﬀects in both final and intermediate good market

need to be considered as they work in opposite directions. Moreover, that

it is important to look at the eﬀect on the F T A as a whole, as well as on

each member. This is because compensating flows occur in other member

countries in response to changes in flows in one member country.

    In the model used by Ju and Krishna the intermediate good market is

the most protected (in the sense that both imports reach a minimum and

the price of F T A made input reaches its maximum) when the regime switch

occurs. Intermediate goods producers are best oﬀ here as this is where their

product price, and hence rents, are maximized. In sharp contrast, the final

good market is most open (in the sense that the imports reach their maxi-

mum) at the same point. Final goods producers in the lower tariﬀ country

gain the most when they have access to the higher tariﬀ country’s markets

at the least cost, that is they want the RoO to be non distorting. Thus these

two groups are likely to lobby for diﬀerent levels of RoO.


5     General Equilibrium Eﬀects

Analyzing the eﬀects of RoO in general equilibrium seems like a rather hard

thing to do in an elegant manner. Krishna (2003) develops a way of looking


                                     21
at the eﬀect of conditional polices, such as RoO, in a general equilibrium

setting under perfect competition. A simple observation makes the problem

tractable using standard duality tools in general equilibrium. Polices like

RoO in an F T A have a carrot and hoop element to them. The carrot,

preferential treatment, is obtained only by jumping through hoops, namely

meeting origin requirements. The basic insight used is that if, by availing

itself of the policy, the firm can raise the factor prices it can aﬀord to pay, it

will be willing to do so. Else it will not. In other words, the paper looks at

the eﬀects of such restrictions on the factor price frontier and shows how this

can be derived quite simply for certain kinds of RoO. It is shown that when

RoO are set at ex ante binding levels, they need not be binding ex post nor

must they result in an inflow of capital. Moreover, the paper argues, the kind

of non monotonicity seen in Ju and Krishna (1998) is likely to be prevalent

in general equilibrium.

   There has been some work on looking at the eﬀects of F T As incorpo-

rating RoOs in a partial equilibrium framework. Such back of the envelope

calculations are not hard and can provide very interesting results. For exam-

ple, Mattoo, Roy and Subramaniam (2002) look at the eﬀects of RoO in the

Africa Growth and Opportunity Act recently enacted by the U.S. and argue

that restrictive conditions on market access, the most important of which are

the RoO, reduce its benefits significantly: they argue that the medium term

benefits would have been almost five times greater without such conditions



                                       22
on access. Computable general equilibrium models can also be used to give

an idea of general equilibrium eﬀects.


6     Conclusion

Much of the concern felt about regional trading areas has been that they will

exclude non member countries from their markets. Much of this discussion,

see for example Krugman (1991) and counter arguments by Bond and Sy-

ropoulos (1996) has been couched in terms of the greater market power, and

hence higher optimal tariﬀs of larger trade blocs. However, tariﬀs on most

manufactured goods are bound by concessions made in successive rounds of

negotiations under the auspices of GAT T. It seems likely that RoO, which

are less well understood and extremely important in practice, provide a far

greater reason for concern.

    While a beginning has been made in understanding the eﬀects of RoO at

a theoretical as well as empirical level, far more remains to be done and the

papers in this conference are making valuable contributions in this regard.

On the theoretical side, work has been confined to partial equilibrium models

and has focused on perfect competition. There are many lessons that can

be learned from looking at imperfect competition and general equilibrium.

Rules of Origin clearly provide a way to raise the costs of F T A rivals. The

desirability of doing so has been studied in industrial organization. RoO can

act to segment markets. Moreover, they can result in interesting switches in


                                     23
best response functions. Many of these ideas are the subject of papers written

for this conference. However, much work remains. On the political economy

side, for example, it would be fascinating to look at particular examples in

more detail to see who lobbied for particular RoO, while using simple models

to understand their desirability for the various interest groups.


References

 [1] Bond, Eric and Constantinos Syropoulos. (1996) “The Size of Trading

    Blocs: Market Power and World Welfare Eﬀects” Journal of Interna-

    tional Economics, Vol 40, No. 3-4, pp. 411-437.

 [2] Breton, Paul and Miriam Manchin (2002), “Making EU Arrangements

    Work: The Role of Rules of Origin,” Center for European Policy Studies

    Working Document No. 183.

 [3] Cadot, Oliver, Jamie de Melo, Akiki Suwa Eisenmann and Bolormaa

    Tumurchudur (2002) “Assessing the Eﬀect of NAFTA’s Rules of Origin".

    Mimeo.

 [4] De Melo, David and Arvind Panagaria (1993), “New Dimensions in

    Regional Integration" (Ed.) Cambridge University Press.

 [5] Duttagupta, Rupa and Arvind Panagariya (2001) “Free Trade Areas

    and Rules of Origin: Economics and Politics" Mimeo.



                                      24
 [6] Estevadeordal, Antoni (2000), “Negotiating Preferential Market Access:

    The Case of the North American Free Trade Agreement”, Journal of

    World Trade , Vol. 34, pp. 141-200.

 [7] Falvey, Rod and Geoﬀ Reed, (1998), “Economic Eﬀects of Rules of Ori-

    gin,” Weltwirtschaftliches 134(2), pp. 209-229.

 [8] Falvey Rod, and Geoﬀ Reed (2000) “Rules of Origin as Commercial

    Policy Instruments” Centre for Research on Globalization and Labor

    Markets Research Paper No. 2000/18. University of Nottingham.

 [9] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, (1995), “The Politics of Free

    Trade Agreements,” American Economic Review, September, pp. 667-

    690.

[10] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Special Interest Politics, Cam-

    bridge MA and London UK: The MIT Press, 2001.

[11] Herin, Jan (1986) “Rules of Origin and Diﬀerences between Tariﬀ Levels

    in EFTA and in the EC,” EFTA Occasional Paper No. 13, Geneva,

    February 1986.

[12] Ju, Jiandong and Kala Krishna, (2002), “Regulations, Regime Switches

    and Non-Monotonicity when Non-Compliance is an Option: An Applica-

    tion to Content Protection and Preference”. Forthcoming in Economics

    Letters. (Available at http://econ.la.psu.edu/~kkrishna/index.html)


                                    25
[13] Ju, Jiandong and Kala Krishna (1998) “Firm Behavior and Mar-

    ket Access in a Free Trade Area With Rules of Origin:         NBER

    Working Paper No. 6857. Cambridge, MA. Revised version at

    http://econ.la.psu.edu/~kkrishna/roos.pdf.

[14] Krishna, Kala (2003) “Conditional Policies in General Equilibrium:

    Rules of Origin Revisited”, Mimeo.

[15] Krishna, Kala and Anne Krueger, (1995) Implementing Free Trade Ar-

    eas: Rules of Origin and Hidden Protection. In Alan Deardorﬀ, James

    Levinsohn, and Robert Stern (Ed.), New Directions in Trade Theory,

    pp.149-187 University of Michigan Press.

[16] Pravin Krishna and Arvind Panagariya (2002) “On Necessarily Welfare-

    Enhancing Free Trade Areas” Journal of International Economics, Vol.

    57, No.2, pp. 353-367.

[17] Krueger, Anne O. (1993). Free Trade Agreements as Protectionist De-

    vices: Rules of Origin.” Forthcoming in Festschrift in honor of John

    Chipman. NBER Working Paper No. 4352.

[18] Krueger, Anne. O. (1995). “Free Trade Agreements Versus Customs

    Unions,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol 54, October 1997, pp.

    169-187.




                                   26
[19] Krugman, Paul (1991). “Is Bilateralism Bad?” in International Trade

    and Trade Policy. Eds. Helpman, Elhanan and Asaf Razin. MIT Press:

    Cambridge and London, pp 9-23.

[20] LLoyd, Peter J. (1993) “A Tariﬀ Substitute for Rules of Origin in Free

    Trade Areas.” The World Economy, Vol. 16, No. 6, pp. 691-712.

[21] Mattoo, Aaditya, Devesh Roy and Arvind Subramaniam. “The Africa

    Growth and Opportunity Act and its Rules of Origin: Generosity Un-

    dermined?" World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2908. October

    2002.

[22] McGillivray, Fiona and Matt Green (2001) “Trading in a Free Trade

    Area With No Rules of Origin: The U.S. Under the Articles of Confed-

    eration". Mimeo. Yale University.

[23] Palmeter, N. David (1993) “Rules of Origin in a Western Hemisphere

    Free Trade Agreement,” Mimeo.

[24] Richardson, Martin. (1995) “Tariﬀ Revenue Competition in a Free Trade

    Area". European Economic Review, Vol. 39, pp. 1429-1437.

[25] Rodriguez, Peter. (2001) Rules of Origin with Multistage Production”.

    World Economy. Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 201-220.




                                    27
[26] Rosellon, Juan. (2000) “The Economics of Rules of Origin” Journal of

    International Trade and Economic Development, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 397-

    425.

[27] Shibata, H. (1967) “The Theory of Economic Unions: A Comparative

    Analysis of Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas, and Tax Unions” In

    C.S. Shoup (Ed), Fiscal Harmonization in Common Markets, Columbia

    University Press, New York.

[28] Vermulst, E. (1994). “Rules of Origin in International Trade: A Com-

    parative Study,” in Studies in International Trade Policy. Eds. Waer, P.

    and Jacques Bourgeois. University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor.

[29] Viner, J. (1950). The Customs Union Issue, Carnegie Endowment for

    International Peace, New York.




                                     28
